PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6327Tuesday, 22 November 2022THE SPEAKER: I urge the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition to consider moving a bipartisan tribute in this House for the distinguished service that Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere offered to this country. At an opportune time, we will expect that motion in this House.Honourable members, last week, I deferred a presentation of the action taken report on the resolution and recommendations of this House to today Tuesday, November 2022. We will have ministry by ministry on a daily basis. We will not look at them omnibus but rather, ministry by ministry so that we are satisfied with their updates. Where they have not responded, you should be able to look at those reports and see all the resolutions that were passed. For those that are not responded to, you will raise them up and they will be responded to.I, therefore, expect the Government Chief Whip, who is around, to have that summary booklet. I implore the frontbench to embrace the spirit of public accountability on Parliamentary resolutions. We are representatives of the people and must be seen as representatives by what we do. As I said, even the Bible says; “We shall know them by their deeds.” What have we done? It should be only talking with no action taken. That is what we need to find out. Honourable members, the Parliamentary Forum for Ethics and Integrity has organised a National Parliamentary Conference on Ethics and Morality on Tuesday, 29 November 2022 IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 10TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. On a sad note, the nation woke up to the sad news of the demise of the former President of the Democratic Party, Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere. The deceased was a distinguished political leader with an illustrious political and leadership career in which he served as a legislator, a former Leader of Opposition in Parliament, a former minister in various portfolios and a two-time presidential candidate. The return of multiparty democracy in 2000 is attributed to the consistency of advocacy by Dr Kawanga Ssemwogerere, among other national leaders. The country will dearly miss him. We have also got information that the Acholi-Labwor community have lost their cultural leader. May we rise and observe a moment of silence for the departed.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6328 [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRat Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. You are all accordingly invited and notified. Please, join the team there to discuss the morality and ethics of this country. This is led by former Minister of Ethics and Integrity Hon. Nsaba Buturo. You are all most welcome for that function. Our sportspersons are going for the East African Games on 24th November 2022; the games will start on the 25th. However, I would like it to be on record that the Speaker’s Office was not involved in selecting the persons who are going for these games. The sportspersons selected their captains and the captains are the ones who identified the persons who are going for the games.  Our office only facilitates. So, that rumour moving around that we selected the persons going for the games - we are not athletes. I do not even know how to hold a ball. When you start having a rumour mill that it is the Speaker’s Office - stop it. I repeat, stop it and it is not mandatory anyway. We can decide to say, “We are not participating in the games and Parliament will continue.”We can now look at matters of national importance. For responses on the communication from the Chair, nothing should be discussed about the issue of sports.2.08MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication, specifically, on accountability issues by leaders, especially Government and the ministers. The only thing that we owe Ugandans is rightful accountability, especially by Government in everything we do. Your statement is timely; it drives to what we expect to happen in this House and what is happening in Uganda. I expect the ministers, now that they are coming tomorrow -THE SPEAKER: Not tomorrow; we are starting today.MR SILWANY: Now that they are ready - since we are going ministry by ministry, I implore you to give us enough time so that when we discuss a ministry, we do it exhaustively. This is what all the Members want and Ugandans are looking forward.Madam Speaker, please, give us much time and allow as many Members as possible. I beg your indulgence.THE SPEAKER: We shall be giving you one hour per ministry, on a daily basis.MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: When you look at the loans you are approving and they say the loan is going to do A, B, C, D please, find out if the loan has done what it was meant for. If there was a resolution, I also implore you to go back and read it. Look at the resolutions and the motions. Look at all the resolutions moved and approved by Parliament and compare them with what is going to be presented. 2.10MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to react to your communication about how the Executive receives resolutions that are passed by this House. First of all, I am very happy that you have clarified and directed. At some point, I think there was a mix up in this House that when some of our resolutions go to the Executive, we have just advised them so they have a choice to ignore. I am happy that this has been clarified because that is the only tool Parliament has. If our resolutions are being ignored in the pretext that we are just advisory, then, it actually renders this House nugatory. Therefore, I thank you very much and urge the ministers that are coming to present resolutions here to take time and know that they are also part of this Parliament. Sometimes, when ministers come and present, it is as if they are 6329THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022not Members of Parliament, who just come to fulfil a duty and be on record. This is painful. I thank you very much for that decision.THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, this is good for all of us. You are all Members of Parliament and you know you can cease to be a minister at midnight. The next day, they can take over the ministerial post but you remain a Member of Parliament. So, it is good for all of us. The accountability is really for our constituents and for all Ugandans. Ugandans need to know what the Parliament of Uganda is doing for them.2.12DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Madam Speaker, I thank you for recognising Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere who we buried yesterday. He was an outstanding gentleman who made a very big contribution to this country. I thank those who participated; his burial was bipartisan. We look forward to that day when a motion will be brought so that we can all pay tribute to this wonderful man. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.2.13MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a very important matter of national importance –THE SPEAKER: Have we gone to matters of national importance? (Laughter) I want a commitment from Government on the tribute first before we go to matters of national importance.2.14THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on three issues raised in your communication.The first issue, regarding your guidance, is that a motion be moved to pay tribute to the late Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere. I undertake, on behalf of the Leader of Government Business, to ensure that this motion, if granted opportunity on the Order Paper, is ready for presentation and debate on Thursday this week, such that we fall within the period that we have buried the senior citizen who made an enormous contribution to his country. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Government. We shall put it on the Order Paper for Thursday. MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in respect to action reports. Our rules, particularly rule 220, seem to be restrictive, since it refers to resolutions or recommendations of Parliament. However, I know that under rule 8(2), some of the decisions you make in that chair become part of our rules.Is it possible to extend the application of rule 220 to implementation of the laws made by this august House so that they include action taken in respect to the budget we pass; the Appropriation Act and in particular, to the recently passed Budget and how far Government has complied with its implementation? (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, are you taking note?MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for accepting that motion. My procedural matter is to the Government Chief Whip.This House has had a lot of challenges on determining who is supposed to get an official burial. Indeed, in the previous Parliament, the former Attorney-General, Hon. Nyombi, was brought here. He was not bought into the Chamber but the public and Honourable Members viewed him from the foyer. Previous Parliaments have been seeking to bring a law that governs us on who should be given an official burial and how it should be done. 6330 [Mr Ssewungu]Yesterday, there were some ugly scenes but God willing, these people accepted. The widow never wanted the gun shots fired to give tribute to the deceased; the 17-gun shots because this man was not used to guns. However, at the end of the day, ministers could not take a decision. They ended up giving the gun shots. THE SPEAKER: Are they gunshots or a gun salute?MR SSEWUNGU: Gun salute – whatever. Gen. Muhwezi knows. When you talk about army issues, he and I understand very well.THE SPEAKER: Where is Gen. Muhoozi?MR SSEWUNGU: Retired Gen. Muhwezi. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. Once we bring this legislation to Parliament, it will help us in deciding how to conduct an official burial. If Hon. Ssewungu does not want this kind of package in the official burial, it can be left out other than seeing the Prime Minister, Gen. Katumba and others fidgeting and the family leaves unhappy; yet, you have given them a very good offer. This matter was serious and it was very ugly in front of us who were once Democrats and are grandsons of Dr Kawanga Ssemwogerere. Madam Speaker, I pray that the Government Chief Whip gives us assurance on that matter so that we get this legislation because Members are complaining out there. The first ambassador in Uganda was buried in Bukomansimbi. Up to now, the family is complaining that he never got an official burial, yet, he was the first ambassador in Uganda since its independence. It is such people that should be given tribute.Who determines these details? These people call the President asking, should we give so and so an official funeral? He determines who gets and who does not. He may say, “No” or “Give that one; he was our supporter.” If they ask, “Should we give Ssewungu?”, he will say, “No, he was against our Government. Leave him alone.” (Laughter) That is the kind of situation and it is only legislation that will sort out this problem.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we have got your issue. The issue is, who has the prerogative to permit an official burial and how is it determined?Before the Government Chief Whip comes in, on the issue that was raised by the shadow Attorney-General, my presumption is that resolutions mean decisions; all the decisions whether in Bills or AG’s reports. That is what it is and that is what you need to bring to this House.Now, you can tell us about the official - MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I had indicated to comment on three - but let me first handle this. In the absence of a guiding principle or legislation, let me state that the Ministry of Public Service has been granted the mandate to work on a paper, highlighting who is entitled to a state burial, an official burial or any other form of burials. In the absence of that guiding principle, His Excellency the President, in the case of the late Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, on behalf of the Government of Uganda and looking at the contribution the late made to the Republic of Uganda during his lifetime, offered an official burial. Madam Speaker, we all know that a state burial is now only limited to a President or a former President. Therefore, the official burial was offered with full package and I am reliably informed of the family.  The moment a state or official burial is offered, it comes with a package. Also, the moment an official burial is offered, it comes with a full package. So, the 17-gun-salute was part and parcel of the official package of an official burial. That said, Madam Speaker-COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6331THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, state burial is accorded to five citizens. There are five citizens in the country, that is, constitutional offices namely; the Office of Presidency, the Speaker and the Judiciary. Those are three offices with the five people.MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable minister, thank you, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister -THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we discuss this when the motion has come on Thursday. Where the law is not clear, we shall ensure it is one of our resolutions. Hon. Angura.2.22MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to warm the Front Bench here. I rise on a very important national matter. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Can you tell us what it is? MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, we have witnessed rains in many places and even some bit of flooding. On Sunday, Tororo South County witnessed rain with hailstone. It rained but there was very little water. There was a lot of ice in a very solid big form, including sizes as big as this table. Madam Speaker, as you may know, after rain, water floods. In this case, Tororo South County witnessed hailstones everywhere. This led to death of animals, birds and very many people were injured; they are now hospitalised. Very many houses were destroyed. There are still visible packets of very big blocks of ice, moreover after two days.Madam Speaker, this is unprecedented. No one has experienced it before – THE SPEAKER: What is your prayer?MR ANGURA: That is what is happening in Tororo South County. The affected subcounties are Kwapa, Kwapa Town Council, Apokor; the whole county. My prayers: i) Quick supply of relief food because everything has been lost. Many granaries were destroyed. Even whatever was in the gardens - everything is now a story that people will tell in the near future. So, we need a supply of food. ii) We need blankets and mosquito nets to rescue our people. We also need iron sheets. Those whose houses were destroyed need to be supported. iii) We need planting material. We need cassava stems to rescue these families immediately. Since it is raining, they can plant cassava now. We also need potato vines. We need planting seeds and tree seedlings so that we are able to increase the cover to support us in the near future. iv) We need restocking of animals.  (Laughter) Tororo has been evaded for a long time. Madam Speaker, this is a call. We need restocking of animals since people’s animals died. Those are my prayers. How I wish the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is here, can respond to this quickly. Otherwise, people are gathered at my home expecting support, yet, there is nothing I can offer. The situation is very bad; very unprecedented and never seen before. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sarah, are people also at your home? Rt Hon. Prime Minister - Are there people at Hon. Oboth’s home?2.27THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I take note of the Member’s concerns. I request that he formalises it with our office. Madam Speaker, we are going to send a team today on the site to verify and see whether we shall supply potato veins, cassava stems and 6332everything he has requested. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Okot - 2.27MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the unprecedented delay in awarding student loans. As you are aware, the Ministry of Education and Sports through the -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, leave the Prime Minister to listen. This is a very important issue. Children are being chased away from school and they may not do exams.MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you. As you are aware, the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board is mandated to provide loans and scholarships to Ugandan students who are financially incapable to pursue higher education. Unfortunately, this academic year, all financially incapable students have found themselves between a rock and a hard place because of the delay in awarding the loans, with most of these students unable to register with their universities, and therefore, at risk of missing the examinations. My prayers are twofold;i) The Ministry of Education and Sports should explain to this House why the loans have not been awarded in total disregard of the cost of delay.ii) The Ministry of Education and Sports should explain how they will guarantee equity in the students’ loan and subsequently, table names of beneficiaries to this House.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister - 2.29THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, the fact is that we are facing overwhelming demand from the students and the Minister of Education and Sports will definitely come and give a report. However, I would like to thank Ugandans for educating their children. We are facing overwhelming demand for scholarships.THE SPEAKER: The issue is that the students are being chased away and being denied exams. What is the remedy?MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, like I have said, let me inform the Minister of Education and Sports to come tomorrow with a conclusive report because this goes hand-in-hand with finances. (Interjections) This is the fact. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want the Prime Minister to tell you a lie? She is saying: “Let me give the ministry a chance to come and present a report.” Let them present a report tomorrow. The report that we want will have an aspect of equity – who has got, which region and all those kinds of things. The delay cannot be known by the Prime Minister. Let us wait for the ministry. 2.31MR WILFRED NIWAGABA  (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, I am, temporarily, the Acting Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)For that matter, Madam Speaker, since you had earlier ruled that we will be considering reports ministry by ministry, could we have the Ministry of Education and Sports as the first to present action reports tomorrow for us to critically consider it with the students loan scheme in mind.THE SPEAKER: I am happy the Leader of the Opposition is taking over my powers. [Ms Nabbanja] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6333THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022(Laughter) I have a list of who should present first and, definitely, all the ministries will present – irrespective of whether education starts or not. According to my list, education is not among the first. Let the Minister of Education and Sports come tomorrow and give us a report on why the loan was not given to the students that applied.Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we also need an explanation from you on why the money was not disbursed for that purpose.2.33MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise this matter of national public importance. On 30 June 2021, the implementation of the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF III) ended. This programme focused on household income generation, livelihood support and public works. In the same month, the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics released a report showing a very worrying trend in as far as poverty across the country is concerned, most especially, covering northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, you recall that several months ago, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister communicated to this House the decision taken by Cabinet to provide a successor programme as a deliberate effort to address the worrying poverty situation across northern and eastern Uganda or, I would say, the greater north. We are informed that the World Bank had demonstrated commitment to providing funds and what was left was for the Government of Uganda to fast-track the programme design processes. However, it is sad to note that the design phase has stagnated because the resources required have not been provided. Madam Speaker, this means that the successor programme will not be taking place unless the design processes are undertaken – but it should also ensure the highest level of participation and involvement by the people in the greater north. I, therefore, would like to make the following prayers:i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explain to this House why they have been hesitant and have failed to provide the funds needed for the design aspect.ii) The Government of Uganda should show commitment and expedite the processes to enable the successor programme to kick off. iii) Finally, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should create time and interact with Members of Parliament from West Nile, Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Bunyoro, Acholi, Elgon and Bukedi  to discuss, in detail, how this successor programme will be worked on so that we help in the fight against poverty.Thank you very much.2.37THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, this successor programme, commonly known as NUSAF IV , is our hope. The Office of the Prime Minister, under the ministry for northern Uganda, has done a lot to make sure that this programme is at the level where it is now. The money that is required is expected soon.After the Minister for northern Uganda realised that there were delays, she came and we, in our senior management, invited the finance minister and the PS/ST and I committed, in writing, to the minister, requesting them to make sure that money is provided for the design. I believe we 6334are at another level. I think my colleague has not yet got this information.Secondly, involving Members of Parliament is a welcome idea. I will definitely invite you for a meeting - because we have been consulting a number of stakeholders so that you can – (Interruption)MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Prime Minister for giving way. We appreciate Government because it has introduced very many programmes in northern Uganda – NUSAF I, NUSAF II, NAADS, etcetera. However, looking at the statistics, as said by Hon. Mapenduzi, Acholi subregion and northern Uganda is still the poorest. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if it is necessary and very important, you have to audit the performance of all those Government programmes. Why is Acholi subregion and northern Uganda still the poorest in this country despite all those good programmes that you introduced for the country? I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: I thought Busoga was the poorest? (Laughter)MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, let me give you facts: An audit was carried out when I had just come. The fact is that a lot of money has been injected into northern Uganda, yet the communities continue to suffer with poverty. What have we done? We realised that all that money was going into infrastructure development; building schools and health centres. Therefore, we have said that this time around, we shall not construct schools, health centres or roads; we are injecting this money directly to the people. That is the answer. A lot of money is now going to the people.Secondly, Members, they would identify a certain subcounty and then get a certain parish but this time, we are saying that all areas must be covered. This time around, we shall push poverty out of northern Uganda. THE SPEAKER: I think we also need mind-set change. People need to look towards development and it should not always be about poverty. However, the Parish Development Model is for another day. MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I would like to inform the Prime Minister that the record of Government should be straight.Madam Prime Minister, I would like to inform you that not all the money that was meant for programmes in northern Uganda actually reached northern Uganda. The Office of the Prime Minister has been culpable. Billions of shillings were stolen and “eaten” here in Kampala. This money did not reach northern Uganda. That should be the starting point. When the record captures it that a lot of money has been pumped into northern Uganda, and yet money was mismanaged here, it is unfair to the people of the north.THE SPEAKER: We will establish how much money was “eaten” and how much money went to the region. Where is it “eaten” from? Is it locally here or upcountry? That is what she needs to establish and then, we will know how to handle the next money; whether it should be sent directly to northern Uganda, other than being “eaten” here first, and the bones are sent.2.42MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Like my colleague from Tororo, torrential rains have hit Mbarara District, particularly Kashari North, for the last two weeks, including hailstorms and strong winds resulting in floods. This has led to destruction of property in different parishes. The roof of Buyenje Primary School was blown off. Rubindi Town Council and Nyabisirira Town Council were flooded and a lot of property destroyed. Many roads and bridges have also been washed away.[Mr Olanya] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6335THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022My prayers are: i) There should be immediate relief supplies in the form of food, blankets, mosquito nets and other materials that can give relief to these people, including roofing iron sheets to families that have lost their houses.ii) There should be planting materials that yield - in the short term - so that the rains, which are still continuing can be utilised.iii) There should be a response by this Parliament to give UNRA more funding to respond to – (Interruption)MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to add is on the issue of rains and roads. Recently, I requested the Ministry of Works and Transport, through the President, to declare a state of emergency on the state of our roads. Hon. Ecweru said that we are not yet there.We are going to have a case of mob justice on one of our Members because of bad roads. Every day, we get a bridge being swept away by water. I can tell you that there is absolutely no response. People look at Members of Parliament to have solutions for these challenges. We also look at the bigger Government for solutions. We need to know who Government is looking at to have solutions in specific cases of roads. I am very sorry for those who may get me wrong but on the issue of roads, we cannot pretend that everything is right. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Mr Bataringaya rose_)THE SPEAKER: I thought you had finished submitting. MR BATARINGAYA: No, I had one more prayer, Madam Speaker. I was saying that UNRA should be funded because they lack funds to go to these areas. The task has become enormous and so, they should – (Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Concerning the last loan that we approved in this House, UNRA was getting more money than any other ministry. Therefore, let the money be given to UNRA to enable it do its work. I think for you to give out what the honourable member is asking for, you need to have a team on ground first, to assess the level of need.2.47THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I like the way you have responded. That is exactly what I wanted to say. My brother, you need to get in touch with our office and we shall send a team to assess the extent of damage. Thereafter, a solution will come. Concerning UNRA, the loan was passed here and we are processing it.  Secondly, I remember telling you here, honourable colleagues, that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is going to frontload for UNRA for the months of March, February and January so that they can have enough money to move. They have a number of debts they are supposed to cover.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of these roads may not be UNRA roads; some of them are district roads. We need to find out how much money was given to every district under the Uganda Road Fund.The other day we discussed this, Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the next budget, let us give every district Shs 1 billion in the Uganda Road Fund. Then, we shall see who will complain. For instance, on the road committees in the districts, Members of Parliament are always the chairpersons. If that Member of Parliament fails to do the oversight role in the district, then, they should not complain. Let us make a decision. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, there are some facts I want to bring to the Table. We have 6336conducted a number of accountability barazas in a number of districts and we have discovered that the chairpersons of LCV have been making themselves chairpersons of committees. For example, the districts of Wakiso-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, because the MPs are absent-MS NABBANJA: No, I do not want to blame colleagues, the Members of Parliament. Once they capture that seat, the chairperson LCV have been taking over the management of road committees; this is happening in Wakiso, Mukono –(Members rose_) THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is one of the issues that is coming under the Ministry of Works, coming under Works on action taken.MS NABBANJA: Okay, allow me to conclude then. Madam Speaker, these are facts; colleague Members of Parliament, in the districts of Mukono were denied information. They did not know how much money the Government was sending to their districts. Therefore, it becomes hard for Members to monitor and do oversight work. Therefore, we agreed and said that the Uganda Road Fund should always gazette in the papers, all the information that has anything to do with roads. In addition, we are saying that they should also put this information in the pigeonholes of Members and they have –(Members rose_)THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we have that information. Let nobody say that there is no information; the information is there. We are failing to do our oversight role. MS NABBANJA:  Lastly, Madam Speaker, we also discovered that there were a number of disparities. They were doing false accountability; presenting accountability for some roads that were made by Members of Parliament as if the money that the Government had sent was being used for that purpose. Therefore, colleagues, let us all join our hands and see that our people get value for money. This is for all of us colleagues. Thank you very much. Hon. Katumba has been in these barazas and can add more information.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are a Member of Parliament like me. I am saying, let us agree as Parliament and have money for the Road Fund so that we take charge of the Road Fund as Members of Parliament. (Applause) MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, it depends on the district because not all districts receive the same amount of money. For example, as I speak now - THE SPEAKER: That is operational- MS NABBANJA:  Wakiso District has received Shs 1.3 billion and they are saying that the money has not been utilized. It is idle and yet, our people are suffering with bad roads. Therefore, if we say Shs 1 billion per district, yet some districts are small-THE SPEAKER: The Shs 1 billion is operational, it is not a must.MS NABBANJA:  Okay. 2.53MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am surprised that my best friend, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wants to donate my office to - I hope I am distant enough and I can speak without a mask with your permission. THE SPEAKER: Please, first stand up. (Laughter)MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, that one, I undertake, but outsid the Chamber. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, yes, I thank the Prime Minister for demonstrating interest in the road infrastructure in this country. You guided well, by making a proposal on money being provided to the districts and then, we see how they are going to come up and complain. [Ms Nabbanja] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6337THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022We receive reports often from the Uganda Road Fund, including the latest one. There are some areas, which have virtually not received money and we must admit as a fact that in a rainy season like this, we are bound to have these challenges. My view and where I agree with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that on a case-by-case, looking at the district, the size and the number of roads, we may have to decide how to assist. There are cases of a one-constituency district. You cannot compare that with a big district like Wakiso without any conflict. What we need to do is to undertake a national survey to see the -(Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. One thing I need to correct Members on is that we did not say specifically the same amount; districts differ. Kasese, for instance is one of the biggest districts. When you go to Arua and Wakiso, they are different. That is why I said it is not cast in stone. We will assess from district to district.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had a motion here in this House on the Road Fund, which was backed by the Attorney-General. I have said severally on the Floor that matters of roads will continue coming and we shall not solve them until we operationalise the Road Fund as it is. The problem is that money is collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority, put in the Consolidated Fund. Then the ministry of finance gives the Uganda Road Fund what it thinks should be given. For example, 25 per cent instead of 100 per cent. Therefore, the problem is not UNRA, or the Uganda Road Fund. The problem rests with the ministry of finance, which has refused to remit funding to the districts as per the Road Fund Act. Madam Speaker, the minister is going to speak and he will still be lamenting about funding. The last time this matter was on the Floor, the Prime Minister was asked to convene a meeting. I was not invited but I was supposed to be in that meeting together with Hon. Byanyima, the Attorney-General and the ministry of finance so that we resolve this matter. Otherwise, we shall continue talking and talking until the cows come back home. Madam Speaker, there is Act; what is lacking is implementation. (Interjections)  The procedural issue I am raising is, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue discussing matters of road funding when the issue rests with the Executive and they have failed to implement it? THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have respect. When one person is talking, you sit. The issues of the Road Fund, Hon. Dan Kimosho, was just being polite. I am told they almost finished him because of his road. The locals attacked his car and that is why he was talking like that. MR SSEGGONA: I thank Hon. Sarah Opendi for giving me information through a procedural issue. First, we need to undertake a nationwide survey to know how many kilometres of road we have. How many of those fall under UNRA, how many of those fall under the Road Fund - because the Road Fund provides the little money, they can afford. Thirdly, colleagues, one day Hon. Baka Mugabi’s constituents beat him with his own chairs and chased him out of the constituency over a road that he is not supposed to make. It is not correct to stop it at the level of saying that the chairpersons appoint themselves. There are these issues; one, Members of Parliament allow some chairpersons to share road committees, but as long as they participate in those meetings and do their statutory mandate, I would not have a problem. I would have a problem if the Government or somebody went ahead and told me, we provided this amount of money to district X to work on roads and they did not do what they are supposed to do. Sometimes, people give misleading information to Government.6338One day, we were in Wakiso and the President was addressing people. He had been told that Shs 20 billion had been given for the youth. He almost had the CAO arrested. When the CAO was summoned to the podium, he said, Mr President, we only received Shs 2 billion. I agree that we need to aggressively undertake oversight and that is why I am happy with Uganda Road Fund. Whatever they disburse to our constituencies, they give us information regularly. However, as you rightly guided, there are roads, which are not covered by UNRA. We must know who is supposed to handle which road and then, follow up with an additional question; are those entities funded? I agree with you, Hon. Opendi. For example when you talk about the statutory mandate of Uganda Road Fund, is ministry of finance providing the money as we appropriated? We cripple an important sector, which is guaranteeing the survival of our people and the money is spent elsewhere. Like you guided, Madam Speaker, the minister needs to come up with a comprehensive programme, lay it before Parliament and we agree. Otherwise, you are going to be bombarded with these complaints of, “my road was swept away.” The next day, another person will come and then, Hon. Opendi will rise on a procedural issue to say, “are we proceeding well to discuss a matter when we have another subject?”Finally, when we take a decision as mature leaders in this country and Government makes an undertaking, let us follow up. For example, the Rt Honourable Prime Minister is saying, “yes, indeed I chaired that meeting but we do not have that information.” There are a number of issues, which we agree on here; we are just about to come up with another one on human rights and the drones. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, under your brokerage, Madam Speaker, had a meeting with the Opposition to discuss the issue of people who were abducted in drones and who have continued to be missing. The time we agreed on has since elapsed and we have no information. The next thing we saw was the vibrations in Geneva. You are going to have more of those and I am sure my brother is about to give us a report. If the Government undertakes and does not report to Parliament, these are the things that are going to continue. Members of Parliament are going to be beaten because constituents think that we are pocketing the money for the roads, yet, we do not even touch it. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Maybe, just for information, the one you call your brother, the Attorney-General, already reported on the report in Geneva and it was received by this House. Honourable members, we are not going to spend the whole day on matters of national importance. I appreciate that you brought your questions. Members, the rest will be handled tomorrow. Gen. Katumba, please, give us an update on the UNRA roads, the local council roads and what your plan is on these roads.THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter, General.MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is quite unfair and I am sorry for interrupting the General before he proceeds. We always come with urgent issues and you always emphasise that they must be urgent. I came here on the 9th to raise my issue but you almost cut it short and you closed the day. You told me -THE SPEAKER: I wish I were you; I would have used that time to raise your issue other than lamenting because I have 556 -MR LUKYAMUZI: The rules do not allow me. THE SPEAKER: Listen. I have 556 Members of Parliament. If you are not among the first five, then we cannot do much. [Mr Sseggona] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6339THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 20223.04MR DA VID LUKYAMUZI (NUP, Busujju County, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I kindly request to use this time. Thank you very much. I rise on a matter of national importance in line with what Nakasero Blood Bank is going through as an entity that was mandated to collect blood in this country. A few weeks ago, Nakasero Blood Bank together with Buganda Kingdom conducted a blood donation campaign in my constituency. We were told as leaders to mobilise and we did our part. Unfortunately, Nakasero Blood Bank could not collect 40 percent of the blood that we had set to collect. They claimed that they do not have facilities and you have heard about the nature of roads that we have in our country. It is my humble request that you use your Chair to instruct the line minister to be responsible and facilitate these people. They should get them new vehicles to help us because it is on record that we are losing mothers because of lack of blood; we are losing people; on average over nine per day due to accidents because they lack blood. Madam Speaker, help the ministry and instruct it to facilitate this entity to execute its mandate so that we save the lives of Ugandans. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Daudi, you said that I should instruct the minister to be responsible. The minister I know is a very responsible minister. It is not her to be responsible, it is the ministry. Dr Jane, first respond to that before the General comes.3.07THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the Honourable Member for his support in mobilising his constituents to donate blood. Since COVID-19, we had a challenge because people did not want to donate blood. We are extremely grateful. The blood bank has vehicles although they are not enough. You will recall that part of the COVID-19 vehicles were given to the blood bank. I will undertake to find out what went wrong so that they were not able to respond to that massive mobilisation and we correct the problem. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So, next time when they tell you to mobilise -3.08THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I highly appreciate the directive you gave that we need to increase the Uganda Road Fund to every district; at least to a minimum of Shs 1 billion per district. I am not going to stand here and lament because the problem is well known and it is cutting across the country. What we need is the response, as has been highlighted by the Rt honourable Prime Minister. I want to thank Hon. Sseggona for suggesting that we do an analysis, district by district and ensure that we apportion money according to the demand. Under UNRA, the number of roads we have are 20,000 kilometres. These are national roads and I have ever presented this matter here on the Floor, defining which roads are under UNRA and those under the district. Of the 20,000 kilometres of national roads, so far, 6,000 kilometres are tarmacked and so, we still have a shortfall of 14,000 kilometres, which need tarmacking.This has been registered in the last many years but if you recall, by 1962, when we were still under the British for 78 years, they left us with 600 kilometres of tarmac. I do not think that in the 78-years rule by the British, they left us with 600 kilometres. The 36 years have seen 5,500 roads tarmacked. (Applause) On the issue of the community access and the district roads, the solution, as you have rightly said, Madam Speaker, is to increase money to all districts. Every district, except the 16 new districts, have road unit equipment – (Interjections) - 6340THE SPEAKER: Can you speak, General?GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you for the protection, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Every district –THE SPEAKER: Can you speak?GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Every district, other than the 16 districts, whose unit equipment we have already ordered has a full unit equipment. (Applause) The 16 new districts will get their equipment by July next year. Every district every year submits its plan to the Road Fund on maintenance of roads. It is against that plan that Road Fund disperses money. The district road committee has authority to even change, with evidence, if the plan may not be - like now, the issues you are raising, where some culverts and bridges have been washed away. If it requires an emergency, you can change the plan that was submitted and write to the Road Fund to that effect. So, every district – and Members of Parliament being members of the district road committee are supposed to supervise the money which goes into the road fund. In addition, the Ministry of Works and Transport, under force account also responds in some districts to some requirements. So, the issue of the rains and damages caused will require a special response because it is not the normal occurrence. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Gen. Katumba. -  Honourable members - UPC President.MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification from the honourable minister. For Lira City, what we were allocated last financial year was slightly under a billion shillings, which was less than what we were getting under Lira Municipality. The area is very big. I am glad you mentioned the issue of the road works equipment. I request that you cross-check and find the functionality of some of the equipment you are referring to. I can assure you that the equipment in Lira City is not good for the work, which is supposed to be done. Secondly, in the first quarter of this financial year, we received Shs 28 million. In the second quarter, we got Shs 230 million. In Lira City, we have three bridges, which have been washed away and the estimate for a single one of the smallest one would consume much more than we already have as a city. This will mean that we do not touch on any other issue but we will not even be able to fix one of the washed away bridges. Honourable minister, I think we need to cooperate more closely on this particular issue. Where funding has reduced from a municipality to a city - the area has expanded and the equipment, which was under Lira District has gone with the district and our city is under the municipal equipment, we are under severe constraint. None of us will be able to complete any of the tasks before us. The road situation will get worse and worse within the city, where we have a mixture of murram and tarmac roads. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe, you need to cross-check with all the districts. Most of the equipment is in a poor state. They cannot even replace mere tires. They say they do not have the money and so, you need to carry out a survey and find out which equipment are working and which ones are not working. 3.15MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampa-ra County,    Rwampara): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and I appreciate the General; the honourable minister who was just submitted. However, I heard - and it had been a concern here - since I represent a con-stituency that is in a new district – The hon-ourable minister said all the 16 new districts will receive road units between June and July. Madam Speaker, I remember these units were appropriated -COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6341THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: We budgeted for them in this financial year.MR KANKUNDA: We budgeted for them. When we are talking about the wash away of roads and all that, but as new districts, we are worse because we cannot even borrow equipment from a neighbour who has a problem. So, for us, with no road units to be postponed to June-July - I actually had hoped this was coming soon. I need clarification from the honourable minister. Where is the challenge? Is it money? Is it the process of procuring the equipment? Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal -GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate –THE SPEAKER: General, let Hon. Ogwal first clarify.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, General. Madam Speaker, this is a matter of equity. The minister said 6,000 kilometre roads have already been tarmacked -THE SPEAKER: The success story of UNRA is 6,000.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Exactly. It is 6,000 – that is what I am talking about. I would like the minister to clarify to me. Out of the 6,000, how many kilometres have been tarmacked in the north, south, west and east? (Applause) I think this is a matter of equity. I just want to know. There may be reasons the north is more tarmacked than the east and so, we must understand. This is purely a matter of equity. I would like to know how you have spread out the tarmacking of roads. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: That report will be brought to the House. Gen. Katumba, we need a report on how many kilometres have been tarmacked and in which region. You will bring it to the House. Also, the issue of new equipment of the new districts of the new issues. Hon. Judith, you will speak on the next one. There is the issue of equipment for the new cities, which we budgeted for. We need to find out what could have happened. Is it procurement or lack of funds? That is what we need to find out. Honourable members, the next item is on the actions taken – and you will bring all your issues related to the Ministry of Works and Transport.GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Why have the equipment delayed? Of course, we started the procurement process but among the provisions of the law you passed is that we do not go into signing a contract until we are sure that we have the money. The money was availed just recently and that is when we signed the contract for equipment for the 16 districts. As for the cities, we have not yet provided equipment for the new cities –(Interjections)-  even for municipalities. We have provided equipment to districts only. That is why we captured the 16 new districts. On the issue of some of the road equipment not being in a serviceable condition – that one I accept because I know many of the district graders do not have tyres. We are in the process of purchasing tyres for these graders – and other spare parts. That is what I can say for now. On the issue of the tarmac roads per region, I will bring that information on the Floor.THE SPEAKER: (Members rose_) Honourable Members, what the ministry needs to do is to have regular checks on the equipment to see if they are in good shape and serviced.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give information on how much money was received by Lira City last financial year. Last financial year, there was budget suppression. Despite that, Lira received Shs 721 million to work on their roads. This financial year, they 6342have so far received Shs 253 million, from July to-date. So, let us monitor that money so that we have value for it.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us do an oversight role. Let us not leave this money for the district chairpersons. Let us do work and ensure value for money. You come and lament here - I am even ashamed that you are the ones lamenting. You have your right; you are supposed to do this work in your constituency. Next item.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE MICROFINANCE DEPOSIT-TAKING INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, in 2003, this House enacted the Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act. This Act sought to regulate the licensing and supervision of microfinance deposit-taking institutions. However, since then, the banking sector has witnessed various changes, notably the advent of Islamic banking and agency banking. As we receive the Bill today, I hope the Government is addressing the urgent variables of Islamic banking, agent banking as well as the bank assurance services for deposit-taking microfinance institutions. We are going to receive the Bill. I invite the Minister of Finto table the Bill. However, I must congratulate the Prime Minister: at least we are receiving one Bill today. (Laughter) (Member rose_) Can I receive the Bill first and then you bring your procedural matter?3.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO FINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to moveTHE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, pursuant to Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure, the Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they are to consider and report back. Hon. Anyakun, can you come back? (Laughter) Honourable minister, are you supposed to be in Tororo or Mbarara? Kashari? We need a report back in this House. I wanted to communicate before you leave. Thank you. You can now go. (Laughter) MR HARUNA KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the copy of the Bill, accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Next item . (Member rose_) Hon. Charles, what is the issue?MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the previous sitting, you directed the Attorney-General to come here with a complete report on the pending Bills. Allow me to refer you to the constitutional mandate -THE SPEAKER: I know the constitutional mandate; please, do not repeat it. I have a report. The report was delivered to my office and I am still studying it.MR TEBANDEKE: Madam Speaker, my procedural issue is that however much the report has been presented, it contravenes Article 91(7) of the Constitution. It states thus: “Where the President fails to do any of the acts specified in clause (3) of this Article within the period prescribed in that clause, the President shall be taken to have assented to the Bill and at the expiration of that period, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and the Bill shall become law without the assent of the President. ” Madam Speaker, the Markets Bill was passed by this House in February. The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill was passed on the 28th of September. If I am to count, mathematically, [Ms Nabbanja] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6343THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022the 30 days have expired. Is it procedurally right to move on the same agenda of the Bill, yet it is in contravention of the law? I would propose -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Charles, you can count biologically. You do not have to count mathematically. (Laughter) Now, Hon. Charles, you are legislating in anticipation. You do not know what report the Attorney-General has. He is coming with a report. First of all, when a Bill is signed, it is addressed to me. I am the one to give you a response on whether the Bill has been assented to or not. So, why don’t you wait? You are acting in anticipation. Next item.LAYING OF PAPERSREPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON TIRINYI-PALLISA-KUMI-KAMONKOLI ROAD PROJECT FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 30 JUNE 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable Parliamentary Commissioner - 3.29MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA  (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli Road project for the period ended 30 June 2022. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 174 of the Rules of Procedure, the report is accordingly referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). I urge the committee to be cognisant of Rule 174(6), which is derived from Article 163(5) of the Constitution that accords the House six months to debate and consider the report of the Auditor-General. QUALITY OF MATERNAL CARE AND HUMAN RIGHTS AUDIT REPORTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/20223.30THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Maternal Health Audit Report for the Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Pursuant to Rule 32(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I refer the report to the Committee on Health and urge the members to report back to inform the budget process on this for the Financial Year 2023/2024. MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Who should I give to raise the point of procedure? Hon. Atkins was also standing. (Laughter)MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a month ago, you directed the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security to report back to this House and also reassure the country about the status of our security and safety of our fellow citizens. It started as a trend and it has now become a pattern. Just about three days ago, we lost a serviceman at Jinja Gaddafi Barracks. Armed men stormed the gate and murdered a military officer and carried away two guns. This occurrence should worry everybody because we have to get assurance from Government. What is it they are doing? Killing our fellow citizens and robbing guns is a fatality. We have to know; who are these people? Where are they? What is it that Government is doing? One gun in the hands of a criminal is a calamity and a tragedy for any nation. Madam Speaker, we are honoured to have the Minister of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs in the House. The families of 6344the deceased servicemen and servicewomen want the assurance on what Government is doing. Also, it is causing a lot of fear and anxiety among the serving offices. Madame Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to recognise that everything else that we do in this House can wait, but not the safety and security of our fellow citizens and especially those that sign up for duty to serve our country with distinction? I appreciate your attention.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister?3.34THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY)  (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for raising this matter. It is, indeed, a matter that the security sector is taking seriously and we are handling. There is no threat to the country. This was a nasty incident, which we are investigating and we shall come back to brief the House very soon.MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, there is something unrelated but overtime, I have noticed that most of our colleagues are gradually offending Rule 82(1)(a) and (b) particularly, (v) and (iv) respectively. The dress code by some of our colleagues is gradually degenerating. (Applause)Madam Speaker, I will not be pointing out a particular Member but I believe you need to start being very serious - not only in the Plenary, but also in committees. Some of us are dressed as if we are going to cattle markets. Honestly, the dress code is degenerating and I believe we need to take action. Maybe, the rules committee may have to go further and define what decent traditional wear is. (Interjections)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he is talking about the issue of dress code in general. That is why he is not naming and shaming. Be smart. It is in good faith. Be like me. (Laughter) MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Health for presenting that maternal audit report. However, recall that there was a petition presented by us, members of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association, which was supported by the whole House on maternal health - mothers dying, yet, these deaths can actually be prevented. You referred that matter to the minister. Now that this report, similarly, touching on the same item is going to the Committee on Health, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the committee to consider that petition as well because it is the same subject matter?Madam speaker, aware that court ruled on this particular matter - actually, this was a constitutional petition in the Constitutional Court and court ruled over this matter. Therefore, in addition to this audit, would it not be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for you to refer our petition so that the committee can handle them at ago and report back? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah, this report actually brings out your issues. The reason we are referring it to the committee is for the sake of budgeting. Yes, you raised some issue but there was no money for it. We now need to look at this report and have money budgeted for all those activities. Your issues are covered in this report.3.39MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of privilege. I am asking that the Clerk should aid me to have a better vision so that when I look at that clock, I am not perturbed to think that it is towards 2 O’clock. Additionally, every day that I come here, I have to rotate around all four machines to get a machine that is really working in order to have my thumbprint taken. I beg to submit.[Mr Katusabe] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION6345THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I have heard clearly and the Member is right. We are going to ensure that that is worked on. We apologise for the wrong clock. I think it only happened today. MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Commissioner apologises, when we were swearing in, the biometric system captured four fingers. However, when you get in here, the machine keeps rejecting some fingers and the next day, it accepts them.  They need to do something beyond that, other than just apologising and saying that the machine will work.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we are moving from analogue to digital and it is a process. Coming from that far end of Bugabula, you may not know how to put the finger well. (Laughter)MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) 237.7 (EQUIV ALENT TO $331.5 MILLION) AND RECEIVE A GRANT OF UP TO SDR 198.2 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO $276.5) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE ELECTRICITY ACCESS SCALE UP PROJECT (EASP)THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, please, listen. If you do not want the loan, you will vote against it. -  Honourable Members, this loan was presented to the committee. It was brought during recess. Administratively, I referred it to the committee. From the committee, I went and sought permission from the Business Committee and we now finally came and handed it over to the committee under Rule 155(2). That is how the loan has come back to the House. Now, the minister is ready to move the motion. I know you want to raise a procedural issue under rule 155. You know very well – do not show me your Constitution, because I have mine. Members, there are some of you who just want to raise non-issues because of cameras.3.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolu-tion of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 237.7 million, equivalent to $ 331.5 million and also receive a grant of up to SDR 198.2 million. That is equivalent to $276.5 million in the form of grants from the IDA of the World Bank Group to finance the EASP Project. The objective of this project is to increase access to electricity for households, commercial enterprises, industrial parks and public institutions from 19 per cent currently to 44 per cent by 2027 and increase the share of clean energy usage for cooking from 15 per cent to 40 per cent by 2027. The location and beneficiaries of this project The project’s geographical focus is national and it will directly benefit households, commercial enterprises, including minerals and mining enterprises, public institutions and industrial parks with access to energy and clean cooking solutions. The project will also support refugees and their host communities with both grid and off grid technologies. The key project results areas include: i) About 1,073,500 new on-grid electricity connections; the estimated number of connections per district is included in the annex, which we shall present later. ii) About 150,000 off-grid new electricity connections made, of which 27,000 are in refugee host districts. iii) Based on the above connection targets, about five million project beneficiaries will be provided with access to electricity 6346under the project through grid, mini-grid and off-grid options, of which 2,525,000 will be female. iv) A total of about 600,000 people in refugee hosting districts will benefit, of which about 300,000, will be refugees.The Project Cost The total estimated project cost and financing is $638 million, which includes $331.5 million in form of IDA credit and $276.5 million in form of grants. Therefore, the grant consists of $112.5 million from IDA, $124 million from the IDA window for host communities and refugees and $30 million from the clean technology fund, of which $25 million is a Contingency Recovery Grant and $10 million from the Clean Cooking Fund. This is supplemented by the Government of Uganda counterpart funding of $ 10 million and $ 20 million that is to be leveraged from the private sector.The project has several components Component 1 is on grid expansion and connectivity, component 2 on financial intermediation for energy axis scale-up and component 3 is on energy access in refugee hosting communities. Component 4 is on project implementation support and affordable modern energy solutions. Component 5 is contingent emergency response. The detailed description of each component is presented differently in a separate document. Loan terms and conditions i) The loan amount - I have already mentioned. ii) Maturity is 38 years, including a grace period of six years.iii) Commitment fee is 0.5 per cent per annum on un-withdrawn financing balance.iv) Service fee is 0.75 per cent per annum on the withdrawn credit balance. Therefore, the loan is highly concessional.ImplementationThe main project implementation entities will be the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the grid expansion and connectivity aspects and the Uganda Energy Credit Capitalisation Company (UECCC) for the financial intermediation aspects, largely targeting off-grid interventions and clean cooking solutions. The ministry of energy will establish a project steering committee to provide strategic guidance and overall oversight during project implementation and ensure effective coordination. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you now presenting the report?MR LUGOLOOBI: I am presenting a motion, Madam Speaker and I am about to conclude because I thought- THE SPEAKER: I needed the motion to be seconded first before you speak about it. MR LUGOLOOBI: I am sorry the motion was a bit long but I am concluding with the next sentence, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: So, you have spoken about your motion already? MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, I have done both. THE SPEAKER: Okay.MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the ministry of energy will establish a project steering committee to provide strategic guidance and overall oversight during project implementation to ensure effective coordination among all stakeholders.The project steering committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, ministry of energy with representatives from the ministry of finance, UECCC, OPM, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Water [Mr Lugoloobi] RESOLUTION TO BORROW6347THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022and Environment. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister for reading both the motion and the report of the committee. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)It is seconded by Hon. Bahati, Hon. Aceng, the Prime Minister, the Government Chief Whip - we all need electricity – and the whole House.Now that the minister has talked about the terms and everything and in the matter of equity, can we now get the names of the districts to be covered? (Applause)All we need the chairperson to do is to lay on the Table the report, the minutes and just read for us the regions. - No, we cannot go to subcounties; let us look at the districts.3.35THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr John Bosco Ikojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has in fact summarised our report and therefore, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 237.7 million equivalent to $ 331 million and receive a grant of up to SDR 198.2 million equivalent to $ 276.5 million from the IDA of the World Bank to finance the EASP project. I beg to lay the report and the minutes of the committee. THE SPEAKER: Please, lay them.MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, last time when we presented the other loan, there were issues of procedure raised by the Honourable Members. Therefore, I wish to lay the documents that accompanied the loan when the minister presented this matter to the House. I beg to lay the minister’s brief, the letter of clearance from the President, the letter from National Planning Authority clearing the loan and many other relevant documents. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, as guided by you -THE SPEAKER: Maybe as you look for the regions, there is something we need to correct; the statement that the minister summarised your report. Just to correct the record, it is your report. He did not summarise; he was speaking to his motion.MR IKOJO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. You directed that we should read the tentative electricity connections to be made per district under the EASP project. We have a number of districts and -(Interjections)-  after page 29, move to the next page. It is uploaded on the intranet.THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, just read starting with Buikwe, Bukomansimbi, Butambala, Buvuma - MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, there is a table, which is Annexure 1 in our report. It begins with Buikwe and the number of connections for Buikwe is 17,257. THE SPEAKER: We do not need that; we need the districts.MR IKOJO: The districts to be connected are: Buikwe, Bukomansimbi, Butambala, Buvuma, Gomba, Kalangala, Kalungu, Kampala, Kassanda, Kayunga, Kiboga, Kyankwanzi, Kyotera, Luwero, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Masaka, Mityana, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Rakai, Ssembabule, Wakiso, Bugweri, Kitagwenda –(Interjections) - that is central. I am going region by region.In eastern Uganda, we have Amuria, Budaka, Bududa, Bugiri, Bukedea, Bukwo, Bulambuli, Busia, Namayingo, Butaleja, Butebo, Buyende, Iganga, Jinja, Kaberamaido, Kaliro, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Katakwi, Kibuku, Kumi, Kween, Luuka, Manafwa, Mayuge, Mbale, Namisindwa, Namutumba, Ngora, Pallisa, Serere, Sironko, Soroti, Tororo, Kalaki and Kapelebyong. 6348In northern Uganda, we have Abim, Adjumani, Agago, Alebtong, Amolatar, Amudat, Amuru, Apac, Omoro, Arua, Dokolo, Gulu, Kaabong, Kitgum, Koboko, Kole, Kotido, Lamwo, Lira, Maracha, Moroto, Moyo, Nakapiripirit, Napak, Nebbi, Nwoya, Otuke, Oyam, Pader, Pakwach, Yumbe, Zombo, Obongi, Terego, Karenga, Kwania, Madi-Okollo, Nabilatuk, and Obongi.In Western Uganda, we have Buhweju, Buliisa, Bundibugyo, Bunyangabu, Bushenyi, Hoima, Ibanda, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Kabarole, Kagadi, Kakumiro, Kamwenge, Kanungu, Kasese, Kibale, Kiruhura, Kiryandongo, Kisoro, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Masindi, Mbarara, Mitooma, Ntoroko, Rubanda, Rubirizi, Rukiga, Rukungiri, Sheema, Kikuube, Kazo and Rwampara.Madam Speaker, those are the areas that will be covered by the project.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Member, for the report. Can we hear from the Leader of the Opposition -4.00MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister, together with my colleague, the chairperson of the committee. As you noticed from the beginning, both sides of the House supported this loan. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you keep quiet?MR SSEGGONA: Ordinarily, we are not opposed to borrowing. We are only opposed to unguided borrowing and poor management of these loans. With respect to this loan, you will notice that it is national in character, over basic infrastructure that we need for development. My attention has specifically been drawn to the coverage and the question of equity. Although I want the minister to correct the impression that Bugweri and Kitagwenda are in central region - making the coverage in the central region appear to be 28 districts, whereas they are actually 26. The rest reflect a national character and the equitable distribution of the benefits of this loan. We noticed equally from the terms that this is a concessional loan with an element of a grant and I kept asking: where have these honourable gentleman and ladies been all along as we were choking in the most difficult loans that we have contracted in the past?Access to electricity is key to development as well as saving the environment.The committee made a report without a minority report this time, which normally shrouds controversial issues from both sides. Therefore, we urge the people that are going to manage this loan to ensure that we have value-for-money so that when we start to pay, we are really paying for value and that this loan will encourage, increase or improve productivity.We have always complained about the absence of a debt management policy. In fact, other countries in the region have gone ahead to enact debt management laws and policy. A case in point is Zambia. There is a debt policy and plan, which must be laid before Parliament annually. I think we need to take such good examples. Finally, the honourable minister has talked about a multi- sectoral committee that is going to participate in the management of this loan. I am one of those that have consistently and persistently been opposed to the abolition of Rural Electrification Authority (REA).Madam Speaker, all the problems in REA, which have largely been managerial, could have been sorted. You must give credit to REA in the distribution of electricity. I think they got us from far. Madam Speaker, taking this back to the mainstream ministry will have its challenges that have dogged all other infrastructure issues. How I wish the Government would reconsider the decision -[Mr Ikojo] RESOLUTION TO BORROW6349THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you listening to that?MR SSEGGONA: …decision of abolishing REA. Madam Speaker, there are mainly two entities, that is, REA and UNRA. There have been issues to do with management, which would have been sorted by way of re-looking at the appointments in those places.  Otherwise, they have done a fantastic job. Without reservation, therefore, we wish to support both the motion and the report. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Honourable Members. It is not a motion for debate. The Leader of the Opposition has talked. As you have heard - first of all, the Constitution allows us to borrow, and the terms are favourable.I would like to agree with the Leader of the Opposition on REA. Government, give back our REA. The management could have been bad but you can give better managers. Otherwise, REA did a very good job. There are institutions that have success stories that you can never forget in Uganda. Look at REA, UNRA, NWSC - and water is life; there is no way you can do away with NWSC. I am not going to allow a debate on this loan.  - Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, please, take your seat.MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want us to be certain that we are proceeding well. The title of the motion reads, “proposal to borrow up to SDR 237.7 million” – with its equivalent – and to “receive a grant”.Madam Speaker, I invite you to look at page 15 of the motion, where item 31(c) also requests us, to approve a loan – a borrowing - departing from the title of the motion that, that was a grant. This is very important because we approve figures and these figures must have conditions attached. As far as the report and recommendations of the committee are concerned, it touches only on SDR 237.7 million as the money we are going to borrow. However, when you look at prayer (c) - and I am going to quote it verbatim – it says: “31. In light of the above, I shall request Hon.  Members to –“ I will skip (a) and (b) and go to (c) – “(c) Authorise the Government by passing the resolution attached to this brief and in line with Article 159 of the Constitution, to borrow up to SDR 198.2 million.”The minister purports that this amount is a grant but now, in the conclusion, this Parliament is asked to approve a loan, which I have nothing against, but where are the conditions for this one? We do not want to think that we are getting a grant of some amount, yet, in the end, we are borrowing. If we are borrowing, let it be clear so that we know both are borrowings and the terms are laid before this House.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General -4.09THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that is because the Government does not seek a resolution to take a grant. The Constitution requires the Government to take a resolution to borrow. So, when we come here, we inform Parliament that we are getting a loan and a grant but the resolution is for the permission to borrow – it is only for the borrowing.THE SPEAKER: Actually, the procedural matter you are raising is on the motion and not on what is in the report. What the Attorney-General is saying is that we do not need a resolution to get a grant. They are asking for a resolution to borrow a particular amount.MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, the report of the committee is on the motion. What is before this House is a substantive motion moved by the minister and this is a document from the minister. I will invite you, Madam Speaker, to read it.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the SDR 198.2 million also a loan or a grant? 6350MR LUGOLOOBI: The grant is actually SDR 198.2 million, which is equivalent to $276.5 million. The loan is SDR 237.7 million, equivalent to $331.5 million. That is what is before the House, Madam Speaker. MR ODUR: In that case, Madam Speaker, this motion should be amended to reflect what they have come to request from us and indicate it as a grant. In any case, it is the first time I am seeing the Government coming here to tell us about a grant. It is unprecedented that the Government has come here – they have been taking grants. So, let us strike off this aspect so that we know we are dealing with a loan. We do not want to come here after five or six years and say that Parliament made a mistake on this matter.THE SPEAKER: Please, move a motion that the borrowing is $331.5 million and the grant is $276.5 million. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: It could be amended to that effect, Madam Speaker but the House needs to know that the grant is a condition on the loan. So, we are amending it to read that “Government be authorised to borrow a sum of $331.5 million and take a grant of $276.5 million”. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: … from the IDA of the World Bank Group. Honourable members, I now put the question that this House approves the motion to authorise the Government to borrow up to SDR 237.7 million, equivalent to $331.5 million and receive a grant of up to SDR 198.2 million, equivalent to $276.5 million, from the IDA of the World Bank Group to finance the EASP project.(Question out and agreed to.)Motion approved.THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on National Economy and the committee members, thank you very much for the work. (Applause) Honourable members, I request you to do your oversight role in your different constituencies where this money is going to be invested. Let it not be paperwork. Let us have value for money. 4.15MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkiizi County West,  Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the guidance, especially on the processing and passing of this loan. I would also like to agree with you on the issue of implementation. While it is good for us to have oversight, it is also important to prepare because I am told that the REA was supposed to be absorbed into the ministry of energy. At the moment, there are a lot of issues to do with the staff of REA.  Some of them have been rejected and other amateurs have been brought to the ministry to supervise the committed and experienced workers. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should give us attention such that you can listen to this, which is very critical. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, while we yearn to absorb them into the ministries, we also need to be very conscious of what these ministries are doing. If REA staff were supposed to be incorporated in the ministry and now, they have been rejected in favour of other people, relatives, friends and in-laws, are we, therefore, going to implement this project? Can we get assurance, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have the next item? (Laughter)PRESENTATION OF ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT, MAY 2021 TO MAY 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall, on Thursday, 17 November, we unceremoniously adjourned the House, awaiting the action taken reports, as per rule ACTION TAKEN REPORT6351THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022220. And the Prime Minister who is present told me that she is ready and set for it. As you may know, action taken reports are vital for our accountability. As Members of Parliament, we need to do accountability not only to ourselves but to the people who sent us here. Of course, as the Legislature, that is part of our work. For that reason, therefore, can we have the Prime Minister present the action taken reports as per rule 220? 4.18MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I may not have been privileged as a new office bearer for the little time I am going to hold this office. I find that the issue my sister, the Prime Minister is presenting on, is vital. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you guide that first, we get those copies and internalise them so as to have an informed decision? -(Interjections)-  Yes, I know, of the intranet, and also the rules. I am actually very happy that I am being reminded by my granddaughter, Hon. Muhanga. I am now happy that she is alive to the rules and proceedings here. However, I am only making that request; if you would find the pleasure that first in ensuring that we do some background check, because some of these issues involve statistics. And they are vital, especially having come from us, if the Prime Minister is equally indulgent. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: I actually have no problem with that. For me, what is important is for the Prime Minister to lay on the Table. Once the Prime Minister has laid on the Table, we will look at all of them and then, debate on them - once we have looked at them. Yes, let her lay on the Table. First of all, I congratulate you for finishing and working overnight to have this ready. Congratulations. And whatever we did was in good faith to help you work and where we find that not everything is covered, we shall still ask you to ensure that- those will come in oral questions. 4.20THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, and colleagues-THE SPEAKER: We thank you for running for the babies. (Laughter)  MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, you guided us on Thursday, that we present ministry by ministry until we are done with a full report. And therefore, in my foreword of this book, I move in accordance to Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I also have the honour to submit before this august House the first action taken report on resolutions of the First Session of the 11th Parliament - that is May 2021 to May 2022. This report outlines actions taken by different Ministries, Departments and Agencies in regard to the resolutions of Parliament for the period above. The report is intended to update Parliament on compliance and the extent of action taken by Government on resolutions of Parliament. Some of the pending resolutions require legislation and policy formulation. To that effect, Government is in the process of initiating the necessary decisions and policies so as to facilitate their implementation. It is important to note that this report also excludes resolutions to authorise Government to borrow and the resolutions to pay tribute. I therefore, wish to inform you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that this is the first action taken report to be presented before the 11th Parliament by the Executive. This clearly affirms Government’s commitment to Parliament in ensuring the timely, efficient and effective delivery of services to the public and in a bid to achieve sustainable development in Uganda.6352The Government of Uganda is appreciative of the oversight role of Parliament. It is, therefore, my pleasure to present this report before Parliament and to reiterate the Government’s assurance to deliver timely responses to Parliament as we join hands in building this great nation. Madam Speaker, I request you to allow the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to be the one to present followed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and then, the Ministry of Information Communication Technology & National Guidance, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Works to mention but a few. I beg to lay on the Table.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please lay, Rt hon. Prime Minister. From your foreword, where you say “it is important to note that this report also excludes resolutions to authorise Government to borrow and resolutions to pay tribute” you can exclude “pay tribute” because it has no financial implications. However, on borrowing, it is about debt-servicing; we need to know how far you have gone. Was the loan disbursed? Has it been used in a proper way? We need to determine the value for money. So, it is a very important aspect that should be included in this. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we shall amend. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, you have heard from the Prime Minister. Can I hear from Leader of the Opposition?4.22MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, actually, one missing point is that you are now hearing from the “Government” on your left. From us, on your left, we want first to congratulate you because this is an innovation from the leadership of this House. (Laughter) Ordinarily, we have been used to the Treasury Memorandum, which comes and is audited and we debate - and that implies action initiated by Government in accordance with the law. Sometimes, it takes very long. Now, you notice that-THE SPEAKER: And it is limited to Auditor-General’s reports. MR SSEGGONA: Absolutely limited to the Attorney-General. Now, this innovation of our House is wider and faster. It is also deeper.  I also congratulate the Prime Minister on being the first to implement this kind of initiative. (Applause) Like I have always said, she is good at execution; very good.  Having said that, I know my granddaughter, Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal is going to tell me that it is because she is a lady. But I will receive her information before I judge her on that point with your permission. (Interruption)  MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Grandpa for allowing me to give you information. (Laughter) Today is St Cecilia’s Day and so, I am just happy. I think the girl-child should learn from St Cecilia’s life. I want to let the Leader of the Opposition to know that the political history of Uganda has registered Rt Hon. Prime Minister Robina Nabbanja as the first female Prime Minister of Uganda. I just want to let you know that. (Laughter)MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I think like any other old man, I was not far from the answer in terms of the information I anticipated from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.Having congratulated the Prime Minister and also, of course, on mobilising her Cabinet to be here and sit up to this time, I am of the view that for us to have a meaningful debate, we need time to go through this document and do research on it. What we are doing is carrying out oversight. When the Government tells you, “We’ve done this,” you must be sure that they have actually done it. (Applause) [Ms Nabbanja] ACTION TAKEN REPORT6353THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2022It is still my plea and that of my government on your left that we be given some time, maybe one or two days, to come back with thorough research and have a meaningful debate. Only then, can we implement your directive earlier given on improving the quality of debate in this House. I am sure outside there, we are going to be congratulated on that because this question has been lingering for a long time. I pray that you find pleasure in granting that request. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I want to thank my brother-in-law –(Interjections) - for the compliment and also request you to allow the Members to have time to go through this so that we can have a meaningful debate, for the good of this country. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, now that both sides are in agreement, can we have the debate on Thursday? We shall have a one-item Order Paper. These are only 11 entities. They will bring more; so, go and look at what is here. We will debate them on Thursday and then, we receive the others.Let it be conclusive. As I have said, issues of the loans must be included. The Bills must be included. The decisions that were taken by this House must be included. Where you feel it is not, go and include them and give us a fresh document so that we are able to look at it, debate and make Ugandans proud because we are holding the Executive accountable. I thank all of you. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 4.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)