Wednesday, 13 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The Committee on Science and Technology in conjunction with scientists from Uganda has organised a workshop to sensitise the entire Parliament on biotechnology issues. This meeting will be held on Friday 15th at Parliament’s Conference Hall, starting at 9.00a.m. It will go on for almost the entire day because it will end at 4.00p.m. So, please, Members, attend this meeting so that we get to know issues of biotechnology now that the matter is before the House, so that we are better informed on how we move the agenda forward. 

Secondly, our colleague, Dr Francis Epetait, is not feeling very well. That is partly why I delayed; we wanted to see how we can arrange for his trip abroad so that he can be treated quickly. He is not feeling very well at the moment, so we need to pray for him. We need to have him in our prayers.

2.51
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national and global importance, a matter that has been in the media variously since last year, relating to abductions, murders and arrests of Rwandese nationals in Uganda. 

Our historical relation with our neighbours is well documented, and it is very difficult on an ordinary day to tell a Rwandese-Rwandese and a Rwandese-Ugandan. Across our borders, we have families that share a lot and it is the reason why I am concerned. I have families in my constituency that are concerned about the issue of abductions, murders and arrests. 

Last year, on 30th November, we heard in the Ugandan media of a Rwandese journalist who had sought refuge in Uganda and he was assassinated in Bukesa, in Kampala here. The last I read about his murder, the Police had promised a report but nothing to-date has ever come out of it. This year alone, the media has reported the recent arrest by Ugandan security of a one Joel Mutabazi. He was a Rwandese army officer but sought refuge in Uganda because of reasons related to his security and torture back in his homeland. He was arrested by the Ugandan Police and handed over to the Rwandese Government. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to a number of international protocols that relate to the protection of refugees and persons seeking protection. Aware of the volatility in the Great Lakes region and aware that countries in the Great Lakes region are relatively fragile states, it is only common that you would get a lot of people crisscrossing borders over political disagreements. It now becomes dangerous for us as a vanguard of peace in the region, and at the same time at the helm of propagating regional political co-operation and federation, to downplay the importance of protecting individual freedoms and hide under issues like “he has a case to answer back home”. According to the Ugandan media, the Police said that Joel Mutabazi had crimes to answer back in his country. That is fine, but he sought protection. 

We might have an extradition treaty with Rwanda but there are international protocols relating to protection of people seeking refuge in our country. I am concerned, Mr Speaker, and I would like to ask Government, in particular the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to explain issues relating to these abductions. 

We also have reports of abductions of Rwandese refugees in refugee camps in Nakivale. These are very serious matters to which the Ministry of Internal Affairs has to answer. They have to explain whether the situation is normal or whether the leaders of this Government are in good position to actually know what it means to be a refugee when you have political problems back home. They need to protect those who have problems back home and use international platforms to protect people seeking protection. 

Right now, we have a group of M23 rebels who were indicted by the UN for crimes against humanity; we have them here and we are negotiating for their peace and protection. I demand for an explanation, Mr Speaker, of these matters. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does Government have something to say on this?

2.56
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the allegations being made are of a very serious nature and I believe that the person making them knows the veracity and importance of those matters. 

My view is that they need substantiation. In my opinion, that statement is general in nature. In order to assist Government to come out with a concrete statement on the Floor of this House, we need concrete information. When you talk of abductions, arrests and murders, that is very general. We need categorical information that he has. He may also wish to inform us why he has not reported those matters to the Police for action and then the Government can thereafter take necessary action.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have addressed my mind to our rules, which require ministers to attend the House and to respond to questions put to them. Here, a matter has been raised and hon. Ruhindi is not the line minister in respect of this. I have also heard him request the Member to bring information yet I thought his obligation was to raise the matter so that the minister responds. So, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to respond in that style other than request for time to bring a statement on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a learned Attorney-General; if matters are legal in nature, it is within his mandate to respond. I think he has acted in that capacity. If there is any response, since this matter has been raised, the honourable Attorney-General and the Leader of Government Business need to find a way of briefing the House about what is happening if it is happening. It has just come up, so we need to find a way of addressing it.

2.59
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker, the matter raised is a serious one and it should be taken as so. In order to pursue it to a sensible conclusion, we need more details and not generalities. When you say “people”, now which people are you talking about? Who has been taken, who has been snatched and who has been implicated? We want to do a thorough job, so please, give us as much information as possible so that we can move forward and react to your issue.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I felt touched and I did not want to put the elderly Prime Minister to order, but I was wondering how the Prime Minister was proceeding. Does the Prime Minister live in this country? Does he know what is happening in this country? The man was arrested at Sky Hotel in Naalya and handed over. Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to show ignorance of what is taking place in the country? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To ask the Speaker to rule on whether the Prime Minister does not know the facts or knows the facts will be a difficult one. I think that is within the knowledge of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. If he says he does not know, it means he does not know.

MR KAJURA: Mr Speaker, all that I am asking for is assistance from those who have raised this issue in order for us to follow up these matters. We want to give an informed position and take appropriate action. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you need to put this in writing. Give some details and hand it over, and please, copy to the Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. When there is a matter of international nature, we know that Uganda is a member of the United Nations and Uganda has signed all these treaties. Uganda knows that there is a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. When you go to another country expressing and asking for refugee status, according to the UN, that country should never hand you over. 

We know where we have come from, Mr Speaker. Ugandans were living all over the world; some of us were living like refugees and we were received and we lived in all these countries. They did not hand over those Ugandans to this country to be prosecuted. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is why doesn’t Government come to the Floor of Parliament and answer some of these issues that are of international nature. We are members of the international community, of the UN, and we should be able to clarify to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is exactly what I have said. Let us start the process by having the facts. The claim from the Government is that they do not have the facts. So, let us have the process of giving this information to the Government, the Speaker will also be given a copy and then we move from there.

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided if these days we have a second Deputy Speaker because the sitting arrangement has always been that the Deputy Speaker is the one who sits there especially when chairs down here are very empty. I need to be guided, Mr Speaker.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to belatedly inform my colleague that there is nobody like a second Prime Minister in this country. It is good for you to be corrected that I the Second Deputy Prime Minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter was about a second Deputy Speaker.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: That is even wrong. That is even more off the target completely. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It relates to where you are sitting. The honourable member has sought the authority of the Speaker to sit in that place because he has some difficulties with the lower chairs. Please.

3.05
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. As you are aware, Kyambogo University has remained in turmoil since the issue about the vice-chancellor was raised sometime back. 

This issue was handled by an ad hoc committee of Parliament and all the concerns and grievances of the people from Kyambogo University were listened to. A report was presented to this House thereafter and pronouncements were made exonerating the vice-chancellor. Even courts of law were involved and indeed, both the High Court and Court of Appeal made a ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, despite all these pronouncements and also a pronouncement from the Court of Appeal directing that the VC goes back to the university, there has been continuous lawlessness at Kyambogo University. The staff have continued to stay away from work and there are continued riots, which have affected our students. They are not studying; apart from the Department of Engineering and Sciences, which has normal classes running, those from arts where the heads of departments are part of the problem, where they are saying they cannot work with the VC, have continued to refuse to obey the court order which directed them to go back to work. I have also seen a letter from the ministry which also made the same pronouncement. 

The urgent matter, Mr Speaker, is that we would want the university to run very well right now. After the pending issues were solved, we are wondering why Government is standing by as the riots continue and the lecturers who have been implicated in scandals continue to hold Kyambogo University at ransom, putting the lives and the education of our children at stake. We seek this clarification. We want to see that those lecturers who cannot obey court directives are handled. 

That is the urgent matter, Mr Speaker. If you allow me, I will lay on the Table the copies of the ruling which was made by courts of law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it will not be necessary. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Minister of Education.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true Kyambogo University has been, and is still, in a state of crisis. Lecturers are not teaching and the students are not learning following a court ruling of 21st October this year. The Government of Uganda respects the rule of law and the Government is insisting that the court ruling must be followed to the letter. That is position No.1

Two, the university council has been holding meetings with the staff and the management of the university. Cabinet has also had the opportunity to look at the matters of Kyambogo University. It has been decided that council, which happens to be the supreme governing body of that university, be asked to implement the court ruling to the letter and ensure that the university operates smoothly and that all the lecturers report back to duty by Monday. All those who will not have reported for duty by Monday will be considered to have absconded from duty and disciplinary measures will be taken accordingly.

Mr Speaker, it is very important that we all respect the rule of law. It is very important that we seriously consider first of all, our students; many of them have already paid their fees and their parents have done all they can. Government is not going to look on as the students continue to suffer. Everything is going to be done to ensure that there is normal life in Kyambogo University within a short time to come. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of education is very close to our hearts. It is a known fact that in the majority of our government-aided universities, over 70 per cent of the students are on self-sponsorship. The parents struggle to pay money for the upkeep of these children in these institutions. 

It is not the first time that we have had such mishaps in Kyambogo University. There are times when ultimatums like the one the minister has given us are issued, but they are not adhered to, causing a loss of time and resources on the part of the students and the parents. Should this problem persist - Much as I would not like to be a devil of doom, but should it happen that as we approach the end of the calendar year and we are going closer to festival days like Christmas, how will you accommodate and account for all this lost time? Aren’t you going to push it again to us like you have done in the past? Aren’t you going to ask parents to pay much more on top of what they have paid? 

Can you give assurance to this House that however long it takes, parents will not suffer the brunt of having extra charges put on them and that the students will finish their academic year and sit their exams as normal? Can you give us that assurance?

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been and I still am one of the mediators of what is going on in Kyambogo University. We have a legal bottleneck before us; Council and Government itself cannot throw out the professor who is the vice-chancellor today without repercussion.  

The Minister has just said that all the lecturers and staff of the university who will not attend lectures will be assumed to have absconded. Last time, during their meeting at Namboole, they took a vote and 95 per cent of the lecturers voted that they cannot work with that vice-chancellor again. What is going to happen in a situation where 95 per cent of the staff of the university do not turn up? Are you going to dismiss all of them? That is the clarification I seek. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank Members for the concern. The clarification I am seeking will be from a reference. When Makerere University had problems, they were really settled. Therefore, I seek clarification from the Minister whether he is really intervening in the Kyambogo situation. We are aware that court ruled, but I have observed that some of the lecturers in reality are part of the problem, which is not ending. Can we seek clarification from the Minister on what he will do to those lecturers? We do not assume that all the lecturers are negative because that will cause a problem to the students.

I am raising this because I am one of the people who passed through Kyambogo University. We cannot look on every time. So, honourable minister, will we wait for our brothers? In a situation where lecturers are not really behaving, can we identify some of the lecturers who are causing a stampede so that we deal with them and the university continues operating? Thank you. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Conflicts are a process and not an event. If you are the minister and you are in charge of education, when did you learn about this? Don’t you have a managing board? Can a minister implement the ruling of court? If they appeal, what are you going to do? Where have you been? That is what you should be telling the House. Thank you.       

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I heard from the minister that the professor had been successfully reinstated by a court order. The lecturers voted against him, the majority of whom would work with him. They are refusing to work with him. 

Mr Speaker, law is law and we also know that it cannot be applied in a vacuum. However, are we seeing a situation where a court order is passed and then people vote on it and then it is negotiated? What kind of precedent are we establishing for this country? (Applause)

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Kyambogo is a very important university to all of us. Actually, it offers, I would say, the most important programmes for this country. I am happy that you are all concerned that we should do something about what is happening in Kyambogo.

It is also important to understand that it has a population of over 25,000 students, of course, excluding all the NTCs in this country which are under the supervision of Kyambogo University. It has a total number of staff of over 1,160. Those who attended the Namboole meeting were only 403. I want you to understand that because when you say, “over 95 per cent voted”, you should know that there are the other 600, though silent –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue is: can anybody constitute a meeting and vote against a court order? 

DR MUYINGO: The answer is a clear no. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what are you doing about it?

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, the law that governs universities gives almost all the powers to the university council to manage and take disciplinary action on whoever misbehaves. This did not take place and that is why Government is coming in to say, “Enough is enough; the law must be implemented to the letter and disciplinary measures will be taken against whoever tries to behave outside the law.” 

Monday is the deadline we are giving to all the staff of that university - lecturers, administrators, non-teaching staff and group employees - to report for duty. Whoever will fail to report by Monday will be considered to have absconded and different measures will be taken. (Applause)    

MR OKUPA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I think that should have happened yesterday. I am happy it is coming now from the government but I want you to assure the country and us that between now and Monday, we will not lose life and property. 

I say this because this morning some students went to attack some staff in their homes. There are two lecturers who come from Kasilo who are lecturing in Kyambogo; students attacked the homes of these two ladies this morning. So, I want you to guarantee the security to property and life, otherwise we are going to lose more in terms of property and life. What assurance can you give us? 

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, two things: One, I have met quite a number of lecturers and staff and very many are willing and interested in going back to work. It is just that some were being threatened. I think Government is aware and all the necessary measures have been put in place to ensure that our students are secure, our employees and property are also secure and normal life will continue. I want to assure the country that nobody is above the law and everything possible is going to be done to ensure the security of property and all human beings.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this matter is closed. Can we go to the Order Paper now? 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have Ms Susan Waitt, Nicholas Edwards and Neil Waitt from the Waitt Foundation and Access Foundation. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have in the gallery this afternoon, councillors from Nabale Sub-county. They are represented by the honourable engineer Kafeero Sekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira, Mukono District. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of guidance. Hon. Kassiano Wadri raised a very pertinent question to the minister; he had wanted assurance about the fees increment. I think this is very important because it touches the learners and the parents and some of us are even guardians and parents as well. So, I do not know at what stage the minister will assure Ugandans as well us about the fees increment. We want that guarantee from the ministry. Thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue raised was that the fees will not be raised. Are you able to give that guarantee, honourable minister? 

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, the Minister gives policy guidelines. The council of the university is responsible for setting and regulating fees. However, for this particular situation I just want to assure you that there will be no fees increment. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am rise on a procedural matter. Rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure does provide for the Prime Minister’s time. Rule 34 states: “There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s Time, commencing at 3.00 p.m. every Wednesday. 

(2) During the Prime Minister’s Time-
(a) the Prime Minister may make a statement, or 
(b) questions may be put to the Prime Minister relating to matters of government policy or the general performance of the Government and government agencies. 

(3) In the absence of the Prime Minister, a Minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her. 

(4) The Prime Minister’s Time shall not exceed 45 minutes. 

(5) The Leader of the Opposition shall have a right to comment or reply.”  

Mr Speaker, this rule has not been followed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. May I know why he is not doing so? Some of us are ready with issues we would like to put to him. We can come here on Wednesday and put to him questions if he cannot make a statement. So, may we know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister why this is not followed because we are ready for him now? If he has no statement, we are ready to put questions to him. Can we seek that clarification? If he is not ready, when will he be ready to start adhering to this rule? I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

3.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, when we last spoke about that rule and its application, we all agreed in this House that we needed more than what is in the Rules of Procedure to work out the procedure that we will follow specifically to handle rule 34. The matter was referred to the House rules and privileges committee –

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I stand here to be challenged, if the Prime Minister can produce when that resolution was made in this House. I remember that hon. Otada raised this matter at one time and I also raised it a second time but we were told that from the next sitting, the Prime Minister should adhere to this. We can produce the Hansard. 

So, it is not right for the Prime Minister to come here and try to divert – [Hon. Member: “Are you ruling now?”]- Is he in order to divert – (Laughter) - or to lie to this House that this matter has ever been referred to the rules committee? I challenge him to produce that resolution. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was part of a meeting where both rule 34 and the other rule that relates to Prime Minister’s brief on the business to follow in the next week was discussed. We found that there were implementation challenges. Prime Minister’s Question Time in the UK, for example, is 30 minutes but they come when they are ready with questions that had been prepared and then there are supplementary questions. 

Now here, is it going to be a discussion where you raise one question and then the Prime Minister responds? Would the 45 minutes be sufficient to handle this, given the nature of the House? Are the questions going to be “fired” from the Floor back and forth and responses given? Would we be able to manage the 45-minute rule? It was, therefore, agreed that it should be structured properly and more guidance needs to be given on how it can be implemented so that the result is what is desired rather than just something that may not even produce a good result? I was part of a meeting that had that discussion.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I could not have been part of this discussion in the House because if the Speaker is presiding, I cannot be part of the House but if discussions were there –

MR OKUPA: Yes, Mr Speaker, that could have happened outside this House but not in this House as the Prime Minister is stating. Also, it does not stop us from following the rules. We can improve the rules as we follow what we already have as rules. That is what we are saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Prime Minister said he was here and that he was ready. It was the order that kind of –

MR OKUPA: We are also ready.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I have noticed today that when there is a proposal to amend a law, then the law which was passed does not apply. This rule was passed by us two and a half years ago and we have not implemented it because we keep saying that we are about to amend the rule. I think that is not right, Mr Speaker.  

In fact, we have not applied it. If we had applied it, we would have known how to move. If the Prime Minister wanted us to give him questions in advance, that should have been the ruling here - that the Prime Minister should get questions in advance so that the following week, when he comes, he is ready with the answers. That should have been the ruling, Mr Speaker. We could give him 50 and say that maybe he needs only five.

Currently, we have over 75 questions which the Prime Minister is supposed to answer. If he had come and he was ready, he would come with answers of at least two or three. Now, since he is here and he has said he is ready, we now have questions for him. Can you allow us ask him questions, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ready, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, I simply want to reiterate a fact. I was here when Madam Speaker was presiding and we agreed in this House that the rules committee would go and study this and come back with a report with details on how this could be handled.  

The Leader of the Opposition obviously knows very well that he is not likely to raise a question that I will not be able to answer effectively. He knows that, and I think that is why he has not been asking questions. (Laughter) You do not need this to ask me questions. I am not aware of the 75 questions that the Prime Minister has been asked; I am not aware of them.  We have rules about – (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. When you look at this rule as provided for, it has its own genesis. 

We have derived this rule and the parliamentary practice here from the Commonwealth. The rationale behind it is that the Prime Minister is deemed to be knowledgeable about all matters in Government such that at any one time when he is asked, he must have a ready answer. That is the reason why even in the House of Commons, they do not send questions in advance. It is like where a lot is picked and the Rt Hon. David Cameron on the other side – the equivalent of – well the other one is bigger because their system is different – (Laughter) - but they are all Prime Ministers although they are not at par. So, we will want to assume that the rationale prevails and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda is on top of issues in this country. (Hon. Members rose_) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No.

MR WADRI: Can I finish then?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, please, do. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: I would like to seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. He is not prepared at this stage to take on questions and he wants us to give him the questions. Is he trying to tell us that he is not in charge and that he is not knowledgeable about issues in the Government he leads? Can you, please, clarify to us whether you really fit that shoe of being a Prime Minister and that you are able to be on top of issues of this Government? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I have not been addressing the question of the level of my knowledge because my honourable brother knows very well – he can answer it himself. I was only making a statement of fact about what happened, and the fact that this matter was referred to the committee. I hope the committee reported; I do not know. However, if they have not reported, we should ask them to report as soon as possible. If we want to reverse that decision even now, we can do it; I am here and I am always ready. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do we take 45 minutes of our time to raise questions to the Prime Minister? Okay, questions. 


QUESTIONS TO THE PRIME MINISTER

3.39
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in line with rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure and I have a question for the Prime Minister. In my hands, I have a letter dated 17 July 2013 written by H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda pointing out the appointment of Chief Justice Benjamin Odoki. Since then, the Parliament Appointments Committee has written to the President to clarify a few issues in regard to this appointment. 

May I ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the following: What is the position of Government in as far as the clarification that was sought by the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee, who is none other than the Speaker of this Parliament, in regard to the re-appointment of the former retired Chief Justice?

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Otada for that question. I want to inform him and the country that this matter was taken up in court. Someone went to court with a petition on this issue. So, since the matter is pending a decision of court, we have considered any discussion of it sub judice. Therefore, we await the decision of court. Thank you. (Laughter) 

3.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, last year when we lost our colleague, hon. Nebanda, many things happened. In the end, Government came up with an inquest and the chairperson’s name was put forward. However, up to date, this inquest committee has never taken off. Why hasn’t it taken off? Can we hear from the Government?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The question of the inquest is a matter that is on-going. We have concentrated on the cases pending before court against those who are alleged to have committed the crime that led to the death of our colleague, hon. Nebanda – the prosecutions and so on. So, as soon as the inquest is complete and the report is ready, this Parliament will be informed. 
Thank you. 

3.42
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division, West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are reports out there accusing Uganda of being the godfather of M23. What do you have to say?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Uganda is neither the father nor the godfather not even the mother of M23, because M23 is a baby of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Uganda as a good neighbour and led by a Government with a Pan African outlook offered its services to our neighbours in Congo to try and resolve the internal conflict. We have made progress, although when we were supposed to sign the agreement it was not done. However, we are still hopeful that we will help our brothers in Congo to have peace because they need it for their own development and we need it for our region. You can trust Uganda in doing that because we have done it many times before with our neighbours. Thank you.

3.44
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division, South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know the plans of Government regarding the elections of LCI’s. Already, there is a vacuum and many people are being killed, many people are being clobbered on the head because there is virtually no administration at the lower councils. One time, Parliament passed funds for these elections to take place but all the time Government just keeps promising that they are going to take place. We want to know what Government’s programme is to rectify that situation. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to remind this House that this Government was ready to conduct the elections at LCI level until the then prominent member of the Opposition, in the names of Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga, – (Interjections) – he is now better placed - took this matter to court. It took years for the court to resolve this matter and because the matter was in court, Government’s hands were tied; we could not hold elections. 

Now court has resolved this issue. Court declared that the provision under which the Electoral Commission was attempting to hold elections at LCI level was unconstitutional. So, we came back to Parliament and we actually passed the law in accordance with the ruling of court. However, when the Electoral Commission worked out the cost of holding elections for LCI alone, it was equal to the amount required for holding a general election. So, it has been a resources issue. So, when this Parliament, which has the sole power to do so, appropriates the money to hold those elections, we will not be found wanting, we will hold them. Thank you. 

3.47
MS BETTY AMONGI (FDC, Woman Representative, Oyam South): Thank you, hon. Prime Minister. I rise to ask you about the rising cases of sexual violence and sexual offenses being meted out on the women and the girls of this country. It has been clearly articulated in the media that the cases of rape, defilement, incest and sodomy are on the increase. I want to know what Government is doing to ensure that this matter is dealt with and that we are safe.

Secondly, the legal reform, which is to do with the Penal Code Amendment Bill, is before Cabinet. One piece of legislation is supposed to protect victims and allow them to testify behind closed doors. When will this amendment be brought to this House so that we can amend the law to protect victims of sexual offences? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I can begin with that last question, about the Bill. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that this is an issue that is on the agenda of Cabinet. Even today, we would have handled this particular case if we had not spent a lot of time discussing the question of Kyambogo, which of course, is a matter that we had not planned for. So, I assure this House and the country that we are giving it due attention and priority. 

This is a matter we are determined to come on top of. We condemn it we will do everything possible to address this question of sexual violence especially against women, defilement against children and the sodomy that you talked about. We are determined to come on top of that situation. Thank you.

3.49
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the Prime Minister what the position of the Government of Uganda is on the ICC; are we still members of the ICC? This is because we have seen our President campaigning all over Africa that we should abandon the ICC.

The other question is: It is over three years since the Government of Uganda commissioned an inquiry on UPE; when is the report going to be made public? Is there progress or did we abandon that commission of inquiry? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will begin with the easier one – the question on UPE. (Laughter) The white paper, again, is pending discussion by Cabinet. As soon we have done this, we will come and inform this House. If the honourable colleague employed her IT skills, she would find a copy of this white paper on the website of the Ministry of Education. We will discuss it in Cabinet as soon as we can and we shall inform you.

On the question of the ICC, I do not know why anyone, especially a Member of Parliament, would have any doubt. We are members of the ICC because we believe that the ICC has a very critical role to play in the preservation of the rights of human beings, generally.

Let me give you a bit of history, especially my honourable colleague, Beatrice. When we took power as NRM in 1986 – (Interjections) – I said we took power; how we did it is known. As Government, we took a very clear position against the then OAU position about non-interference in the internal affairs of states. Our President, in his first attendance of the OAU Summit as Head of State, made a very clear statement that in Uganda we had suffered under regimes that killed us in hundreds and thousands while the rest of the world looked on. He said this was done in the name of sovereignty and we rejected this notion; we said sovereignty is not sovereignty of regimes but of the people. 

Therefore, where the regimes, which are supposed to protect the people of a country they preside over, are the ones violating those rights, the rest of the international community has a right to speak out. That is how we have conducted ourselves for the last 20 or so years as you know. [Hon. Member: “Can we quote you on that?]- I am public now. I am going to be on the Hansard and the whole nation is hearing me now. I have also repeated this many times before, so this is not new.

We were subsequently very active in the formulation of the Rome Statute, from which the ICC was created. Of course, as you know, Uganda was the first to refer the case of Kony – (Interjection) – Yes, of course, Beatrice, you know that. We referred the case of LRA and Kony to the International Criminal Court. Those who were in the previous Parliament may recall that we actually brought a Bill here, which eventually was enacted as law to domesticate the Rome Statute. So, the Rome Statute is part of our law. Therefore, to say that we are not members of this or that is – (Interjections) – Well, I am telling you that this is the position.

Of course, we have looked at the practice of the court and Africa has made some comments. There are some misgivings about the way some of the court cases are being managed and this is the problem we have; it has nothing to do with the purpose of the court. The court was established to fight impunity in violation of people’s basic rights. You know very well that we are the chief crusaders for freedom of the people, who made it possible for us to have what we have today. We have no doubt at all that the purpose for which the court was established is a noble purpose; we fully support it and we will always support it. However, in the management of the affairs, we have had some comments and misgivings and we hope we can engage them as we have done before, to make sure that we are all on the same page. Thank you.

3.57
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the recent statements in the press about the Government of Great Britain deciding to support government through NGOs. I think the Prime Minister needs to assure this country that these funds are not fuelling subversion, and to tell us whether this is actually not undermining our sovereignty. Thank you, Prime Minister

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, we all know the history of that decision, which was the mismanagement and stealing of funds in the Office of the Prime Minister and other places.

I am happy to tell this House that Government, together with our development partners – I made a statement in this House before on that issue, I think more than once. In summary, we obviously condemned what had happened and we undertook to take all the necessary measures to strengthen especially the financial management systems, in order to avoid a repetition of the kind of stealing that occurred. In this, we have worked very closely with our development partners. 

Those of you who may have followed media reports on this issue will remember that I did sign a communiqué with our development partners. They stated clearly that there were happy with the measures Government of Uganda had taken and that they would resume their relationship with this Government in as far as financial support is concerned. So, we are very happy about that.

Some of them have indicated that they will give us support through NGOs rather than budget support and we are very happy with this. We have no problem with that at all because as you know, in the budget we passed recently, more than 80 per cent is resources internally and domestically generated. So, we have some support, which is very critical, from our friends, which is now less than 20 per cent. We welcome it, whether it is through budget support or some other way of support.

We have also agreed on what they call the Paris Declaration of Principles; this is the question of accountability. In the past, accountability has been one way; they always demand accountability from us but we did not demand nor did we get accountability from them. Now we have agreed that accountability must be mutual. For every penny that comes into Uganda, whether through NGOs or direct support, those that bring in the money and those that utilise it have a duty to account to us as a country and to account to their people. so, I do expect that all the resources that come in to support whatever cause will be accounted for to us as a Government, as country, as a people and of course, to those back home where they come from.

I would be surprised - In fact, I can state categorically that we enjoy excellent relations with her Majesty’s Government. We have excellent relations with the Government of United Kingdom as we do with many other Western governments and many others including China, India and others. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The Minister for Overseas Development in Britain recently called Ugandan leadership fraudsters. That is why they will not send money to the Government but they would rather channel it through NGOs. They think that our Government is headed by fraudsters. That is her word.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I must say I have not heard that and I would be very surprised if a minister of her Majesty’s Government used such language. I was in London not a long time ago; I was with the Prime Minister, David Cameron, in June and the Minister for Overseas Development. One of the ministers was in my office a few weeks ago. So, I can tell you that the relationship between this Government and the Government of United Kingdom is excellent.

If any minister used that kind of language, maybe it would be a Shadow Minister. (Laughter) I would also be very surprised even then. However, I am very happy to report that we have very excellent relations. I do not therefore expect them to engage in activities that would be subverting the Republic of Uganda.

4.04
MS EVERLYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question to the Prime Minister is: What is our relationship with Tanzania in relation to the East African Federation? I ask this given the fact that recently, the President of Tanzania addressed the Parliament of Tanzania and he referred to the issue of the infrastructure summit that took place in Kigali and Tanzania being side-lined. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, this is a question that has been in the air. It is true that the President of Tanzania, His Excellency Kikwete, made the statement in the Tanzanian Parliament. I want to inform this House that at a recent summit in South Africa, where both President Museveni and President Kikwete were, the matter was mentioned and it was agreed - maybe this is not public yet - that this issue would be discussed by the Heads of State at the summit in Kampala on 30th November. So, it is a matter that is at the Heads of State level and therefore, I think it is prudent that we let them discuss it so that we get the outcome of that discussion.

4.06
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have is in relation with the recruitment to the army that took place recently. Some of the conditions that were given to the recruits were: you must have no scar and you should not have lost even a tooth. The Prime Minister should assure the nation on this issue. Won’t some tribes be left out because for some it is a matter of culture that you have to remove your tooth? Does it mean you will not be recruited in the Army?

Two, the war left many people in Northern Uganda with scars; if they have struggled and at least met the academic qualification, will they not be recruited in the Army? I need some assurance from the Prime Minister. I got very scared and my people are crying that probably in two or three years, we will have no one from Northern Uganda being recruited in the Army. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am, as all of you know, very closely associated with the military and therefore, I was at the heart of the formulation of policy, including the policy on recruitment. To the best of my knowledge, recruitment is based on a quota system. Every part of Uganda is entitled to offer recruits and each administrative unit is given a quota from which the Army goes and recruits. 

The details about qualifications are specific to the reason for recruitment. Therefore, for me to answer that question, I need to know what kind of recruitment was going on and for what purpose. Sometimes you find that if you are recruiting pilots, you may want to check the sight of those who are offering to be recruited because sight is critical to flying planes, and so on. Therefore, when I get particulars of what type of recruitment was going on at that time, I would be able to answer this. However, I can assure the country and the honourable member that certainly, there is no part of Uganda, which will be missed out when recruiting into the Army. Thank you.

4.10
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we all know, coffee is one of the leading exports in this country. Recently, I received several calls from my constituency, from peasants, alleging that there is a new directive that coffee should not be dried in dusty environments. This is genuinely okay, but the problem is that this policy has just been announced and the peasants have not been given enough time to prepare themselves to buy the tarpaulins in order that they can appropriately dry their coffee. 

What is happening now is that the Police and UCDA are enforcing this policy and where they find coffee being dried in a dusty environment, that coffee is impounded. There is a lot of public outcry. We know very well that we are talking about peasants who are harvesting one debe of coffee. A tarpaulin costs about Shs 60,000. Some who would use cow dung to smear their compounds cannot find this cow dung anywhere. So there is a real crisis and now people cannot find anywhere to dry their coffee. So, what do we do, Mr Prime Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us keep the questions short so that the responses are short and we use the time properly.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda has for long suffered from a disease called non-adherence to universally acceptable standards. We know very well that when we grow coffee or many of these cash crops, we are growing them for the international markets. Even as we speak today, one of the problems why our coffee sometimes fetches low prices is because of standards. Therefore, we have come to the conclusion that it is for the good of this nation, it is for the good of coffee growers that we enforce the standards required by the international market for the products we produce. 

Therefore, my honourable friend will take the leadership in his constituency; where what he has described that is apparently occurring, he should not only take the lead to educate the peasants but actually also to help them organise. I have said this many times - where individuals may not be able to achieve whatever results they want to achieve, collectively they will manage. So, my advice is, let them be organised. 

I gave the example recently of coffee growers in Kasese when I participated in the Pakasa panel discussion. A young entrepreneur called Andrew Rugasira, who produces the Good African Coffee for the international market, has taken extraordinary steps to make sure that the coffee that he produces is the coffee the malls in Britain, especially where he already has a market, and other places beyond, will accept. So, he has spent money to achieve this. In Kasese, for instance, he has spent money to educate these farmers - peasant farmers – on how to handle their coffee so that they attain the standard that is necessary for him to maintain in order to enter this market. 

I am happy to inform this House that Andrew Rugasira is succeeding. He pays 70 per cent more than the market price of coffee to those farmers who adhere to the standards. Therefore, because of that higher pay, they are actually able to meet the needs for managing their coffee. They can buy some of these things if they are organised. They are organised in groups and I am very happy to say that they are a model that others should emulate; they are a small group but they are succeeding. Thank you. 

4.15
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Currently, China is a very critical ally to this country, but recently we have heard that we have around 200 prisoners in China. Most of these prisoners have been arrested on allegations of trafficking drugs and are due for hanging. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you have any arrangements to get these sons and daughters of this country back to this country?

Secondly, we are considered by other countries to have very lenient or weak laws concerning drug trafficking. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you accept this criticism?

Generally, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, our society, especially the youth, is being killed by these drugs. Youth in this country are taking drugs and the society is being killed. I do not know whether you are aware; if you are, what steps do you intend to take to curb this problem? Thank you very much. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, the question of illicit drugs is a very serious matter and the honourable member is right that it has finally come to Uganda. We have evidence that more and more of our young people, especially in the urban areas, are getting affected. As you may recollect, on the Floor of this House we had a question that was raised on Kuber. I think it was hon. Bitekyerezo who raised that question here. 

I am glad to inform this House that I took up the matter myself. I actually convened meetings of the minister and the entire establishment under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Trade, UNBS, the Uganda Revenue Authority and we have had many meetings in order to handle this. I think we made a public statement on it as well. We also carried out tests and so on. So, this is an issue that is very serious and that we take seriously and we are prepared to do everything possible to manage and control.

Yes, it is true that there are many Ugandans in jails in China. Actually, they are 600 of them in prisons in China and many of them are on drug trafficking offences. When I last visited China, we did discuss this and I am glad to say that the Chinese authorities allow consular services, which are extended by members of our Embassy to these people. They had actually reached a certain stage of negotiations with them about how to handle this. What I was not sure about is whether all the 600 are Ugandan or they are individuals bearing Ugandan passports because that may also be an issue. However, we are engaging the Chinese authorities. We are providing, as I said, consular services to these Ugandans who are in Chinese prisons. 

However, let me warn Ugandans; most of these are young people and many of them are women, and evidence is emerging that actually, they are being used by drug barons. I would like to go to Mukono because I am getting more and more evidence about where Mukono is on this issue – (Laughter) – So, it is a major problem. 

Many countries take it as a very serious offence. In China and other places, if you are found guilty the penalty is very serious. It is very grave, and we will not protect you if you go to another country and breach the laws of that country. Therefore, I want to use this opportunity to appeal to Ugandans generally; I have asked the Inspector-General of Police and together with the new minister, we are discussing the establishment of a special unit to handle drugs. 

If you knew the level of this problem of drug trafficking and drug usage in Uganda, we would all join hands. This is not a partisan thing, it is bipartisan and all of us should join hands to fight this menace because it is going to kill our children. It is entering our primary schools, especially in urban centres. Please, we have a duty to join hands and fight this menace before it gets worse. 

4.25
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell this House the total amount of Uganda’s external debt burden at the moment. Thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is becoming a matter of urgent public importance that three members of this House should refer to the Speaker as “Madam Speaker”. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, my apologies. This is the influence of hon. Okupa. (Laughter) My direct response to the honourable member is to refer her to the Hansard because Government came here and actually tabled this before this House. 

4.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister – I want to catch the eye of the Prime Minister to confirm that he is listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All you need is the eye of the Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the Prime Minister to tell the country and this House: if the Government is able to fund 80 per cent of the budget, why is the Government continuing to borrow? Yesterday, we were told by the Committee on National Economy that as of yesterday, Uganda had gone to about 28 different debts - borrowing and borrowing. We even borrow as little as US$ 12 million. Why does the country continue borrowing?

I have another small question. I would like to know whether Uganda’s delegations to international conferences are allowed to go to the so-called “green rooms” where protocols and agreements are concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, that would be the last question. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Why continue to borrow even US$ 12 million or US$ 5 million; why not? I have said that the budget, which this House passed - We appropriated and our budget was just short of Shs 12 trillion, which is roughly US$ 5 billion. So, the 80 per cent I talked of is of that total amount. The balance of less than 20 per cent is also in trillions. Actually, it is almost Shs 3 trillion. So that Shs 3 trillion includes US$ 1 million, US$ 12 million - It is within the percentage of the support we are getting from our friends outside and I think it is alright. I want to assure the honourable member that the municipality he represents, Mbale Municipality, for which I have unending love, is, as he knows, a direct beneficiary of some of these resources that we borrow. 

Hon. Wamai has also asked the only question that I will pass today. He asked about red rooms and I associate red rooms with all sorts of things, and I am not familiar with that subject. Therefore, I am unable to answer that one. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the time is up for this particular matter; it is 45 minutes. We have other business to follow but let the record show that on the request of the Members and by the agreement of the House, the Order Paper was altered to accommodate the provision of rule 34 to deal with Prime Minister’s question time. The records should reflect that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for attempting to answer the questions put to him and the Members who moved. I just want to make a small correction. The Sun of 6 November 2013 clearly says that Britain will stop aid to Uganda Government after dodgy officials stole US$ 1.3 million. The heading reads, “At last, we stop aid to fraudsters: Cash cut to corrupt Uganda”. This statement was made by a minister called Justine Greening. I want you to go and look for it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my honourable friend, the Leader of the Opposition, for that information. However, I would advise that in future, he should not go by what is written in tabloids of Great Britain. Just in case he did not know, one of the tabloids called the Daily Mail did write that I am the one who stole that money and I am glad to inform this House that I took them on in Her Majesty’s Court. I won the case and I was handsomely compensated. So, if we are to make it a matter of debate as if it were fact, let us find more reliable and credible sources.

It is true that people who steal money are thieves and fraudsters and we have these because our money was stolen. However, they were making reference to leaders and none of them is a leader. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON THE STUDY ON REGIONAL HIV STRATEGY

4.35
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS on its findings, lessons learnt and recommendations during its visit to Arusha to study regional HIV strategies, policies and programmes from 5th to 13 May 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. At an appropriate time, we will see if that can be debated and the recommendations looked at by the House. 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE BUSINESS TRANSACTED BY COMMITTEES SINCE THE INCEPTION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AND BUSINESS PENDING

SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today was the deadline for the committees that did not report yesterday. Is there any member of the committee here? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not think this should be the Clerk’s office because it is the clerks who help these chairpersons with business, unless the Clerk’s office is telling us that the clerks are not available. They should have prepared the business pending in committees for purposes of coming to present to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the clerks do not appear before Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising this is: if a clerk had prepared, then one of these members would have presented the report here. I do not think we should blame the chairperson or the vice-chairperson. It is the Clerk’s office we should blame most.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any Member of the Committee on Education and Sports? What is the situation?

MS AMERO: Mr Speaker, the chairperson and the vice-chairperson plus the clerk are out of the country. So, we cannot access the information anywhere.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think it is now criminal. It is a serious crime for the chairperson and the vice-chairperson to leave the country at the same time and leave the committee without anybody in charge. I think the Government Chief Whip should be able to respond to this. We are saying we are not the problem because you cannot clear the chairman and the vice at the same time to abandon parliamentary business.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, when you look at the Rules of Procedure, it is the responsibility of the party whips to constitute delegations when teams are going out of this country. This has not been adhered to most of the time by your office, Mr Speaker. 

I say this because I tried even to raise it and the answer I received was from the Clerk’s office through the Public Relations office that it is the responsibility of the Speaker to give permission to people to travel abroad, ignoring the fact that it is the responsibility of the party whips to constitute delegations. Actually, this is causing us problems as party whips, to the extent that we cannot account for our people. I want to admit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will handle this in the Parliamentary Commission and see the best way this matter can be resolved.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any committee member? (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) Is it the Shadow Minister reporting now?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs but it is unfortunate that both the committee chairperson and the vice are not in the House to give a report. So, this is really surprising. I cannot give a report on behalf of the committee because I do the oversight of the committee’s work.

MR OMWONYA: Mr Speaker, as hon. Wamanga-Wamai has said, both the chair and the vice are not here. I tried to contact the clerk to the committee but unfortunately, she is on leave and she said she could not come to prepare the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the chair and the vice?

MR OMWONYA: I do not know where they went. (Laughter)

COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO: I happen to be a member of that committee; unfortunately, the chair has just travelled with a certain group and I do not know the whereabouts of the vice. (Laughter) I have no report; otherwise, I would have represented them.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

4.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, I wish to submit business so far transacted by the committee and the business that is pending. Since the inception of the Ninth Parliament, the committee has handled the following Bills, which have now become Acts of Parliament:

1. 	The Meteorological Authority Bill, which was considered by Parliament and was assented to. It is now an Act of Parliament.

2. 	The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012, which is now an Act of Parliament.

3. 	The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, which is now an Act of Parliament.

The Committee of Natural Resources is co-handling the Finance Bill as directed by the Speaker of Parliament. There are three committees that are charged with the responsibility of considering the Public Finance Bill and the process is on-going.

Mr Speaker, we have had petitions and most of them are on-going. The first one is in regard to the allocation of land in the Kampala Industrial Park, which has remained unutilised. Hon. Nambooze happened to appear before the committee and we are due to visit the areas concerned on 25th this month. (Interjections) I interfaced with hon. Nambooze I think even about two weeks ago. I indicated the date to her but she said she had other commitments and therefore, she would not be in a position to receive the committee in her constituency. 

We are going to finalise and conclude on the date -(Interjections)- Yes, it is true; I talked to her. To be specific, the Katikkiro was going to meet the members of the Buganda Caucus and, therefore, she indicated that that day would not be convenient for her. I respect our traditional institutions because they are constitutional. So, that is still pending.

The second one is to do with compensations for land identified for the proposed Uganda-Kenya oil pipeline between Eldoret and Kampala. Specifically, this petition was submitted by the residents of Kawempe North, represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala. We also have a scheduled visit to interface with the residents on the ground on 25th of this month. 

The third petition, which is on-going, is on the environmental degradation by Rosebud, a flower-growing company on Entebbe Road, located in Wakiso, Busiro South, represented by hon. Balikuddembe. We did receive the petitioners as a committee and they included hon. Balikuddembe and the chairperson of Wakiso District. We agreed that we would visit the site but in the process, we received a letter from the lawyers of Rosebud, indicating that there was a case in court. The case is between NEMA and Rosebud on one hand and Wakiso District administration on the other. There was also another case, which I think was brought by the district administration of Wakiso. So, in view of this, when we got the letter, we sought guidance from the Speaker and the Speaker advised the committee to hold on before proceeding as we await the court’s resolution of the case. I even interfaced with hon. Balikuddembe on this issue. We agree that indeed, this would be sub judice and we could not proceed. So, that is also pending until we are further guided.

As a committee, we also carried out physical visits to the Albertine Grabben to ascertain the various activities that were going on there. We specifically visited the districts of Hoima, Buliisa and Nwoya to experience first-hand what was going on with regard to the exploration and development of the oil drilling sites, which are eventually now for the production of oil.

We visited Jinja fuel reserves to ascertain the rehabilitation works going on there on the storage facilities. I remember calling hon. Paul Mwiru as we headed there. Of course, he was busy but we were privileged to have hon. Kassiano Wadri as Chairperson of PAC accompany the committee on that tour –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just report on the status, not what you were doing there. This is not the time for that. Just give us the business that is pending and what framework you need for reporting to the House.

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Okay. We also visited some of the mineral sites and there are some visits that are pending. We plan to visit Namekala in Manafwa District, Sukulu Hills in Tororo and also the Albertine Grabben with regard to the resettlement action plan; of course, that is an issue that is on-going. 
Mr Speaker, those are some of the activities that we undertook. We will have a detailed write-up presented to the august House. I think within this financial year, we will be able to complete business. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, for that update. Honourable members, we need to also take decisions on some issues. First of all, yesterday we said that if the 45 days lapse, then the chairperson of the committee must either write to the Speaker or update the House and say, “the time is going to an end but we still have this bulk to finish.” You will then be officially granted an extension. To sit with the matter for a year without recourse to the people who sent it to you is not proper. So, from today onwards, if a matter has exceeded the 45-day rule, please seek an extension formally so that it is recorded that such and such a committee has been given more time to handle this and that.

Secondly, there is the question of dual action; you petition Parliament but you also rush to court. By rushing to court, you have stopped Parliament from proceeding and you will have clogged its system with business that it cannot process. I think a decision has got to be taken to the effect that if a petitioner brings a matter to Parliament but subsequently goes to court, that petition should be deemed to have been withdrawn. This is because you cannot hold two arms of Government on the same issue yet one arm cannot move because you have petitioned the other.

The petitioner must come back to Parliament and inform Parliament that the petition is now a subject of litigation in court and so it should be withdrawn. The committee should then come back to us so that we strike it off our list until the court resolves that matter. If they want to come back to Parliament, they will be free to do so. Otherwise, we cannot have a matter both in court and in Parliament.

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance on what happens when it is not the petitioner but the respondents who might have gone to court. I am saying this because people might use that and make people petition Parliament in vain; the moment they realise the petition is in Parliament, they will run to court to lodge a matter there. Do we just drop it or should we have a mechanism in which we can notify court about how Parliament is still handling such a matter? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, it is not the other way round. Court does not have a sub judice rule on issues that are going on in Parliament. It is Parliament that should take cognisance of whatever might be happening in court and must cease handling any matters that are still before court.

Now, if a petitioner comes here and the same petitioner goes to court, then that petition shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. However, if a respondent goes to court, that is not a petitioner. The petition, of course, will not proceed because that matter will have gone to court.  However, we will have to handle it and see if it can be reconciled and we get it off the list of issues in Parliament because the matter is now in court. We will do this to stop bogging down our committees reporting on the same things, that they are in court, because that might not be a good thing.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, is that the law or it is a rule of the Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The sub judice rule is a rule of this Parliament and also a rule in the laws of this country.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform you that sometimes, a petitioner may not be one person. There are circumstances when about 10 people petition Parliament and after that, two of them will go to court without the other eight. In such circumstances, what happens?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is about allocation of Plot 1, Kampala Road, for example, and there is a petition on that subject but the same matter is now in court. The question is: must Parliament sit and wait for court for five years before it can move? 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even practically, you cannot seek a single remedy from two places. It is a matter of practicability. It is a rule of practice; if you think Parliament is delaying you and you change to court, you should be deemed to have withdrawn that matter. That is a matter of practice. It does not have to be a written law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. For petitioners, I think we should apply that strictly. For respondents who rush to court, we will examine that on a case by case basis. Petitioners who bring their petitions here and then they run to courts will be deemed to have abandoned their petitions in Parliament. Okay? I think we can go by that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, extensions will only be applicable when the 45 days have not elapsed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, because you cannot extend something that has expired.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, I think the respective chairpersons should seek extension before the 45 days expire. Otherwise, when that period expires, then Parliament should take a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, when that period expires, there shall be nothing to extend – what do you extend when the period has expired?

COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE

4.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Ms Suzan Amero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The business conducted by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline since May 2011 to-date includes the following: 

The committee received proposals from Members on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure. A report was presented before this House and adopted.

The committee also undertook study visits to the following national assemblies: 
    • Zimbabwe; 
    • Zambia; 
    • House of Representatives of States-General, Netherlands; 
    • National Assembly of Seychelles; 
    • Wales Assembly, Cardiff 
The reports of these visits are ready.

The committee also handled a motion for the resolution of Parliament to find Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, hon. Hillary Onek and hon. Sam Kutesa liable for contempt of Parliament. This report was overtaken by events. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t they report here? Was that report not brought to Parliament?

MS AMERO: No, it was not. Because of the Severino case, we could not bring the report to the House. 

The standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline also handled the disruption of Parliament proceedings on 27th November and the report is ready.

Mr Speaker, the much awaited report of the continued absence of hon. Gen. David Sejusa from the sittings of Parliament is also ready. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  Thank you very much.

MS SSENTONGO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to intervene but I have just been called out by the clerk of our committee and they have handed me the report of the committee. Can I, please, present? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the -

MS SSENTONGO: The Committee on Gender. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.59
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Tasks completed at the commencement of this session include the following:

    • We completed the ministerial policy statement for the social development sector 2013/2014 and the report was adopted by the House.

    • We completed the report on the petition on the externalisation of labour by women labourers who went to Iraq. 

    • We presented the report on the National Disability Council. The report was adopted by the House. 

The petition on children is still pending. The petition on Kyabazingaship is still pending.

The ministerial policy statement was discussed and the committee invited the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as the Equal Opportunities Commission for hearings. The report was presented to the House and adopted.

Members of the committee, with authorisation of the Speaker and clearance from the relevant authorities, travelled to Baghdad, Iraq, to interface with Iraqi authorities on the issues of human trafficking and the externalisation of labour. The committee met the ministers in charge of interior, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the committees of Parliament responsible for human rights, women affairs and the Ministry of Defence. The committee has a draft report which will be ready any time from now.

Members of the committee attended a workshop on social protection in Mombasa, Kenya and the draft report is quite ready.

Planned Tasks

We anticipate that we shall conduct an audit of the sector’s ministerial statement so as to help the sector come up with viable activities and programmes. 

We are also going to undertake field activities in all regions of Uganda to do an oversight on implementation of Government activities relevant to the social development sector. The areas of focus are remand homes, children’s centres, rehabilitation centres, the functional adult literacy programme and the grants for women, youth and people with disabilities, workers in selected workplaces, cultural institutions and expanded social protection projects in pilot districts. A comprehensive programme for these activities has already been presented to the Rt Hon. Speaker for approval. I thank you for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we now go to the next one?

SELECT COMMITTEE TO REVIEW THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE PROBING INTO MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

5.02
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I stand to give a brief on the progress of the work by the select committee which was tasked to review the report of the committee probing into matters pertaining to the management of Kampala Capital City Authority. The chairperson of this committee, hon. Grace Byarugaba, is away on special duty and she requested me to stand in for her. 

The committee has carried out several meetings. We started with an analysis of the terms of reference. After that, we sought some legal advice before the following meetings were held: 

The first meeting looked at the original petition and also the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government which was presented in the House. We also looked at the report drafted by the clerk to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and reviewed the various sets of minutes of the committee, which were recorded during the consideration of the petition. 

We were able to interface with the following people: the then clerk to the committee, Mr Paul Ouma; the then committee chairperson, hon. Raphael Magyezi; the members of the committee then; and the Clerk to Parliament. We later harmonised issues and as I talk, our report is ready for presentation. If you give us space on the Order Paper tomorrow, we can present it. If that is not possible, we request that we present it on Tuesday. This is because the subject which we handled rose out of a petition and the petitioners are eagerly waiting for Parliament’s action. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is the select committee on KCCA. As the Chair says, I think we should be giving them time to deal with these issues in the House here.

AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

5.05
MR MICHAEL KAFABUSA WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to report that the report of the Ad hoc Committee on the Regularisation of the Oil and Gas and other Matters Incidental thereto is ready. We are slated to be meeting with the Speaker tomorrow as a committee. 

Mr Speaker, at the time of commencing our work, the committee was flagged off by the Speaker and we thought that it would be important that the committee again formally meets with the Speaker and hands over the report. We are ready with the report, Mr Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to add that along the way, we have been interfacing with the Speaker, keeping the Speaker informed about the progress and we have been cleared to continue with our work. So, this was to actually handle the issue of the 45 days. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, given the fact that for most of these committees, the 45 days have elapsed, as a House don’t you think we need to take a decision to maybe officially grant them another 45 days, because it is no longer going to be an extension since the 45 days have elapsed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this process has alerted us. The Clerk now should compile the list of the Bills whose timeframe has expired so that we bring them here and we make clear guidance on how to proceed with them. Also, the next 45 days must be 45 days so that we do not fall in the same trap.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO BEACHSIDE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 5 o’clock and that particular matter might require quite some time. However, there is a petition whose petitioners have been in this House since it started appearing on the Order Paper; that is on the pensions of the Uganda Railways workers - Uganda Railways Pensioners Association. It is a long time now since they petitioned this Parliament. Today, it is on the Order Paper and given the time that we are left with, can we bring this forward so that we can finish conclusively and move with it.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE UGANDA RAILWAYS PENSIONERS ASSOCIATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have a summary? Please, use the summary.

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): I think the report should be ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, circulate the report. I have a copy.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, I rise to present the report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by Uganda Railways Pensioners Association. I hereby beg to lay a copy of the report and the minutes of the meeting, which helped us to come up with this report, on the Table . I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KWIYUCWINY: A petition by the Uganda Railways Pensioners Association was presented to Parliament on 18 July 2012 by hon. Hassan Fungaroo and was directed to this committee. 

Background

Uganda Railways Pensioners Association is made up of pensionable employees who worked in Uganda Railways Corporation. It was formed in 1997 with the objective of advocating for prompt and accurate payment of pension to ensure that pension timely reaches pensioners.

The association petition presented to Parliament raised a number of issues including:
    1. Uganda Railways Corporation is using six different formulae to determine pension. 

    2. Whereas pension is a regular payment made by the employer to former employees to enable them to subsist after retirement, the rates of pension described in the petition are outside the law, so miserable and too minute for anyone to subsist on. Some pensioners get as low as Shs 10,000 per month. The petitioners are of the view that the pension should have been computed in accordance with the Pensions Act.

    3. The pensions have not been revised as required by the existing laws in spite of the revision of salaries that has taken place in the Uganda Railways Corporation over the years. This contravenes the Central Joint Council Agreement of 24 March 1998, which, among others, accepts the revision of pension whenever Uganda Railways Corporation reviews salaries. 

    4. The aforesaid is incompatible with Article 254 of the 1995 Uganda Constitution, which provides for pension commensurate with one’s rank, salary and length of service; pension exempt of tax and subject to periodic review to take into account changes in the value of money; and pension to be prompt and regular and easily accessible to pensioners.

The objectives or prayers of the petition were:
    1. To order Uganda Railways Corporation to: 
        i) comply with the law; 
        ii) reinstate the payment of monthly pensions forthwith; 
        iii) pay pension arrears resulting from the application of 0.6 per cent, that is, 0.4 per cent arrears; 
        iv) conduct a re-commutation of pension; 
        v) reinstate payment of survivors’ benefits.

    2. To consider transferring the 1,500 Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners to the Ministry of Public Service or paying them off in lump sum.

Methodology 

We met a number of stakeholders as listed there. We also reviewed some literature including a keynote address on the railways sector reform on privatisation, and this was presented by hon. John Nasasira, the then Minister of Works and Transport, under which Uganda Railways Corporation falls. This was held in August 2004.

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	Compliance with the law 

The committee observed that in the court ruling H.C.C.S Civil Suit No. 708 of 2002, Kwoba Augustine and eight others v. Uganda Railways Corporation, court directed the defendant, that is, Uganda Railways Corporation, to effect payment of 100 per cent pension as required by the Pensions Act. 

In her judgment delivered on 19th May 2006, Judge Arach Amoko partly submitted that: “In the circumstances, I see no cause to keep on dragging this matter or to interfere with the arbitrator’s award. The plaintiffs are senior citizens who need their benefits. Some of them have waited for this money for long and have since died before getting a solution to their case. Justice, therefore, dictates that the court confirms their award and I do hereby confirm the same and enter judgment for the plaintiffs according to the terms of the award.”

The committee reliably established that the said nine former employees are currently being paid the right pension of 100 per cent, leaving others to get partial payment. 

It was erroneous and illegal for the Uganda Railways Corporation management to subject a 0.4 per cent deduction of pension to other former employees. Periodical revisions of pensions were never conducted to take into account inflationary tendencies and salary structural changes as they occurred over time.

The management of Uganda Railways Corporation is violating the law by using many wrong formulae to settle pension claims. The committee established that it was not true, as claimed by Uganda Railways Corporation management, that pensions were harmonised in April 2010. The various formulae used include: 
i) 	Length of service in months multiplied by salary, multiplied by 1 over 500. This is for nine pensioners, where the nine pensioners are Kwoba Augustine and eight others v. Uganda Railways Corporation. The 1 over 500 refers to a pension constant. This is one of the formulae used.

ii) 	Length of service in months multiplied by salary, multiplied by 1 over 500 times 0.6. This was being calculated for 548 pensioners referred to as post-concession pensioners. The 0.6 means that instead of 100 per cent, pensioners got 60 per cent and 40 per cent was retained by Uganda Railways Corporation. 

iii) 	Length of service in months multiplied by salary, multiplied by 1 over 500 times 0.6 times two-thirds. This was again administered to another set of staff, 953 pensioners, referred to as pre-concession pensioners. The two-thirds means that one-third of pension was recovered from pensioners and retained by Uganda Railways Corporation management.

The recommendations the committee came up with were that:

    1. Uganda Railways Corporation management harmonises the formulae for pensions and comes up with one formula that cuts across the board irrespective of the different employee categories. This should take effect from the time of engagement of each individual employee.

    2. Uganda Railways Corporation management should carry out periodic reviews of pensions to take into account inflationary tendencies and salary structural changes as they occurred over time. This should be computed for the period in question including the attendant arrears.

    3. The one-third and 40 per cent of the pension deducted illegally from the different categories of pensioners and retained by Uganda Railways Corporation should be paid back with interest covering the period in question.

Reinstatement of Monthly Pension Payments 

The committee observed that: 
        a) Uganda Railways Corporation management had suspended payment of pensions in 2008 claiming illiquidity and financial hardship. By law, Uganda Railways Corporation was not supposed to have suspended pensions, and we have Appendix 1 to refer to. They would have sought all means possible to seek for assistance from relevant government institutions like the line Ministry of Works and Transport or the Privatisation Unit, which is the custodian of all revenues pertaining to the Uganda Railways Corporation assets.

        b) Complaints from Uganda Railways Pensioners Association had long been lodged with the management of Uganda Railways Corporation but no efforts had been made to expedite the process of settling pension claims. The committee was informed that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Eighth Parliament had considered a similar petition but not to a logical conclusion.

The committee was further informed that due to emotional torture and the bureaucratic procedures entailed in pensions’ management, most Uganda Railways Pensioners Association members have given up chasing their pension. Some have gone into hibernation while others have sadly passed on without receiving their benefits.

c) 	There is uncertainty as to the correct number of Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners. Whereas management put the figure at 1,276, Uganda Railways Pensioners Association estimated it to be 1,500. This arose mainly from pensioners who were deleted from the pensions’ payroll owing to non-attendance of the pensions audit exercise that was conducted by Uganda Railways Corporation. Failure to turn up for the exercise arose due to various reasons including death, ailments, change of residence, and lack of involvement of the association.

d) 	Uganda Railways Corporation management was bound to face sustainability challenges if it was to pay full pension to all claimants. Approximately Shs 200 million per month is required to settle full pension claims, totalling to Shs 2.4 billion annually. This would be budgeted for as pension allocation in the Uganda Railways Corporation budget.

The committee was informed that Uganda Railways Corporation pays pensions from its revenues, that is, from asset rentals, concession fees from Rift Valley Railways and sale of obsolete assets proceeds, which are deposited with the Privatisation Unit divestiture account. The committee was further informed that Uganda Railways Corporation was in a severe financial crisis and would be constrained if it were to pay full pension without assistance from Government.

The committee noted Government’s commitment by the then Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira, in his keynote address at the Railways Sector Reforms and Privatisation Uganda-Kenya Joint Concession Stakeholders Conference held in Kampala on 23 August 2004. Hon. Nasasira said that the Government of Uganda would be responsible for paying all Uganda Railways Corporation employees their terminal benefits and pensions, and for paying all existing pensioners.

The recommendations the committee has come up with are:
    1. That the Uganda Railways Corporation management should immediately reinstate and expeditiously pay all the pension arrears to all its former employees with the accruing interest with effect from August 2006. Whether or not the pensioners attended the pensioners’ audit exercise conducted by Uganda Railways Corporation, it does not absolve Uganda Railways Corporation’s obligations to its former employees and this should not prohibit them from accessing their pension.

    2. The government should own up to its pledge made by the then Minister of Works and Transport of paying all former Uganda Railways Corporation employees and existing pensioners their terminal benefits and pensions. The outstanding arrears presented to the committee by the Uganda Railways Pensioners Association as at 21 October 2013 stood at Shs 7,545,895,023.

Payment of Full Pension Arrears

The committee observed that: 
    a) The interim Board of Directors of Uganda Railways Corporation directed management to apply 0.6 per cent while calculating pension, which resulted in under payment by 40 per cent. The results of this were further subjected to a reduction of one-third of 15 years’ pension, which was never passed on to the beneficiaries.

    b) Uganda Railways Corporation had declined to pay pension arrears to pensioners who had qualified for full pension. 

The committee recommends that: 
        1. Uganda Railways Corporation management should comply with the pension regulations - statutory instrument - and pay the pensioners 100 per cent of their pension dues.

        2. The illegal deduction of one-third of the pension amount collected for 15 years and never passed on to the right beneficiaries should be computed and paid with interest covering the period in question.

Re-commutation of Pension

The committee observed that Uganda Railways Corporation never made any attempt to commute pensions while taking into account inflation and salary structural changes. The committee was informed that re-commutation by applying one-third on outstanding pension was illegal because the result was the recovered monies never passed on to the beneficiaries.

A re-computation of pension was done in 2010 to cover both the pre-concession and post-concession pensioners. This was done by applying different formulae to staff that retired prior to the concession and those after the concession. This is believed to be the cause of discomfort among the pensioners.

The committee notes the advice of the then Solicitor-General, Mr Lucian Tibaruha, that, “The import of Regulation 4B of Statutory Instruments No. 6 of 1996 is that since the existing pension, which is being increased under Regulation A of Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1995 is commuted pension at the date of retirement, a resultant new or increased pension must not be subjected to commutation again. In terms of the pension regulations, a commuted pension gratuity deduction occurs once at the time of retirement at the option of the pensioner. It is illegal to subject the new pension benefits to one-third commuted pension gratuity deduction.

Where the deduction was made and withheld, the pensioner received one-third less of the new increased pension benefits. The underpayment is illegal. Clearly, the amounts deducted and withheld, if any, must be paid to the affected pensioners. For the avoidance of doubt, the new or increased pension under Regulation 4A should be paid to the pensioners without deduction of the one-third.”

The committee came up with the following recommendations:
    1. The committee recommends that the advice of the Solicitor-General should be upheld by Uganda Railways Corporation management.

    2. An independent body, preferably the Auditor-General, be tasked to scrutinise the Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners payroll, with the aim of weeding out ghost pensioners, if any.

Survivors’ Benefits

The committee was informed that Uganda Railways Corporation suspended payment of pension immediately on death of its pensioners yet it is aware of its obligation to pay the balance of the pension to the beneficiaries for the remaining years. The committee was further informed that reinstatement of payment of pension to beneficiaries was only done upon presentation of letters of administration from the Administrator-General by genuine beneficiaries to commence on the process.

The committee recommends that Uganda Railways Corporation management should continue to scrutinise the genuine beneficiaries carefully, to avoid fraud and stick to the advice of the Administrator-General.

Transfer of Uganda Railways Pensioners to Public Service

The committee observed that different legal frameworks provide for separate management of pension. Whereas the Public Service is mandated under the Pensions Act to manage pension claims, the Uganda Railways Corporation Act provides for terms and conditions of Uganda Railways Corporation, pension management inclusive.

The committee noted the Solicitor-General’s advice that staff in parastatal organisations and statutory bodies are a standalone workforce and are not part of the mainstream Public Service. The Public Service only manages pension claims in respect of former employees of the East African Community and East African Railways Corporation and does not extend to cover former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation. The Pensions Act, First Schedule, provides specifically for employees of the East African Community and the East African Railways Corporation.

Management of pensions for former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation can only be effected through the legal framework establishing the Uganda Railways Corporation. Otherwise, transferring Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners to the Ministry of Public Service would be illegal.

The committee recommends that: 
    1. The advice of the Solicitor-General should be adhered to and Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners be paid in accordance with Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1996 and in accordance with the concession agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and the Rift Valley Railways.

    2. Government should explore the possibility of paying off Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners once and for all or procure an annuity from an insurance company instead of transferring the pension obligation to the Ministry of Public Service, which would be illegal.

Other Salient Issues

Poor Public Relations in the Uganda Railways Corporation

The committee observed that Uganda Railways Corporation is not doing enough to redeem its stained image before its former employees. The committee was reliably informed that despite numerous correspondences from the Uganda Railways Pensioners’ Association to Uganda Railways Corporation management, none has ever been responded to by the latter. This has led Uganda Railways Pensioners’ Association to suspect fraudulent activities and actions by Uganda Railways Corporation management in the management of their pensions.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Railways Corporation management should revitalise and improve on their public relations with its former employees and other stakeholders.

Sale of Uganda Railways Corporation Assets

The committee was informed that part of the Uganda Railways Corporation assets were sold to prospective investors; a case in point being part of the Nsambya land that was sold at a cost of Shs 69 billion. The proceeds from the sale were said to have been deposited with the Treasury/Consolidated Fund. Management of Uganda Railways Corporation indicated that the proceeds from the sale, once transferred to the Divestiture Account, could be used to pay off pension claims.

The committee recommends that the outstanding arrears since August 2006 to October 2013, amounting to Shs 7,545,895,023, be met from the Divesture Account.

In conclusion, it is the right of pensioners to have their pension paid. Government and Uganda Railways Corporation management should ensure that this right is not violated. It is Government’s obligation to have this anomaly corrected. Ten years is too long to deny one his or her basic means of livelihood. Government should, therefore, pay Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners’ arrears to avoid litigation or any other costs that may accrue from this case. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, for handling this petition. I am sure that the petitioners will sleep today knowing that the matter has finally come back to Parliament and that it is going to be discussed.

Honourable members, just to guide you - the committee has made eight sets of recommendations, meaning that in some instances under one sub-heading, there is more than one recommendation. I do not know how we are going to process them. 

The first set of recommendations is on compliance with the law, which is on page 5. The second set is on reinstatement of monthly pension payment; the recommendations are on page 7. The third set is on payment of full pension arrears, on page 8. The fourth set is on re-commutation of pension, and the recommendations are on page 9. The fifth is on survivors’ benefits and the recommendations are on page 10. The sixth one is on transfer of URC pensioners to Public Service; the recommendations are on page 11. The seventh is on poor public relations in URC; the recommendation is on page 11. The last one is on the sale of URC assets, whose recommendation is on page 12. 
So, there are those eight sets of recommendations, which we could now debate and see how we process them to conclusion.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek guidance on the same note. Before we make our stand regarding whether the pensioners should get their pension, recommendation 6.2 on page 11 shows very well that through the sale of the URC assets, Shs 69 billion was got and put on the Consolidated Fund. So if these people will be considered for pension, how will we handle this matter because in another observation, we saw that this group of pensioners are a standalone workforce? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a matter for debate. Let us get information from the Minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give to the House is that it is true that part of Nsambya land was sold at this price. However, it is not true that this money has been paid by the Treasury or deposited on the Consolidate Fund nor has it been paid to the Divestiture Account. So, it is a debt due from the Treasury but has never been settled. That is the information I wanted to give, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it looks like the Minister’s statement has attracted some clarifications; so, we will start from here.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Certainly, you are spot-on by saying the Minister’s statement has provoked certain reactions. So, I want to react to it accordingly.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek a correction in regard to the figures given by the chairperson of the committee in respect to the price of the Nsambya land. In dispute - at least I know that the committee will report – is over 57 acres of land. There was a commitment by the Government of Uganda to pay Shs 2 billion per acre. Simple arithmetic will tell you that that commitment would attract over Shs 100 billion. That commitment has now lasted for very many years. 

I am, therefore, surprised that the Minister can come here and provoke us and the pensioners by saying that the money is not in the Consolidated Fund accounts yet it was them who caused the transfer of these people from Nakawa, Naguru to Nsambya. It was done at the convenience of Government but at the inconvenience of the former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation.

I therefore seek that the record be straightened. We are not talking about Shs 69 billion only; we are talking about over Shs 100 billion. If this money was paid by Government to Uganda Railways Corporation, these old men and women would go home smiling. Remember some of these senior citizens have long gone to their Creator but with Government still dilly-dallying on this matter.

Mr Speaker, the Minister should put the record straight on this matter. He should not be hiding under the errors that may have come about due to lack of information to the committee and begin to strengthen his argument on the basis of Shs 69 billion. Please, Mr Minister, talk about Shs 100 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to guide on why the chairman of COSASE is saying this - there was another petition on that piece of land, the 57.93 acres. When you look at the Order Paper, it is item No. 6. That report is also actually ready and the copies have been circulated. That is why that statement is being made. The statement is based on another petition.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If the Minister of Finance does not know where the money is, then who ought to know? This is a very serious matter. Money that comes from the sale of land that belonged to Government! 

I have seen people entering the chamber; I hope they are not from Uganda Railways Corporation. If that is the group that is being starved and the Minister of State of Finance does not know where the money is, then we need to have the full Minister of Finance here. This is because state ministers sometimes do not want to commit themselves on some of these issues. Mr Speaker, can we now call the Minister of Finance - the big one – (Laughter) – to come here and tell us where the money is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no big minister and there is no small minister.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I think hon. Aston Kajara is a Minister of State for Finance in charge of the Privatisation Unit. As you know, Uganda Railways Corporation is under the Privatisation Unit. If that is the case, then it must have been that corporation that sold that land. If it did not sell that land, then you must tell us who sold it.

Mr Speaker, I am raising this issue because we sold part of the assets of Uganda Railways Corporation and the body responsible for that sale was the Privatisation Unit. Money was collected and this land was given out; in fact, the pensioners were staying on that land for in order to wait for their pension payments. The Government, under the leadership of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, allocated the land in Nakawa – he took over the role of Uganda Land Commission – and then the people who came to develop it said they did not want to go on with developing the land because there were people on it. I was told that the same President Museveni then carried the same people from Nakawa to Nsambya on agreement that the pensioners would be paid.  

First of all, it was the Privatisation Unit to sell off that land but who sold that land? Secondly, when that land was sold, what was the mode of payment? Thirdly, these 57.93 acres of land are valued at about Shs 116 billion; why are you claiming for Shs69billion when the total value is over Shs 100 billion? Who is taking the balance? We need to know who is taking the balance. Is it you, hon. Aston Kajara?

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I appreciate, as usual, the submission of the Leader of the Opposition. The challenge we have, and this is why we normally do not get the right answers, is creation of apparent overlapping function centres. When you say the President allocates land, that already overshadows us from pursuing the function centre to tell us exactly how land was given out. This is dangerous because constitutionally, that is the function of the Uganda Land Commission. Of course, the Uganda Land Commission, under Article 238, is obligated to hold and manage Government land.

We cause a contradiction, and I am happy that Cabinet has processed a Bill to come here in respect of the functioning of the Uganda Land Commission. In the Land Act, when you look at the powers of the Uganda Land Commission, it also has powers to sell land, which in my opinion is unconstitutional. The only way you can interpret it to harmonise it with the Constitution is: if the Uganda Land Commission has to sell land, it must be with the full knowledge and consent of Government, in this case Cabinet. Do you get the point?

Of course, we can talk as lawyers here. You can say there are executive powers of the President under Article 99, but even if he exercises those executive powers, it must be within the confines of the Constitution. He would say, for instance, “I advise if there is land, Uganda Land Commission, please consider so and so for a piece of land.” That does not mean that that is a directive, and that is where the problem is – (Interjections) – let me finish before you come in. 

All I am trying to submit on this is that let us not confuse the different agencies and authorities as far as their functioning is concerned. If we are Parliament and we want to know how that land was given out, the best agency to attack is Uganda Land Commission and then they will tell us how they did it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament, one time I was here, and I want to thank hon. Ruhindi, the Deputy Attorney-General - Maybe before I bring that up, before he became a minister he was an MP for Nakawa and he still is. There was a time land was allocated in Luzira and the person who really cried was hon. Ruhindi. By that time, he was a Member of Parliament and he stood and cried saying that we help him. (Laughter) Now he is the one who has turned. He even came and applied the laws. We tried but immediately he was rewarded, he ran away and abandoned people on the way. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I am raising this because in the Eighth Parliament we again raised the issue of the President allocating land. The Speaker then, Rt Hon. Ssekandi Kiwanuka, said it could not have happened. I said that the following day, I was going to bring the letters. When I brought them, he almost collapsed in the chair. When we say the President allocated land in Nakawa, in the same vein tomorrow I am going - (Mr Amuriat rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the Member had risen on the same issue.

MR AMURIAT: It is just information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On information?

MR AMURIAT: Was he giving information? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what he was doing. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I was holding the Floor.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you. I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information I would like to volunteer is that actually, there are letters in the possession of the committee, and how I wish our report had been presented immediately after the report that has just been presented, it would have - (Interjections) – No, we have been here since last week. We never delayed. We are very efficient. 

You would see for yourself from our report directives from the President over issues of land. I am surprised, Mr Speaker, that ministers of Government have come here to deny this, well knowing that their boss is in the habit of issuing directives over land. I think this will be evidenced tomorrow. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that hon. Bahati is not around but I will mention this. We were somewhere with hon. Bahati - that was in the Eighth Parliament and we were having coffee – and I said, “this President is busy allocating public land when it is not his responsibility.” He said, “You can cut my hand off if the President is allocating land.” When I brought the letters to him, hon. Bahati run away. I was coming to cut off his hand because he had promised me that he wanted the hand to be cut off. I wish he was around; he would have confessed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When did this happen?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament we met with hon. David Bahati in South Africa and as we were chatting, we discovered we were together. We had travelled differently. As we were having a cup of coffee as accountants, I said, “But these things do not flow well in accounts.” We then talked about allocation of land and I said, “I will bring them tomorrow; the letters will be there.” I am always good at letters and I am happy that even the committee has letters. If we do not bring the letters showing that the President was the one allocating land in Nakawa- over my dead body. They will be here tomorrow at the exact time –(Interjections) - I will also put my hand. The reason why we are raising this – (Interjections) - Okay I will put my neck. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to correct something; COSASE was No.6 on the Order Paper, Madam Chief Whip. If they had been given opportunity, they said they would have presented but the Speaker said we had to alter the Order Paper. 

Mr Speaker, what I want to raise here –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. This is for the record, not just to disrupt your very good submission. We want to hear you properly - You said you will bring the letter and if you do not, you have offered your head- (Interjections) - the neck. However, is that letter a directive to somebody to allocate land or is it a directive allocating land? The two are different. Just make the clarification for the record.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The letter will be written to somebody saying, “Please, give 6.6 acres to so and so and four acres to so and so”, and I can tell you tomorrow. Mr Speaker, after communication from the Chair, you give us an opportunity- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the question from the honourable Member from West Budama South is: Does the President’s letter say, “I have allocated 10 acres to so and so”? I think that is the clarification he wanted.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I have further elucidation to the honourable member, Oboth. In this report, of course it is not yet on table for discussion, I see a letter which says, “I therefore direct you to identify and allocate…” Really, if you are Uganda Land Commission, if you are directed to identify and you do not identify, you write back and say, “I cannot identify.” They are not directing you to allocate; they are directing you to identify and allocate. If there is no land to identify, you communicate accordingly. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are wasting time; I am the one who gave you way. Mr Speaker, it is very bad for a man who used to talk right, now to turn and talk in the opposite direction. This hon. Ruhindi used to talk- (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Constitution spells out the responsibility of a Member of Parliament and the responsibility of a minister and the rules that they have to follow when they are in those offices. The Leader of the Opposition has consistently decided to attack the person of hon. Ruhindi Fred. Is he in order to fail to distinguish between the roles of a Member of Parliament and those of a minister? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have actually not raised the violation I had seen. By saying that the honourable member is now speaking the other way is imputing motive otherwise than proper. (Laughter) That would be the point of order that is sustainable. 

As for the other point of lack of knowledge of what the Minister does and what the Member of Parliament does, certainly you cannot rule on a point of lack of knowledge as a violation of order. However, on the issue of imputing motives otherwise than proper, I will hold you not in order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for your wise ruling and I want to thank my sister, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, for raising a wrong point of order instead of raising the right one.  Basically, Mr Speaker, these two people, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba and hon. Ruhindi, the Deputy Attorney-General, have been good colleagues since 2001 and it is unfortunate that we took different paths. Initially, we were together in the same camp until they saw the other side and ran; otherwise, we were walking together in the same group. (Laughter) Initially, hon. Ruhindi was the Attorney-General of PAFO and hon. Kasule Lumumba was in charge of the church matters in PAFO.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: I would like to give clarification. (Laughter) Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I want to remind you that I, Kasule Lumumba Justine, was the chief mobiliser of PAFO and not a leader of church matters. Under PAFO, I was the chief mobiliser but at the same time, I was the chairperson of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy but not on behalf of PAFO.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also recall that there were some Muslims in PAFO.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is true and that is why I said that when we wanted a prayer in PAFO, she was the one who would lead us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter before the House is a report on this petition. Please, let us address it as we will need to use the time properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I was trying to bring up, lastly, is that it is true that the President has given a lot of directives but we want PU to address these issues:
    1. The advert for the land; was there an advertisement for land?
    2. Who are those people who took the land at Shs 69 billion instead of almost Shs 116 billion?
    3. The Privatisation Unit was in charge. In this case, where has PU put our money? Why should it deny that it does not have money? Treasury accounts means that even the PU account is a Treasury account, so long as it manages it.

I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you respond, let me just recognise the people we have in the gallery. We have a group of residents from Budiope East Constituency represented by hon. Mubito John Bosco and hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo from Buyende District. They have come to observe the proceedings. If they are here, please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have a group of cadres from Mayuge District and they are represented by hon. Nakadama Rukia Isanga and hon. Bagiire Vincent Waiswa. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have residents from Bugabula South Constituency. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Asuman Kiyingi and hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Kamuli District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please also join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I see the honourable member saluting the guests. 

MS ALASO: Rt. Hon. Speaker, it would appear to me that we are getting into a matter that has the capacity to shift our focus from the pension. It is also a matter that is a subject of investigation by other committees of this House and we are told reports and other issues are about to be presented.

I seek your guidance on whether it would be okay for the House to proceed in such a manner that in the meantime we leave out item No. 6.2 and its bearing on the pension issue and we discuss and address ourselves to the subject of the retirement benefits of these people who have waited for decades to get their benefits. We will deal with the value and where the proceeds are as an independent matter that will arise from a report of perhaps COSASE or whoever is in charge of these matters as of now. In any case, I think that whether that land is sold or not and for whatever amount of money, we must confront the issue of pension. So, I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Member for Serere, for raising that issue. Actually, looking again at the prayers of the petition and also looking at page 11, item No. 6.0, it is on other salient issues. This means that these were issues that were not directly within the petition but were salient issues that arose in the course of their direction. 

I think the request of the honourable member, if we are to address the issues raised by the petition, means that we would restrict ourselves to their prayer and the findings of the committee in relation to their prayer. This would in effect exclude the whole of item 6.0 and the subsequent matters of poor public relations and sale of Uganda Railways Corporation assets. 

However, this does not absolve the Minister from making statements on what has been raised or registered, so that the Hansard is complete. We can then go back and deal with this petition, so that we deal with the specific issue of the petitioners and we conclude this matter quickly.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank honourable members. I actually rose to put the record right, and it is necessary that the House appreciates the truth especially regarding the sale of these assets. 

When URC was concessioned, there were two sets of assets that were identified: core assets which were concessioned with RVR, the concessionaire, but also non-core assets of the business. Now, the property in issue is what is regarded as non-core assets of URC. Under the arrangement, non-core assets of URC were to be sold and disposed of and proceeds therefrom deposited on the Divestiture Account. The truth of the matter in this case is that Cabinet approved the sale of these 57 acres of land to investors and directed the Ministry of Finance - the Treasury - to deposit the proceeds of the sale onto the Divestiture Account. 

I rose to inform the House that first of all, the sale was authorised by Government. The Chief Government Valuer did value this land and the value was Shs 1.2 billion per acre and not Shs 2 billion as the chairperson of COSASE mentioned – (Interjection) – It was Shs 1.2 billion per acre. If you multiply Shs 1.2 billion by 57 acres, you get about Shs 67 billion and that is the money that the Treasury was supposed to remit to the Divesture Account. 

Mr Speaker, I rose was to inform the committee that much as this land was sold and a directive given to the Treasury to deposit the money on the Divestiture Account, the Treasury has never transferred this money. It has never paid for the land that it was allocated. So, it remains a debt due to the Divestiture Account, which is managed by the Privatisation Unit. That is what I wanted to inform the House about. 

The land was sold for Shs 1.2 billion per acre but the money has never been realised in order for it – (Interjection) - Well, it is a debt due from the Treasury to the Divesture Account and therefore, this money is not available to settle any of the divesture dues including the pension. That is the information that I wanted to put on record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want the House to debate properly. There is a motion on a petition on the sale of these 57.93 acres and it is on the Order Paper and we are going to discuss that tomorrow. Now this debate is about the benefits of the pensioners and their prayer. Can we defer the debate on the accounts and on the money and we leave it for tomorrow’s debate and for now we deal with the issue of the pensioners; would that be proper?

MR OBOTH: Clarification, just for the sake of the record. On the sale, can the minister be clearer; I know he can do better than that? Where there has been a sale, what is the effective sale? I benefit from the minister being a legal minded person; can a sale be a sale but the money is not there? You could get a better word so that you comfort the Members. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, as a lawyer, and hon. Oboth is one, I know that there is an offer, acceptance and there is consideration. Consideration is the payment and the payment can be in cash or it can be future payment. It need not be a cash payment. In essence, this was a sale but the consideration was a future payment from government to the Divestiture Account. So, if I quote what – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I have clarified that this was a sale, it is only that the proceeds of the sale have not been realised to where it was supposed to go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the land been transferred?

MR KAJARA: The land was transferred, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To whom?

MR KAJARA: To the beneficiaries.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, we want to be clarified -

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, you have guided very well about this matter. I am a member of COSASE and we have more information than what the minister is giving. I do not know whether it would be procedurally right to continue with this matter before we debate and give full information from the committee? It will help us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, each time we ask these questions, the answers are leading us more to item No. 6 and not item No. 7. Item No. 6 is about the sale of that land, the 57.9 acres, and there is a full report on it. Here, we are dealing with a category of a very marginalised, almost impoverished, people who serve this country and they are all here to hear what Parliament is going to say on their fate. 

So, can we deal with the issue of their pension at least - that was the subject of their petition - so that the issue of the sale - who has bought, who has transferred and in whose name the title is - can come in tomorrow’s debate. Let us now debate the merits or demerits of this petition and what the committee has recommended. If the Members agree that the issues raised in the petition are legitimate, then we can go to process the recommendations that have been made.

6.12
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I entirely agree with the direction you have given us because the summary of what the petitioners are saying to us is that, “cause the government to comply with the law and pay us our full benefits”. That is all they ask of this House.

I want to thank the committee for exploring the various scenarios and I entirely support those recommendations. I want to highlight the fact that it is important to remind Government to treat its retired workers decently. People cannot give a service to a country and then they die waiting for retirement benefits. I have looked at the names here and I know some of these people personally. I have even ticked off some who are already dead and their children cannot afford an education. So, that takes me to your directive - to the recommendations. 

To me, the most important recommendation I want to buy into is 5.6(b) and I just want to propose an amendment only to that recommendation. It should be amended to read, “Government should pay off the pension benefits of Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners once and for all.” The option of annuity should be deleted, and any other option should be deleted. I think we just need to recommend to government that they must pay off so that we stop this ping-pong game and the issue of creating options of whether you can pay them a percentage or not. If you go into buying an annuity, for instance, you might be told that government is constrained. Government should own up; these are their workers and they just simply must pay them. 

I do not even want to buy into the idea – fortunately, this is even already overtaken - that we should be finding where the money is. Whether you talk of Divestiture Account or Consolidated Fund, there is only one factor in common - they are all government accounts. So government must just finance the billions of money and pay off its retired workers; simple! That is what I would like to submit.

6.15
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the recommendation under 6.2, which is more less the same as the one in 5(b).  It says, “The committee recommends that the outstanding arrears since August 2006 to October 2013 amounting to Shs 7.5 billion be met from the Divestiture Account”. 

There are two different things. If government got money and put it differently in whichever account they want, the pensioners will still be waiting for their money. They do not care where the money is coming from – whether from the divestiture account or whichever account. Those are internal processes of government. 

The recommendation should therefore be for government to pay off this debt. The delay plus interest accumulated is causing government problems. These are not the only arrears which have interest accrued on the principal. We ask government, please, wherever these debts are, make sure you pay them. That is my recommendation.

6.16
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Mr Speaker, mine is about this illegal underpayment. This is an abrogation of human rights because pay is a right and one reaches an agreement knowing well how much is going to be paid. However, this is a situation where the management decided to discriminately pay some people full pension and yet some are partially paid, some have not been paid and some have even passed on. I recommend that the benefits of those who have passed on should be given to their relatives. 

Secondly, the poor relationship is not only in public relations but even in industrial relations. Today in Uganda Railways Corporation, the industrial relations are very poor. I have been talking to the Minister of Works and one time I walked to him and told him that things were not well in URC and he ran there and found out what was going on. However, the current management is not adhering to the laws of Uganda. 

I, therefore, want to support the recommendation that everyone receives what they are entitled to. The poor industrial relations should be amended. Let people who produce for this country be treated well, as human beings, because they are the backbone of this economy. Thank you. 

6.18
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for coming up with these recommendations. However, I have a problem with all these recommendations which the committee has given because they do not have a timeframe. We have been giving recommendations in this House and then Government says, “We shall work on the issue”, but they keep on dragging because we do not give them a timeframe. 

I propose that as we debate here, these pensioners should be paid by the Ministry of Finance within six months. This is because some of the people who are looking for this money are grandchildren of the pensioners who died. Some of the beneficiaries have died. So, I propose that the money should be paid to these people within six months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the budget for this year is already passed; have you borne that in mind?

MS MWEBAZA: Mr Speaker, many supplementaries and loan requests have been coming to this House and we have been passing them. I would have no problem if the Minister came to borrow money; at least Government would be able to pay because it is still in power for many years but some of our pensioners are dying without getting their benefits. They can come with a supplementary budget or they can borrow money so that we pay these pensioners, Mr Speaker. 

6.20
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish also to begin by thanking the committee for a generally good report. A corporation that in a single transaction of selling land could fetch Shs 69 billion cannot qualify an argument that it is constrained to pay only Shs 7 billion to its former employees. 

I wish to get clarification on the two recommendations on page 7, under item No. 5.2. Mr Speaker, I note that the URC management has been asked to “pay all the pension arrears”. At the same time, Government has also been asked to own up to its pledge of paying the same. I now wonder if it is the Government of Uganda or URC in its entirety to actually pay. I know URC is a corporation of Government but then recommendations are talking of URC management paying and the Government of Uganda owning up to its pledge of paying the same; who will actually be making this payment? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

6.22
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and to thank the committee for a very good report. 

Really, we should not be debating people’s pension; it is a matter of right. People should be paid their money as a matter of right. If somebody has worked for a country or a company, he is entitled to pension and we should not be debating that. However, we are debating this because we treat our retired workers very shadily, whether they are public servants, from companies or from parastatals. We treat them shadily. 

For workers of the East African Community who are from Kenya and Tanzania, the last payment was between 1984 and 1986. In Uganda, we are still debating it in 2013 because we do not care. It is intriguing to say that even the calculations here have various formulae. Somebody must be cheating these workers; they multiply what is due to them by different figures. When you are working, the compensation rules are very clear; why is it that here they are not clear, that somebody sits somewhere and begins changing the rules of compensation?

I support the committee recommendation that the Auditor-General should investigate this compensation for the railways workers, and not only railways but also Post Office and Uganda Transport Company. There are many workers out there who are complaining; even workers of Kibimba Rice Scheme in my constituency. I am sure hon. Kasule Lumumba also knows there are issues of compensation there because we do not treat our workers sensibly. So, I support the recommendations wholeheartedly. Money must be found to pay people because they have worked for this country. 
 
Mr Speaker, Uganda Railways Corporation owns a lot of priority land which is being rented and is being occupied by various people. Actually, they are one of the biggest landowners in the country. Therefore, there would be revenue out of that but somebody is just messing about. Maybe we want these workers of Uganda Railways Corporation to behave like the Kasokoso residents so that they go and occupy the railway yard and chase away the investors at Nsambya before you can compensate them. We already know that Nsambya land is being developed. Those who were allocated land are already developing it but the workers are just watching. They were chased away from where they used to stay and they are in villages; they do not even have money to come and fight for their rights. 

I would, therefore, like to appeal to Government and the Minister for Finance to pay Ugandans - senior citizens or retired people - whether they are in public service or whether they have been working in parastatals. It is only fair that they are paid. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Bukooli makes an important point that we should not be debating people’s pension because it is a matter of right. So, can we process the recommendations of the committee and take decisions instead of debating? I do not think there is anybody who disagrees that pensioners should be paid their money. So, can we process the recommendations? If it is okay, then let us go to the sets of recommendations in 5.1 on the compliance with the law, which is on page 5. 

I will call them separately because they are three; I do not know whether there is a way of putting them together. The first one is: “(a) Uganda Railways Corporation management harmonises the formulae for pensions and comes up with one formula that cuts across the board irrespective of the different employee categories. This should take effect from the time of engagement for each individual employee.” I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation (b) says, “Uganda Railways Corporation management should carry out periodic reviews of pensions to take into account inflationary tendencies and salary structural changes as they occur over time. This should be computed for the period in question including the attendant arrears.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The third and last on this particular set is: “(c) The one-third and 40 per cent of the pension deducted illegally from the different categories of pensioners and retained by URC should be paid back with interest covering the period in question.” Do you have an issue with this, honourable member?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and Members. Pension is pension; so we would like to move that the interest aspect be removed but we consider the other part. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your justification for removing the interest because that money should have been paid years back?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I am one of the people who worked for two years without pay but when they paid me, they did not add interest. Since even Government is struggling by saying it has delayed because the money is not there, we feel that one would rather get what is available without interest, which will never come. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question to the amendment that we should strike off interest as proposed by the Member.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, recommendation 5.1 (c) is informed by the observation in 5.1 (b), which says that it was erroneous and illegal for URC management to subject 0.4 per cent deduction. This is an illegality committed and I know it is also criminal in nature. 

I know this parastatal or this corporate body had an accounting officer, a person who should be held liable for committing this error. Where is the sanction in (c)? This is why I have a problem with passing this recommendation as it is. I would propose that the sanction be recommended for the persons who committed this illegality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is so, we can pass (c) then you make an additional recommendation to deal with the specific individuals. It does not affect (c); does it, Members?

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, the recommendation reads, “The one-third and 40 per cent of the pension deducted illegally…” Can we confirm from the Attorney-General that this was done illegally before we recommend? This is because we might recommend and there was no illegality - (Interruptions) – Are we safe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, can you advise us on what is going on with the microphones? Please, proceed Member.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Kasule, for giving way. A deduction of any form on pension or even salary is a constitutional matter. However, as you said, we would benefit from the wise counsel of the Attorney-General as to whether even the word “illegally” deserves to be there. We would have simply said “deducted”. The Attorney-General probably is better placed to guide us. 

MR RUHINDI: Rt Hon. Speaker, from the import of this report, the committee interacted with the office of the Solicitor-General extensively and certainly, they must have gotten advice that these deductions would be illegal. I would want to concur with my friend, hon. Oboth, that this is unconstitutional. Of all things a pension; why should that be? Let us be realistic; let us be positive on this matter and say that this matter should be resolved once and for all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So, the one-third or 40 per cent of the pension deducted illegally from different categories of pensioners and retained by URC should be paid back with interest covering the period in question. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that we add the following: “persons responsible for these illegal deductions be tried or prosecuted or be held accountable.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? The persons responsible for these deductions referred to in this particular- That means there should be a process of finding out who is responsible.

MR RUHINDI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we need to study that a little bit further because first of all, I read through the report but it was my first time to interface with it. It appears that there is what they were calling either commutation or re-commutation. The idea was that maybe at a particular time, they were constrained resource-wise and they were more or less saying they could not afford the total amount but they could pay this and then there would be some kind of post saving. So, it appears that there was no total denial and if I am right, then we need not actually go into this business of prosecution. 

In addition, there is always the element of officers doing a job in good faith. Officers can naturally commit errors in the course of their employment. So you need to have credible evidence before you make such a recommendation; you can, in fact, recommend for further investigation. I have seen the recommendation that the Auditor-General takes up this matter. When the report comes from the Auditor-General, the Parliament will be in a better position to make an appropriate recommendation.

MR KAKOOZA: I think I would like to agree with the Deputy Attorney-General. When you read the communication in Appendix 1, the acting Chief Executive Office states that there is an issue of cash flow constraints and that the pensioners should be patient regarding the matter and that would be highly appreciated. That means the problem was the cash flow but they did not refuse to pay them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that particular matter is on the suspension of monthly payment.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, that is what it means. That is why they paid 60 per cent and the 40 per cent remained in the account to be paid after the cash flow is not constrained. It was not total denial.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that does not relate to Appendix 1. Appendix 1 is on suspension of monthly payment of pension; it does not talk about those percentages, unless there is another document maybe. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, there are observations on page 8 and 9 which show that the advice from the Solicitor-General was given in full, including on what we are talking about. So, I do not think we need to investigate further. I do not want to read it because it is too big for us to read verbatim, but everybody has the report and I think the advice is conclusive enough for us to make a decision. 

Let me read one of the sentences on page 9: “Where the deduction was made and withheld, the pensioner received one-third less of the new (increased) pension benefits. The underpayment is illegal. Clearly, the amount deducted and withheld, if any, must be paid to the affected pensioners.” So, I think we have enough ground to make decisions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are we making these sanctions only in respect of individuals who dealt with deductions or is it going to be a general situation, in which case it would come as a general clause?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, based on the wise counsel from the Deputy Attorney-General, I think this report needed a finding, as of fact, that there was negligence or bad faith on the accounting officer’s or management’s part. We would then be able to adopt the recommendations from my friend from Busia. In the absence of that, I find it quite difficult. 

What the Solicitor-General gave here is about the illegality of deductions but he did not point to a particular officer or show that somebody intended to punish these pensioners. It sounds good to our ears but civil servants or anybody occupying such an office is protected by law. If you cannot prove that whatever that person did was in bad faith, you are making a recommendation that would be held nugatory. 

REV. JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I want to supplement what the honourable member has said. When I read point No. 5.3 between the lines, it appears that it is a group of people who consciously decided to make this deduction. As for the purpose, we do not know. So, I would go with the recommendation which the honourable member made, that we make a third recommendation that these people be brought to book to work as a deterrent. 

I have observed that in this country, pensioners are really mistreated. They are treated as if they are not human; their rights are trampled on. So, Parliament should come up with recommendations that will work as a deterrent to the companies or group of people who handle pensioners. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question that I posed was: would it be handled as a general clause to deal with all situations that may occur in the course of the entire report or recommendations, or should it be specific to this one? This is because there are similar recommendations in the next paragraph – (Interjections) – No, that is not good drafting. In good drafting, you deal with everything. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am constrained; I know the anxiety of members over this matter and I am equally perturbed. However, if you may borrow a leaf from the CHOGM report, we had a problem with it here because the first recommendations were, “prosecute”. I remember it was hon. Ben Wacha in the other corner who said, “On what basis and as who are we recommending prosecution?”

Prosecution under Article 120 can only be sanctioned by the DPP after evaluation of evidence from the Police. The other agency is the Inspectorate of Government, and sometimes they work hand-in-hand. Normally, what Parliament does in such cases is to refer the matter to the responsible agencies to take further action. Even if you say, “Take further action”, it is sufficient –(Interjections)– We can do it as Parliament. What I am saying is that we should not say that we recommend prosecution. We should say, “Recommend to the relevant agencies to take further action.”

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I would like the Attorney-General to read the Solicitor-General’s recommendation carefully. The Solicitor-General already stated that it was illegal. So, the pension cuts are already declared illegal. It was not a post-saving as somebody was saying; the money was cut. The board directed and the Solicitor-General wrote saying it was illegal. Now, we are asking: who caused the illegality? That is why the honourable member from Busia is saying that this issue should be investigated and punished because they went forward with an illegality. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still ask: would that not be a general recommendation for all issues that have happened that require accountability, rather than pinning it on one set of recommendations? Would it not be proper to take care of the whole situation and all the illegalities that went on there?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I tend to buy into the idea of a general recommendation, given the fact that the committee on page 9 already talked about the Solicitor-General’s role. Our feeling for sanction is premised on an assumption of an ill motive. The best way that we would identify the ill motive in this whole transaction and even get the responsible persons and the extent of the ill motive would be to have additional work done by the Auditor-General. 

I think we should put this together now that is really ahead in the recommendations. On the issue of scrutinising the payroll to get rid of ghost pensioners, we could also add establishing the motive behind the illegal deductions and maybe finding out whoever is involved in this. We could put them together and pass it over to the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let that come in at the end when we have examined all the issues. For now, we have finalised with 5.1. Let us go to 5.2 on page 7 on reinstatement of monthly pension payments. 

The first recommendation is: “The URC management should immediately reinstate and expeditiously pay all the pension arrears to all its former employees with the accruing interest with effect from August 2006. Whether or not the pensioners attended the pensioners’ audit exercise conducted by URC, it does not absolve URC’s obligation to its former employees and this should not prohibit them from accessing their pension.” I think the recommendation stops at “2006”; the next sentence is on elaboration. Can we look at that part also– whether or not the pensioners attended the audit? I think when you say, “should immediately reinstate…pay all the pensioners”, that covers the next leg –(Interjection)- For emphasis?  Okay, can I then put the question to that recommendation as it is?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, you seem to have read ahead of us, and I do not know why I am trying to think that your guidance was proper to stop at the issue of payment to all the pensioners without necessarily going into other details. Attorney-General, I do not know whether it would not cause any other – We can say, “…pay all the pension arrears with the accruing interest with effect…” and we stop where the Speaker had suggested. I think the Speaker’s guidance was going to be a little helpful but the Attorney-General always has the last word. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: I think the chairperson of the committee would be helpful at this stage. However, listening to her presentation, I got the impression that URC had qualified their conduct and said, “The reason we are not paying this group of people is because they did not participate in the audit that we carried out.” 

So, I think they are bringing this other part of the recommendation to just emphasise to URC that whether they attended or did not attend the audit, that reason is no longer valid. What is valid is that these people are entitled to their benefits. If it does no harm and causes nobody any pain, I think we should just leave the recommendation and vote on it the way the committee has proposed.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the process of paying pension, especially arrears, is such that the Auditor-General does an audit and issues a report on those entitled. If you say that whether or not pensioners attended the pensioners audit exercise it does not absolve URC’s obligations to its former employees, it does not hold. This is because if you pay without this audit, there is a chance that you could pay ghosts or those who are not entitled. Actually, all payments go through the Auditor-General and it is on the basis of the recommendation of the Auditor-General that payments are made. 

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I have listened to the Minister’s submission, but having worked in several organisations, including Parliament, I know that organisations keep records and I know that organisations are able to use the records they hold on the employment of a particular individual. They can order an internal or external audit of the documents to come up with a correct picture of what to pay in terms of pension to a pensioner. 

So, whether the individual goes to attend the audit exercise or not, the organisation has the responsibility to keep proper records of the individual’s records and payments made to that individual during his employment. The organisation is therefore capable of calculating the pension even in the absence of the pensioner. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the recommendation says, “…pay all the pension arrears to all its former employees.” Doesn’t that capture what we want?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I have an amendment. I would like to add the phrase “without any conditions.” (Interjections) – Oh, there are conditions indicated in (b). So I propose they pay without any conditions or according to the law.

MS KWIYUCWINY: I would like to agree with the Member who said that the second part of this recommendation is a matter of emphasis. This is because during the investigations, we found out that URC had their own list and the pensioners’ association had their own list and they did not match. So it is a matter of audit but also a matter of emphasis; if the pensioners did not attend this meeting, there are other ways of finding out whether they are alive or dead and even if they are dead, pensions are paid to the next of kin for a certain period of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation as it is.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General is the one responsible for the audit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to the role of the Auditor-General, to take care of the whole picture. Recommendation (b) says, “The Government should own up to its pledge made by the then Minister of Works and Transport of paying all former URC employees’ terminal benefits and pensions to all existing pensioners. The outstanding arrears presented to the committee by the Uganda Railways Pensioners Association as at 21 October 2013 stood at Shs 7,545,895,023.” I put the question to the recommendation.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we go to 5.3, the recommendations on payment of full pension arrears on page 8: “(a) URC management should comply with the pension regulations - Statutory Instrument - and pay the pensioners 100 per cent of their pension dues.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation (b) says, “The illegal deductions of one-third of the pension amount collected for 15 years and never passed on to the rightful beneficiaries should be computed and paid with interest covering the period in question.” 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The 15 years is not clear; is it for all workers? They do not come on the same day, so the 15 years would not be clear if we left this as it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, would you like to explain the 15 years?

MS KWIYUCWINY: We could remove the number of years if it is not clear. However, the pension should be calculated on the number of years for each employee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just capture what has been said and then you make your amendments. “The illegal deductions of one-third of the pension amount collected and never passed on to the rightful beneficiaries should be computed and paid with interest covering the period in question.” That should be the new text. Is that correct? They have removed the year now, so it is anything that was collected and never passed on to the right beneficiary; it is now all round. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I think it is important to mention the period but we should say, “within the 15 years…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson thinks it will not have any impact if the year is removed. “Pension amount collected and never passed on to…” It was collected but never passed on. No matter whether it is one year or 15 years, any amount that was collected and not passed on to the rightful person should be paid. That is what it is saying now.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, this is within a specified period and I see no harm in specifying that period. It is within the 15 years. If we said, “within the 15 years”, everyone would be covered and we would be specific. If we say “amount collected”, is it as of yesterday? That is my contention.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, I thought “the period in question” covered this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. So the text now is, “The illegal deductions of one-third of the pension amount collected and never passed on to the rightful beneficiaries should be computed and paid with interest covering the period in question.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, deductions are already a collection. So, I think it should be, “…illegal deductions of one-third of the pension amount.” Do not add “collected”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What were you suggesting?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are saying the illegal deductions have already been illegally made. When you say “collected”, where did they collect it from? They never collected; they just deducted. So let us remove the word “collected” then we go on with your sentence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, whatever they deducted they collected together. What this is saying is, “the illegal deductions of one-third of the pension amount collected…” Does it make sense? It was collected but not remitted. I think it is okay. I put the question to the recommendations as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we go to the sets of recommendations under 5.4, re-commutation of pension, which is on page 9. 

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I have a problem with the wording because it says “re-commutation of pension” but when you read the first paragraph it says, “The committee observed that URC never made any attempts to commute pensions while taking into account inflation and salary structural changes.” I would imagine that that word “commute” should actually have been “compute”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I have been thinking but you know some of these terms are technical.

MR KABAJO: It should actually have been, “…to re-compute pensions taking into account inflation.” So, unless the chairperson can explain to us what “commute” in this case means, I think the correct word should have been “re-compute”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, is it a technical term for pension?

MS KWIYUCWINY: We have to check the dictionary for what it means but this is the technical word we were presented with - re-commutation of pension.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, “commute” here would mean instead of going for a long period, you change it to a block. It is referred to as “commute”. I think that is what they are trying to say here. Were there some people who got pension in lump sum? If there were some people who got pension in a lump sum, then we can use that word. However, if you are saying there is not yet - (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, when you read the sentence, it is not about changing the pension into a lump sum; it is about recalculating the pension to take into account inflation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What they are saying is that that process of recalculating is called re-commuting. If it is called re-commuting in their language of pensions, as a lawyer or in your profession we cannot start amending technical terms. If that is what it means, then we cannot do much. I also had the same sentiment but if it is a vocabulary within their usage, we cannot change it. 

Recommendation (a) under this says, “The committee recommends that the advice of the Solicitor-General should be upheld by the Uganda Railways Corporation management.” I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation (b): “An independent body - preferably the Auditor-General - be tasked to scrutinise the URC pensioners’ payroll with the aim of weeding out ghost pensioners, if any.”  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that we rephrase (b) to read as follows: “The Auditor-General should carry out a special investigation with a view to- (i) scrutinise the URC pensioners’ payroll with an aim of weeding out ghost pensioners if any; (ii) establish the motive behind the illegal deductions of pensions benefits.” 

The reason I am making that proposal is to bring forward an earlier argument that we had where we thought that there was an ill motive. Until the Auditor-General finds out why these deductions were being made and payments made piecemeal, it would be difficult for us to suggest sanctions. It is upon that finding that we can then propose sanctions on the individuals that are found to have had ill motives in this exercise. Of course, I also proposed, indirectly, that we delete, “an independent body” because we probably already know that the person we want to do this work is the Auditor-General. So we can be specific about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, do you have a comment on establishing motive?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember, clearly, that hon. Mwebaza Sarah added the issue of a timeframe. According to observations, most issues with the Auditor-General have taken many years to be presented. So, can we add a timeframe to that? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us be systematic. There is an amendment; can we process this one first? That is why I was asking the Attorney-General about the weeding out of ghost pensioners and establishing the motive of the people who did this. Is this okay?

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I have a problem with the whole issue of ill motive because once the Auditor-General comes in and finds controls, he will give a fair opinion.  Of course, if it is something done against the rules and controls, he will mention in his opinion that it was done illegally, and that is the intention of the Auditor-General. Once he does a special audit, he will give you – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the framing does not have the word “ill motive” but it has the word “motive”. It is in my justification that I brought in the fears of an ill motive. I just wanted that to be clear.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, these authorities have their mandate clearly spelt out in the Constitution. The ambit of establishment of criminality is essentially the ambit of the Police, the DPP and the IGG. It is not the work of the Auditor-General. 

The Auditor-General audits and gives a report to Parliament. When that report comes to Parliament, if there are areas that require further action by the Police or the IGG or the DPP, you refer those matters to those bodies. That is my understanding. You recommend that the Auditor-General does his work of investigation in accordance with the laws that govern that institution, brings the report and then we shall see what to do next.

MR NADALA-MAFABI: I think this Government has a big problem. In fact, as soon as the Auditor-General’s report is out, people who should be interested in it would be the President, the Police, the IGG because the report always comes up with issues, some of which relate to criminality. If you wait for Parliament, then your Government has a problem. 

Having said that, here we must do away with “independent body.” I think we should say, “The Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit of the URC pension payroll.” When we say that, you are telling the Auditor-General to go into detail and he will identify all the issues pertaining to that payroll and it will also answer the issue of criminality. When he does the forensic audit – (Interjection) - The reason I raised the government problem –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, you are going to get away from your point. (Laughter) The point is on the drafting he has done. Are you commenting on it? If it is okay, we approve and then we move on. Is it okay? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: It is not okay because he disorganised the flow of what we were carrying out. I want to partly agree with the Attorney-General but I also do not want us to lose hon. Alaso’s idea about finding out the motive. 

I was a chairman of a district - a very big district that time - which inherited a lot of pension issues. My local government was the first entity to be taken to court by pensioners. I want to say that they really did a good job on this report because what happened is that the judge of the High Court told us, when he looked at these old men and women, that he wanted us to find a way otherwise the case was already a bad case according to him. 

I want to say that sometimes the technical people tend to take pension as a non-issue and this is why these arrears accrue without due regard to that item when they are doing business. So we should not really just leave it. Next time, we should provide a legacy for all these technical officers who handle budgets to make sure that this problem does not re-occur. For how long shall we continue talking about pension arrears? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is there a difference between a special audit and a forensic audit?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, there is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, does it not cover the subject you are raising if it is a forensic audit?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, that covers it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the Member has proposed – not a special audit but a forensic audit.

MR SSEMPIJJA: We should also have another item as a recommendation from Parliament to request a responsible organ – We can recommend another body like the Police. 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to raise this point for the benefit of emphasis and correction of what the Leader of the Opposition has said about the Police and Government. Under article 163(5), it is only when the Auditor-General reports to Parliament that Parliament takes appropriate action. It cannot be the Police because some audit queries can be dropped by Parliament. I want to correct the Hansard that it is after Parliament has taken appropriate action that Police can act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The recommendation proposed for the forensic audit captures all the illegalities and investigations with specific findings as opposed to a special audit or a general one. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, some of us are not sure about the forensic audit. I do not know whether I would – (Interjections) – I am asking for clarification from you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether it would do any harm to add what this forensic audit is expected to achieve.

THE DEPUTY SPAKER: A forensic audit is a forensic audit. Leader of the Opposition, can you restate that amendment please?

MR NADALA-MAFABI: I said, “The Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit on the URC pension payroll.” Maybe we can give him a timeframe, which my sister from Iganga was proposing - within three months maybe.

I am saying this because there are 1500 pensioners, which means 1500 entries, and what we are trying to do is to establish first, when they were employed; that is number one. Having got that, we would want to establish when they retired –(Interjection)- That is what I am trying to explain. So, the period comes in. I am coming to experience; it is not that I am just giving details. That is why we want to determine the period- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all debate should be on record.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, it should be within three months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to that, honourable members? I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we go to 5.5, which is on page 10 - survivors benefits: “The committee recommends that URC management should continue to scrutinize carefully the genuine beneficiaries to avoid fraud and stick to the advice of the Administrator-General.” What was the basis of this, honourable chairperson?

MS KWIYUCWINY: The basis was that the next of kin of the deceased pensioners did not get the pension. They were not passing over the pension to the relatives of the deceased and the Administrator-General advised that normally, it is not automatic; a form has to be filled within a certain period and the beneficiary has to be integrated onto the payroll formally.

So, we upheld that recommendation that Uganda Railways Corporation management should continue to scrutinise, not just take on or effect payment without that scrutiny. It is just as it is stated here. This would be done so that we get the genuine beneficiaries of the deceased pensioners.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just worried about “carefully” and “genuine”. “Scrutinize the beneficiaries to avoid…” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, whenever an employee fills a form, he or she names the next of kin. That is one. The people who keep the file of the next of kin in URC are the URC management. Now, if somebody has died and there is something, then the next thing should not be “careful” but they should scrutinize the file for the next of kin and the Administrator-General’s letter of no objection. So, what is this? Unless there was some fraud and if there is fraud, then URC management should be held liable.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the committee members who drafted this recommendation. The role of the Administrator-General is to give a letter to show or to prove that a certain person is the beneficiary. He or she cannot again go and participate in the process. So, I think that this does not stand because once the Administrator-General says that you are the beneficiary, that is all that is needed. He should not involve himself in the process. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the recommendation is saying is that the Administrator-General had given URC some advice, so they should stick to it. Isn’t that what you are saying? Yes, that means there is some advice on record from the Administrator-General.

MR RUHINDI: I think the recommendation should really reflect that the URC should have genuine beneficiaries where, of course, there are estates of deceased former employees. As the honourable member was saying, the only advice you can get from the Administrator-General is to the extent that he or she issued a letter of no objection and then the matter had to go to court, where the letters of probate or administration are processed.

Before I vacate the Floor, I would want to establish whether today I was the right person the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition wanted to quarrel with because he continuously attacked me during the entire session. Mr Speaker, I was just googling, for purposes of clarity, the word “forensic audit” vis-à-vis other types of audit. The definition I have constantly got from the research is that a forensic audit is principally aimed at collecting forensic evidence for purposes of using in court. So, it is stronger in the sense that the moment you get that evidence, you can proceed with it directly to court and provide it as evidence. I thought I should make that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General has agreed with you. (Laughter) Please, can we finalise with this. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, to me this recommendation leaves out the major concern - that the beneficiaries are not paid the balance of the pension for the remaining years. So, I would suggest an amendment and add that they should stick to the advice of the Administrator-General and ensure that the beneficiaries are paid – (Interjections) - okay, that the survivors are paid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member has a point because there is no reference to paying them in the recommendations. I think there is a valid point raised. After scrutiny and finding out these are the genuine beneficiaries, they should pay them; that is what the Member is saying. So, what should the final text read in full? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, “The committee recommends that URC management should continue to scrutinize carefully and identify the genuine survivors or beneficiaries…” - and there must be payment there; where do we put it? (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: It could read as follows: “The committee recommends that URC management should continue to carefully scrutinize the genuine beneficiaries to avoid fraud, stick to the advice of the Administrator-General and ensure that the survivors are paid.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay; or we should say, “and pay the survivors”? 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem with this recommendation of the committee. There is a point of contention between the management of URC and the pensioners’ body. With this conflict existing, I believe the URC management cannot continue to carry out the scrutiny against fraud fairly. The fraud could as well be done by the URC management. 

Why did we recommend for a forensic audit to be done by the Auditor-General? This scrutiny, in my opinion, should be done by a different entity other than the management of URC, to also provide room for the scrutiny against the mismanagement or misbehaviour of the URC management itself. I beg to move. 

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I beg to humbly disagree with the honourable member who has just left the Floor. It is the role of the URC management to carry out the scrutiny and pay the beneficiaries. If you think that they are not capable of carrying out that role, instead of recommending another separate body or persons to carry out that role, you might as well recommend that that management, which is incompetent, is removed and replaced by competent management which is able to carry out that role. 

If we bring it nearer to Parliament, for example, you cannot say that the people managing the Parliament pensions are incompetent and therefore the payment of pensions should be done by an external body while leaving these ones there. What would these you have left there do? So, if they are incompetent, just recommend that they are replaced by competent managers but it is their role to carry out that payment. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, this recommendation is informed by observation 5.5 on page 9 and I would like to read the last bit: “The committee was further informed that reinstatement of payment of pension to beneficiaries was only done upon presentation of letters of administration from the Administrator-General by genuine beneficiaries to commence the process.” 

My understanding is that the organisation already has information as to who the genuine beneficiaries are. These were on the forms filled by the workers. Therefore, we should not go into these gymnastics of “scrutinise” or “genuine”. My proposal would be for the committee to recommend that URC management should pay the genuine beneficiaries on the advice of the Administrator-General, and we leave it at that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the advice of the Administrator-General? The advice of the Administrator-General is not the final advice on which payment can be based. It has to go to court. The Administrator-General just gives no objection for the person to go to court to get either letters of probate or letters of administration; letters of probate in case there is a will left and where there is no will, they get letters of administration. So, then you go to that full extent. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I also think that the reason why this responsibility cannot be passed to another entity is because it is an on-going responsibility. We can pass it on today and then after the new entity has validated, another person dies. This is about survivors’ benefits; it is about pensioners who pass on. Maybe they pass on today before they get their benefits or they pass on tomorrow after a new entity has provided a new lease. So, you cannot go back to the same new entity and say, “Now there is this one case of a pensioner who has passed away; Auditor-General, can you go and validate this?” 

I think that the responsibility can comfortably be left with the management of the organisation provided they stick to the provisions of the law. Like any other person making claims as a survivor, you really cannot walk in there without all those provisions of administration of estate and such related matters. It is just next to impossible. So, I think that is better still housed under URC as they stick to the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that the committee was informed that URC suspends payments of pension immediately on death of its pensioners yet it is aware of its obligation to pay the balance of the pension to the beneficiaries for the remaining years. That is the problem. That is where the recommendation is coming in. How do they do that? That is why they are making this recommendation. It is now a drafting issue. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when somebody dies and he or she is a pensioner, the pension is computed there and then and paid out to the beneficiary. I would like to seek clarification from the committee before I make a proposal here. What are these remaining years of the balance? Is it that the person will be paid on annual basis for the remaining years of somebody’s life which has been determined as X,Y?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. It really depends on the type of pension that you have. If you have a pension where you are supposed to be paid for 15 years and you die in the ninth year, your survivors will be entitled to the remaining six years but they will not be entitled to be paid indefinitely; it still also has a limit. It really depends on how the pension scheme was structured. So, I do not think that she can immediately answer your question. 

The thing is that it is specific to the type of pension scheme. For some pension schemes, when the individual who is entitled dies, they calculate a lump sum which is paid to the survivors. So, it all depends on the way the scheme was designed. However, if the scheme provides that survivors will benefit from the remaining period, then when the pensioner dies, initially they have to suspend the payment of that pension so that they can work out who the correct beneficiary is to be paid the remaining pension. That is the correct procedure; they have to suspend. However, I think the problem here was that they would suspend and not bother to pay the beneficiaries for the remaining period. That is where the Administrator-General came in and advised that they were supposed to pay the remaining period to the survivors. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, what was the situation in this case? 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I want to thank my colleague for answering. This was exactly the situation. They have periods in which they should be paid pension and it was 15 years. So, the survivors of some of those who passed on before they were paid or before they completed the 15 years complained that they were not getting these benefits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is it a specific type of pension arrangement?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if that is true, then for all of them the time has expired. When was Uganda Railways Corporation privatised? It was in 1996. So, 1996 plus 15 years comes to 2011. The reason I am raising this is because if they were not paid, the issue we are talking about should not be monthly payment. We should be talking about the lump sum payment for those who died and never got their money. So, I want to understand that context. 

MR RUHINDI: Yes, I certainly agree. The passage of time does not extinguish an accrued obligation, so we should bear that in mind. 

If we may see the sequence of 5.5, then we may get the message – “The committee was informed that URC suspends payment of pension immediately on death of its pensioners yet it is aware of its obligation to pay the balance of the pension to the beneficiaries for the remaining years.” Certainly, that exception should apply without prejudice to where genuine beneficiaries are identified. You do not have to bring in the Administrator-General. It is you, the accounting officer, to verify the genuineness of the beneficiary. You can go to the registry of the court where the letters of administration were issued. You do not have to go back to the Administrator-General as he or she may not know. 

The succeeding sentence says, “The committee was further informed that reinstatement of payment of pension to beneficiaries was only done upon presentation of letters of administration from the Administrator-General…” No, it is not from the Administrator-General; it should be, “…upon the presentation of letters of administration or probate by genuine beneficiaries to commence the process”. Delete the expression, “Administrator-General”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can you now state the draft of the recommendation, please to capture the whole thing for the record.

MR RUHINDI: After the first sentence in 5.5 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are now looking at the recommendation.

MR RUHINDI: Oh, we go to the recommendations. Well, the recommendation should simply state that the committee recommends that URC management pays genuine beneficiaries to avoid fraud or pays genuine beneficiaries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee recommends that URC management should pay genuine beneficiaries.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. I agree with this position because it eliminates the risk of determining the genuineness of a beneficiary by the URC. They just have to go and pay after it is cleared that this person is genuine. So, I agree with you, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think at some point we really need to help our people. I am drawing from our experience with the Parliamentary Pensions’ Scheme. There is no way you can continue payment of pension without suspending it for a time. There was even an experience where we had six wives up here and we faced a nightmare. We had to suspend the whole thing and told them to first go and sort out administration of the estate and come with proof. We put them through all that. So, I think it is just a matter of education. 

If the issue was that the person dies and payment is suspended and the survivors do not get paid after they have provided proof, that would be a problem. To me, there is no problem here. When a person dies, you must suspend because relatives like the wife, the son in the home and the ones outside the home of the married and non-married wife will all show up and that will be a problem. Therefore, you have to give URC the opportunity to sit down and verify all these things; they must scrutinise them. So, I think the position, as articulated by the committee, is still the fairest of all. When we put in the amendment “and pay them”, that wraps it up very neatly.

MR RUHINDI: That position is absolutely not fair simply because you cannot prejudice the chances of a person whose claim is clear, who has clear genuine letters of administration. You cannot say that you have simply suspended across board so they have to wait until you also verify others. You can only suspend for those persons whose interests are not yet verified. So, it should be without prejudice; suspension cannot be across the board.

MR KAKOOZA: The title of 5.5 is survivors’ benefits. That means death has occurred and they need to pay the next of kin or the survivors. The survivors must be identified and how is this done? They must have proof that they are the administrator of the estate. You cannot come here and say you are claiming for Kakooza’s benefits when you do not have letters of administration or probate from the Administrator-General.

The only issue here, therefore, is the continuity of payment of the survivors’ benefits after proof. That is what it should be. Somebody has given the example of the pensions’ scheme we have in Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us bring out the set of facts on which we must frame this thing. One, a pensioner has died. Two, payment is suspended. Three, payment is resumed upon production of proof of inheritance. Those are the three facts; so, just draft on that. There is death, there is suspension and there is resumption upon production of proof.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I think the word “genuine”, which was also included in the last re-drafting, takes care of all this. You cannot establish genuineness unless you have done a, b, c.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So then can I put the question? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the learned Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last set of recommendations is on the subject of transfer of URC pensioners to public service, which is on page 11. The first one says, “The committee recommends that the advice of the Solicitor-General should be adhered to and URC pensioners be paid in accordance with the Statutory Instrument No. 6 of 1996 and in accordance with the Concession Agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and Rift Valley Railways.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation (b): “Government should explore the possibility of paying off Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners once and for all or procure an annuity from an insurance company instead of transferring the pension obligation to the Ministry of Public Service, which would be illegal.” This is what the hon. Member for Serere spoke on earlier.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you. Earlier on I had proposed that we amend (b) to read as follows: “Government should pay off Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners once and for all.” The rest should be deleted because if you go by the insurance scheme design as suggested by the chairperson, they have more or less outlived the life of the insurance scheme. The 15 years are almost over, so this question of buying annuity and staggering payments will not even arise. I do not think it is even the best option. 

We earlier on also adopted a recommendation that Government should own up to its obligation. Therefore, my view is that we delete the rest of it and just stop at Government paying them once and for all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there is no problem with that, but I ask the chairperson to state categorically if there are no employees who have their pension in perpetuity. If they are there, then transferring them to the Ministry of Public Service will not be illegal because we even transferred pensioners of the East African Community to the Ministry of Public Service. So, if it is 15 years and it has now ended, then Government should settle lump sum. However, if there are those who are still in perpetuity, there is no crime transferring them to Ministry of Public Service because we have done it before. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, on this matter, we were advised by the Solicitor-General that the parastatal organisations and statutory bodies are a standalone workforce and are not part of the mainstream public service. The Ministry of Public Service only manages pension claims in respect of former employees of the East African Community and the East African Railways Corporation and does not extend to cover former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation. That is why in this recommendation we have said that Government should explore the possibility of paying off Uganda Railways Corporation pensioners through other means and not necessarily taking them to the Ministry of Public Service. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the proposed amendment from the Member for Serere is that Government pays off – (Interjections) – the amendment does not include exploring other means. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem with the amendment by the Member for Serere. It assumes that this is the best or preferred option for the pensioners’ organisation. I think there is no problem with annuity because there could be some people who are still young enough to enjoy it for some years. 

As far as I know, pension begins at a certain age – 45 years in some cases, 50 or 55. So there could be some employees who left URC when they were still young, maybe at 30 or 35 years, and their pension will come into effect three or five years from now. So, I do not know why we should assume that everybody at the time of dissolution of URC immediately went to the pension scheme. 

If I can be assured that all the ex-employees of URC immediately went to the pension scheme, then I would agree on paying them a lump sum. However, if there are some who had not yet reached the age where they would qualify, then it is possible that some of those would prefer to get annuity – regular payment - rather than a lump sum.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You qualify for pension after working for a certain period. If you have not worked for that period, they pay you little terminal benefits and you go. So we are talking about those who qualify and not those whom you are anticipating to qualify. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot be a pensioner unless you are a pensioner. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my proposal is further informed by the on-going challenges. If we were able to pay these people’s pension at the time it accrued, this petition would not be in this House. So, we are looking for a final solution, a final settlement to this matter. If it is as members have proposed that you bring a supplementary or you go borrow, you borrow once and settle the matter for once. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the honourable member from Serere. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if it is true that these people were supposed to be paid for 15 years but they were not paid and time has passed, I want to propose that all the pensions due must be paid with interest. The justification is that the pensioners have lost their money and if we pay them Shs 1,000 which should have been given to them in 2011, the money has lost value. Shs 1,000 cannot buy the same thing it would buy in 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wasn’t that already passed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Speaker. That was for those whose pension was deducted. Now we are paying everyone. We are saying that you pay them their dues with interest. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: It was on the one-third, but I think even in the committee we discussed that; if they are going to be paid, they should be paid with interest. So, we agree. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the interest should be at the commercial rate. If I had Shs 1,000 borrowed from a bank, I would pay it back with interest. So, these people should be paid with interest at a commercial rate. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the rate of interest that accrues when we are paying awards differs from time to time. So, my view is that the commercial rate would be too high. First of all, these monies were not paid because the money was not available; if you make it impossible to pay, you compound the problem. 

I therefore think that that we should propose a reasonable rate, - the court usually gives a rate of six or eight per cent - so that it is affordable. Once it becomes cumulative, it becomes even more difficult to pay. So, if we could make it six per cent, which would be reasonable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, what is the court rate now? 

MS KAMATEKA: Mr Speaker, let us leave it open and just say that they be paid with interest. The Auditor-General will determine the rate because we recommended a forensic audit. The Auditor-General should decide how much they should be paid. If we stand here and say six per cent, it may be too high or too low.

MR KAKOOZA: Can I provide information? There is a precedent set by court on pensioners. There was the case of the Diary Corporation against the Government. Justice Kibuka Musoke ruled that the pension should be given with an interest of eight per cent. So, that precedent was set in court. You can read that ruling on the internet. There is no arithmetic formula but whatever happens, it is between eight and six per cent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, rates which are usually applicable are the Treasury bills rates; that is what they tend to use and they add two per cent, or the prime lending rate. We may not take the commercial rate here but the prime lending rate, which Bank of Uganda uses, which is about 12 per cent or 14 per cent depending on the period.

Mr Speaker, if we do not put a rate, they will not pay quickly because they will say six per cent is very little money. However, if we propose the prime lending rate, which is maybe 17 per cent, these people will pay quickly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say Bank of Uganda rate?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Bank of Uganda prime lending rate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bank of Uganda rate on the date of payment. Attorney-General, please guide us on these things. I want to deal with the Attorney-General now.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to be really controversial because this is a very sensitive issue. The Leader of the Opposition, of course, may be correct by suggesting the application of the prime lending rate. However, at the back of our minds we have the challenge that the Minister for Finance is talking about. 

Of course, when we are making these proposals, we are also mindful of our powers within the ambit of Article 93 of the Constitution because we are recommending to Government. The other one is an obligation; there is no doubt about it. However, when it comes to the issue of interest, then we may have to put it in such a way that we recommend for Government to consider payment of a reasonable interest rate, preferably using the prime lending rate of Bank of Uganda. So, when you do it that way, certainly you give the leeway to Government to make appropriate- (Interruption)   

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the government has defaulted; for over 20 years, they have not paid people money they are entitled to. If these people go to court, definitely they will be awarded costs against Government. So we should not be begging Government; we are helping Government now because those people would not have come to Parliament if Government was meeting its obligations. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oguttu, this is Parliament; Parliament is also part of Government. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, Mr Speaker; Parliament is not Government. It is another arm. Government is these people-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Another arm of what? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Of the state.  (Laughter) Government is another arm of the state and so is Parliament and so is the Judiciary. That is what it is - the state. The state is different from Government. 

So, is it in order for the honourable Attorney-General to keep asking us to be lenient to Government, which has failed to meet its obligations for the last 20 years? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From my understanding of the separation of powers and things related to Prof. Rousseau and all those who wrote about this concept, they say there are three arms of government- the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive. Even in the Bible, those three arms are there. If you go to Isaiah 33:22, you will find it there - “I am your lawgiver, I am your judge and I am your king.” Those three are also in the Bible. So, we are braced with the challenges that our Government faces as a government.

What do we do with the issue of the interest rates, honourable members? It is a very specific issue on which the Attorney-General had made- 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. In my view, we really need to consider this issue in such a way that the pensioners gain confidence in the pension - if Government delays in the payment of your pension, you will be paid and you will not be a loser; there will be a gain. This issue of pension is what actually increases corruption in the country-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you then suggest a war forward.

MR FUNGAROO: I support the position of the Leader of the Opposition that it should be paid at the prime lending rate, so that at least at the end of the day, with all the delays, the pensioners gain something.

Mr Speaker, I am the one who presented this petition in this House and before I did that, I met these pensioners one by one. I held several meetings with them. In the process of the meetings, I saw their misery and pain. So, I suggest-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is taking us back now. We are on the issue of interest and the Attorney-General has agreed to the prime lending rate but the issue is how to capture it in the recommendation. I think that is what he was doing. He said we should put it at the prime lending rate but we should say, “…with interest, preferably using the prime lending rate.” So, give guidance on what Parliament desires. Isn’t that proper? 

MR FUNGAROO: With that, I rest my case. However, I emphasise that Government should not decide at its own pace. Parliament should recommend and the recommendations of Parliament should be valid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I put the question to the amendment as finally proposed by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any other matter on this subject, honourable members? I want to thank you- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What about 6.2, Mr Speaker, on page 12.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we agreed at the beginning that the whole of item 6 will come under item No. 6 on the Order Paper tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it says, “The committee recommends that the outstanding arrears since August 2006…” That is the recommendation I am looking at. Is it the one you are saying will come tomorrow? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is on page 12. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh yes! It is because it is buried under item No. 6; I think that is why. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, the same recommendation appears on page 7, part (b), and the same figure is mentioned there. It says, “The Government should own up to its pledge made by the then Minister for Works and Transport of paying all former URC employees’ terminal benefits and pensions to all existing pensioners…” The outstanding arrears presented to the committee were Shs7 billion, which also appears there. So it could be the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is taken care of there. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also make some contribution here. I have read the observations from which the recommendation was derived, and that is 6(2), sale of URC assets, and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide on this. I think the reason why it came under this is because it is supposed to be made from specifically the Divestiture Account. Now, the Minister of Finance earlier said there was no money there. So, in passing the recommendations we have passed, in the general recommendation we are saying it is not necessarily from the Divestiture Account but from anywhere – supplementary or whatever - that Government should get money to pay this Shs 7.5 billion. Isn’t that what we have decided already? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Leader of the Opposition, this issue of the Divestiture Account is the reason why this recommendation has come under item 6, because it is on sale of assets. Now, what we are going to discuss tomorrow is what happened to the money. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is the reason, Mr Speaker. That is why if we delete that- The only thing I want to is Shs 7.5 billion with interest; the word “interest” must be there. The reason is that hon. Kajara will look for Shs 7.5 billion and he will say, “This is what they recommended.” So, the only addition I want to make here is of the word “interest”. As much as we have talked about it under page 7, (d) - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have already made that recommendation as a general recommendation, which we have adopted. You suggested the interest issue, which the Attorney-General agreed to; doesn’t this capture all the payments, Leader of the Opposition? It does cover all the payments because it was the last recommendation to cover the whole thing.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we know these people very well; they may say the last recommendation did not have interest. That is what they will say. That is why I am saying that the last one should not amend the earlier recommendation. That is why the last recommendation of Shs 7.5 billion should have interest. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not dealing with that last recommendation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then we delete it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not even considered it because the recommendation we have adopted is on page 7 running onto page 8. Have you seen it? That is the one we have adopted, to which the interest rate, which we have also adopted, applies. Is it okay?

Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee, as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. This shows that we are abreast with the problems that afflict our people. This is the kind of responsibility we will always continue to exhibit to the people who petition this House because they seek remedy and recourse to the problems that face them and they find that we have the solution. We should be able to show them that we can also try and solve some of the issues. 

I thank you very much for sitting this long. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 8.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
