


PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Wednesday, 24 November 2021


Parliament met at 11.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. We have business that was done halfway, which we should do and finish early this morning so that we can continue with the rest of the business on the Order Paper. 

We will take the urgent matters when we resume in the afternoon but for now, let us proceed with the Bill. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

Clause 7
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall we stood over Clause 7 for reasons of harmonisation of fines and jail terms based on what the law has stipulated. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, the committee had proposed a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both. We are proposing that the same be amended to read, “A person who fails to remit shall pay a fine of 20 per cent of the amount deducted but not remitted to NSSF.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That would be the fine? (Interjection) Whatever is outstanding must be paid?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Yes. What it would mean is that you will pay a fine of 20 per cent of the amount you did not remit. That is the penalty. You will then remit that amount and it will have the interest which was due to the employee. I think that will be deterrent enough.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, is that clear enough? Can I now put the question to the amendment proposed in Clause 7? I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8
MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 8 is about the amendment of Section 14 of the principal Act. The committee proposed that we delete Clause 8. The justification is that NSSF engaging with third parties shall expose members’ contributions to protracted and endless recovery court battles which may cost more than what would have been intended to recover. Therefore, it would be costly on the savers’ contributions. 

The NSSF should internally devise or improve the internal mechanisms to directly recover from the defaulting employers. Attempting to recover from third parties may cause delays in the collection of members’ contributions as well as conflict of interest on the part of those executing the task of the actual recovery from the third parties. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is that Clause 8 be deleted. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the rationale for that proposal was derived from the tax laws where URA, when you fail to pay your tax, is authorised by the law to attach any of the funds from your third accounts or any other source. So, our rationale was, these are workers whose money you are supposed to remit. Therefore, if you fail to remit the workers’ money as a company, we would be able to recover their money from a third party; somebody we know who owes you money. We will then remit the workers’ money that you had not remitted. 

However, we are not very strong on this. If Members feel that we do not need to go to third parties to attach your funds to save workers’ money and remit it as a contribution, I would concede. (Hon. Kabahenda rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is nothing much on this. You want to delete. What else is there? 

MS KABAHENDA: There is the next item on Clause 8 on inserting a new clause immediately after Clause 8 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with the clauses in the Bill first. You requested for it to be deleted. 

Honourable members, the recommendation from the committee is that Clause 8 be deleted. The minister, in a roundabout way, has come round to accept that it is okay for it to be deleted. I put the question that Clause 8 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, deleted.



New Clause
MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we insert a new clause immediately after Clause 8 as follows and it amends Section 20 of the principal Act. 

Section 20 of the principal Act is amended by repealing subsection (3). The justification is to remove the restriction on the number of times a member can be paid an age benefit. I submit. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I agree with that because originally, we had restricted age to 55 years. With the introduction of 45 years to access mid-term benefits, then we can no longer restrict the age benefits in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, the proposal is to insert a new clause immediately after the deleted clause to the effects stated by the chairperson of the committee. I put the question that the new clause forms part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 9, agreed to.
Clause 10, agreed to.
Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12
MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, Clause 12 is an insertion of Section 24A in the principal Act. Clause 12 is amended in the proposed Section 24A:
    a. In sub-section (1) by substituting for the word, “contributions” the word “savings” and in subsection (2) by deleting the words, “on such terms and conditions and in a manner prescribed by the board” appearing in lines three and four.
    b. In subsection (2), by substituting for the words, “not exceeding” the word “of”.
    c. By inserting immediately after subsection (2) the following:
A member who;
    a. Is a person with disability;
    b. Is 40 years of age and above;
    c. Has made contributions to the fund under section 7 for at least 10 years is eligible to mid-term access of a sum of 50 per cent of his or her accrued benefits;
    d. By inserting immediately after subsection (3) the following: “the statutory instrument under subsection (3) shall be laid before Parliament for approval.”

Justification -

THE CHAIRMAN: Before you go to the justification, section 2 (c) in subsection (b) says, “is forty years of age and above.” However, you did not read the word “and”. Have you changed your mind about the word “and”?

MS KABAHENDA: It is “forty years and above.”

THE CHAIRMAN: “Forty years and above” but there is another “and” after that.

MS KABAHENDA: For workers with disabilities.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. Read the text.

MS KABAHENDA: “c) by inserting immediately after subsection (2) the following –
 (b) is forty years and above.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay but there is the word “and” at the end.

MS KABAHENDA: I removed the other “and”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you removed the other “and”?

MS KABAHENDA: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the justification for that?

MS KABAHENDA: No. I did not remove it. 
“(b) is forty years and above; and
(c) has made contributions to the fund for at least ten years.” I maintain that.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is clear. The “and” is very important.

MS KABAHENDA: Yes, it is. 

The justification is -  
    1. Substitution of the word “contribution” for saving is for clarity since voluntary savers are not mandatory contributors to the fund.
    2. To ensure uniformity of 20 per cent for all contributors entitled to mid-term access from the fund. 
    3. The powers to prescribe terms and conditions and procedures for mid-term access for both voluntary and mandatory contributors and savers should lie with the minister in consultation with the board.
    4. To enable persons with disability who are a small minority of the contributors of the fund to be eligible for mid-term access.
    5. For Parliament to ensure that the regulations meet the spirit of the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the proposals from the committee. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee whether by substituting “”contributory saver” does away with the ambiguity of the distinction between a contributor and a saver, when it comes to mid-term access for the benefit and to remove ambiguity. Otherwise, the diffusion section does not have a saver. Therefore, does that amendment take care of that ambiguity?

MS KABAHENDA: The voluntary members who have been attracted to NSSF are not mandatory contributors. They are going to be savers who have free entry and exit. For the mandatory people, who are supposed to be putting their money in NSSF; both salary and contributions from the employers is mandatory and they do not exit at the time they want. The exit is according to the speculated age eligibility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The clarification is in the words, “from contributors to savers”.

MS KABAHENDA: The voluntary will be savers and the other workers will be mandatory contributors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Contributors relate to those who contribute under an obligation but under the law, the employers and employees must contribute. The savers are those who voluntarily take their money and keep it there until they need it. Is that what you asked?

MR MPUUGA: Yes and No. Yes, because the distinction is clear. No, because I am trying to establish whether at mid-term access, the savers - if you look at the wording, when it comes to mid-term access, it is about contributors. Therefore, what happens to the savers, when it comes to mid-term access?

MS AMONGI: Honourable Chairperson, I am actually going to introduce an amendment to delete the word “voluntary” because mid-term access is not only envisaged to be benefiting only voluntary savers. Mid-term access is supposed to benefit both regular savers and voluntary savers. I hope I am clear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. They say free entry, free exit. Would that apply to a voluntary saver, who has free entry and free exit? Why would you talk about mid-term access for a person who wants his or her money anytime? Otherwise, they are under no obligation to keep it there because they have voluntarily put it there and they can get it anytime they want. Therefore, why are you giving them mid-term access? That is the question.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, first, I want the word “voluntary” in the current Bill to be deleted. This is because the original beneficiaries for this provision are those who are current regular contributors of the fund. Therefore, the committee’s proposal to replace the word “contributions” with “savings” would also not apply because in the current law, you are a contributor and not a saver.

Therefore, if the Leader of the Opposition’s clarity is to be embraced and with your guidance, Mr Chairperson, then we would just deal with the regular savers and leave the voluntary savers since they come and exit at any time. We are bringing them now in the Bill for the purpose of allowing any person who would like to save with the fund to come and save.
In that case, the amendment in clause 12 to insert in the proposed section 24A (2) (c) would read - 
“A member who has made a contribution to the fund shall be allowed mid-term access to his or her benefits accrued from the savings or contribution.” We again removed the word “voluntary”.

Mr Chairperson, I, therefore, propose that we delete the word “voluntary”, immediately after the word “made” and retain the word  “contributions”, which means that the committee’s proposal to  replace the word “contribution” with “saving” would not be acceptable. Then the word “voluntary” immediately after the word “accrued from the…” So, the word “voluntary” will be deleted and we retain the word “saving”.

Mr Chairperson, I also want to retain the words “such terms and conditions and in a manner prescribed by the board…” in subsection (2), in the amendment of clause 12, for an insertion of section 24A in the principal Act. The committee is proposing deletion of that. However, yesterday, we agreed that in the regulations, there would be terms and conditions. The principle of 45 years of age and above would stand. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, section 24A in the Bill talks about voluntary savers and it needs to be deleted so that we remain with subsections (2) and (3), where subsection (2) becomes subsection (1) and subsection (3) becomes subsection (2).

We have 24A(1) which reads - 
(1) a member who is 45 years of age, who has contributed to the fund under section 7 for the last ten years is eligible for mid-term access” so that we do not talk about the voluntary savers since they voluntarily come and exit the way they come.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. To be fair, it should have been “a member who has reached 45 years is eligible to access the fund or who has saved for 10 years.” The word “and” should be deleted.

The Chairperson: No, we are not reviewing that. We took that decision a long time ago. 

Mr luttamaguzzi: Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

Mr ssemujju: Mr Chairperson, I need to be helped. I thought and I want to agree with both the chairperson and the minister - If we passed Clause 7 that has, “The Board shall, by regulations, prescribe the procedure for making voluntary contribution and benefits” my feeling is that everything to do with voluntary contribution should be left there. The board may determine when they want them to leave such that after it has taken decisions to guide, you then take a decision whether to start voluntary contribution or not. 

You do not subject statutory contributions to “voluntary” so we can leave them in just one section of the law introducing them and giving the board the responsibility to deal with all their affairs.

Mr odur: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. First of all, in the interpretation section on page four, we already defined under (g), what a contribution means. It is stated here that “contribution” means “standard contribution”, “voluntary contribution” and “special contribution.” I think we should be reading that interpretation together with section 24. The minister could help reconcile this before we take a decision. 

Secondly, under Clause 7, which is seeking to amend, we already provided for this voluntary contribution. My understanding from the explanation is that this was introduced to help people who have been left out or who have been exploited by other schemes to have an alternative where they can save for their retirement. 

The principle with voluntary savings is that I should come in and when I want to leave or I need my money, I should be able to access it straight away, which is very different from the mandatory savings. That should be quite clear. If it pleases the minister, let us have two provisions; full access for people who have voluntary saving. They can come in at any time and the regulations can prescribe things like the disturbances and the inconveniences that the Fund will go through to give them their money.

However, for mandatory, which is where this mid-term access is coming from, it should stand on its own because this is for people who are under the mandatory. That is my proposal.

The Chairperson: I had already picked the Member for Manjiya who always deputises when you are not here, Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

Mr nambeshe: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. My understanding is that the mid-term access should be for both mandatory and voluntary savers because the contributors are those that contribute consecutively; monthly contributions. The saver could also have done the same consistently for 10 years but then because of emergencies or some eventualities, they skip a month or so and would qualify as a voluntary saver. Both voluntary and mandatory savers should be accommodated to this mid-term access. 

The Chairperson: No, the principle established is that for the voluntary contributor, I bring my money anytime I want; I take it out anytime I want. So, I do not need mid-term access to my money because I can get it when I want. I am just trying to explain where we have reached with this so that there is a distinction between the mandatory contributor, who by law must keep the money there until a certain period but now who is being given this leeway of mid-term access; 45 years of age and should have contributed for at least 10 years. Those ones are entitled to mid-term access.

However, the other ones – I had already picked the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr mpuuga: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The submission of the honourable minister settles my spirit, save for clarity on the fact that we do not have any attendant conditions on the voluntary saver. That should be unequivocally stated to avoid the contradiction. 

Secondly, we need not forget the fact that these amendments were occasioned by a national crisis. In my view, we have not taken care of occasional emergencies because we have conditioned them to a particular age and saving period. Should we get into a crisis and you need to take care of the savers, and you do not have to invoke the 45-year rule and the 10-year saving period, what have you planned to the workers in terms of an emergency? We have not established emergency access but put up strict conditions on age and saving period. 

My sense is that we have not provided for emergency situations –

The Chairperson: Like?

Mr mpuuga: We could plunge into a recession occasioned by dis-equilibrium in the economy and therefore, the need for an intervention. I am not looking at 10 per cent or 20 per cent but I want to invite the minister. Would it hurt this legislation if provision is made for an emergency and a percentage less than 20 without conditions of age and the saving period?

Mr kiryowa kiwanuka: Mr Chairperson, first of all, sections 22, 23 and 24 of the principal Act have made provisions for those circumstances. Where a person has got an accident, has been rendered invalid or they are no longer working, they can get all their money. That is provided for.

Secondly, honourable members, we need to be mindful of the fact that this is a Fund. It is not a bank so the money is not sitting there. Every time we make these provisions for quick access, that means you are depleting the ability of the Fund to invest. If we can perceive it then we can write it. If we cannot perceive it then we should not because then it distorts the entire existence of the Fund. 

Mr Chairperson, the Leader of the Opposition asked us to make a statement that the voluntary saver will be able to get the money whenever they want. Again, I say this is a Fund. That is why in Clause 13A, which we have just passed, there will be conditions for saving and taking your benefits. The voluntary saver will know that if I put my money in this Fund and I want it, I have to wait for 50 days, 10 days or whatever the Fund will work out. That way, you voluntarily enter into this arrangement fully aware of when you can get your money. 

Mr Chairperson, on clause 24A, the committee is proposing to remove subclause 24A(1) that creates the right to mid-term access. Subclause 24(2) creates the condition. Therefore, if you remove clause 24A, you have removed the right for a person to have mid-term access. 

Mr Chairman, I propose that Section 24A is left to be dealt with by the contributors; the ones who already exist. We should just remove the word “voluntary” and say, “A member who has made contributions to the fund shall be allowed to access his or her benefits accrued from the contributions on such terms and conditions…” We can actually remove “on such terms and conditions” because yesterday, we provided for “three” which is going to set the regulations. We have set two fundamental conditions, which is age and time of saving. If all the regulations made can only be to facilitate that. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I would like you to firmly propose what you want us to consider.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: I propose firmly, Mr Chairman, that 24A be carried as follows: “a member who has made…-

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is clause 24A (1)? 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Yes and I propose it reads: “A member who has made contributions to the fund shall be allowed mid-term access to his or her benefits accrued from the contributions.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? I see all the workers representatives, including the man from West Budama. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the learned Attorney-General for those very eloquent submissions. The problem his submission raises is: what then do we do with clause 24 (a) (2)? What he talked about is captured in 24 (2). 

Section 24A (1) should remain as it is and I will explain. The learned Attorney-General gives the justification that this is a fund. So, if you make voluntary contributions to the fund, you must accept to be governed by the terms and conditions provided for by the fund. There is free entry but there is no free exit. The exit is conditioned upon the regulations. Therefore, clause 24A(1) should remain as it is to provide for the entry and exit by voluntary contributors. 

Section 24A (2) deals with mandatory contributions; the two are different but are both relevant and so, we should deal with both. 

Mr Chairman, the other fear is that I foresee a circumstance where voluntary contributors will have more money in the fund than mandatory contributors in the long run. If we allow them to freely exit, there will be a run in on the fund and it will collapse. We should provide for that. I thank you.

MR MUGOLE: Mr Chairman, just rightly from the submission of hon. Ssemujju and the chairperson of the committee, every contributor becomes a saver. Once you contribute, you become a saver. So, on the definition of “contributors and savers”, I saw something unclear. Once you contribute, whether voluntarily or mandatorily, you become a saver. You can contribute for only 10 years but continue saving for the next eight years. You will also be eligible for mid-term access, yet, you contributed only for two years. Therefore, I wanted that clarity made. 

Secondly, I would like to agree with the learned Attorney-General. There are voluntary contributions currently at NSSF but one cannot withdraw as and when they want because it is a fund. Voluntary contributions also do not stop at only those who are not saving with NSSF; even those saving with NSSF mandatorily can also voluntarily contribute. 

That is the money that the Leader of the Opposition talked about where if there is a crisis, one can withdraw but the mandatory saving is only the 20 per cent of mid-term access and the old age. You can withdraw your savings voluntarily but on such terms, as agreed to by the board, in consultation with the minister. I just wanted to make that clarification. 

Therefore, where the committee had suggested substituting the word “contributions” with the word “saving”, I think that would not be right. Let us remain with the word “contributions.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have resolved that. Honourable members, there is one matter to be resolved. From the submissions from the Member for West Budama – I am hoping that he has listened to what you have said properly. What he is proposing is not what you are saying. He said that even a voluntary contributor cannot exit as and when they want. That is what he said, - [Mr Stephen Mugole: “Exactly.”] - Would you like to listen first? 

If we are clear on that issue, then the substance of the amendment would make sense to remove the word “voluntary” because the mid-term access would only apply to mandatory savers. It will not apply to voluntary savers because their conditions of access are different. They can access part of their savings anytime, based on the conditions imposed or they can access all of it anytime. 

Even for the mandatory contributor, who has an additional contribution voluntarily, that component “voluntarily contributed” does not fit within the proposed Section 24A. Are we clear on that? If we are clear on that, let me hear what you have to say.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with the proposal moved by the Member from West Budama that we retain clause 24A (1), which was put to cater for clause 13 (a). It means that the people saving more or above the statutory requirement can access their voluntary savings. This provision caters for that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought I had tried to summarise clearly but apparently not. Yes, honourable.
    
MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would not like to disagree with my colleagues but I think you explained that in 24, if we added the word “mandatory” then it would separate the two. As of now, we are looking at mandatory savings. 

Therefore, I agree that after separating the two with the word “mandatory” then the other one remains a contributor, like any other because right now, we are looking at how to save or how these people can access their 20 per cent. This is because of the crisis that exists. If we have called them “mandatory”, then the other one stands on its own. I agree with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In section 24A, the subject is “mid-term access” to benefits; that is what he is talking about. So does mid-term access apply to voluntary savers, and I think the conclusion has been no. So then the word “voluntary” cannot stay in 24A(1) because it is wrong housing for it; is that correct?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I suggest that the minister guides us here because my understanding at first was that 24 (A)(1) was restricting itself to voluntary; the one we are calling “willing in, willing out” and it does not have to be somebody who has saved for 10 years, it does not need 45 years but only the terms and conditions that the board will prescribe. 

So 21A (1) in this Bill, was only for those voluntary savers. Then the one in 24A(2) is the one for mandatory - their conditions of withdrawal. That is what I wanted the minister first to clarify. If that is clear, then it is going to be very easy for us to move because we are mixing the two.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, 24A(1) had envisaged the issue of voluntary contributors, but also encompassed the aspect of the right to access.

Therefore, after examining the committee's amendment under 7, which we have already passed, it says, “The Minister shall, in consultation with the board, by regulation, prescribe the procedure for making voluntary contributions and benefits.” 

We now feel that this provision we already passed under 7 should explicitly deal with voluntary contribution because it is addressing the issue of the procedure that you will follow to make your voluntary contribution and access the benefits, which shall be by regulation. So, let us detach anything voluntary under this provision. Then 24A we now delete anything to do with voluntary and only leave the principle of access to 241 and 242 shall be the principle of terms or conditions for access. That is the submission – (Interruption) 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. From your submission, I would like to imagine that you may want to recommit or revisit 7 because it leaves the situation of the voluntary saver a bit uncertain. Probably my documents are not complete, but it leaves it a bit in balance. In addition, I had envisaged a situation where you need to clearly distinguish the conditions of the voluntary saver and the mandatory saver. 

If we can properly frame 7 without having to refer to the regulations because for the regulations, whereas for the mandatory, we are complete in 24 but we are not as complete in 7 (for the voluntary savers) and that is where I find a bit of problem. If we do so completely in 7, there is no need to discuss the voluntary saver in 24. We would house their needs and conditions in 7 and settle their matter. 

Honourable minister and learned Attorney-General, we should not legislate and forget the objective of legislation. Are we intentioned on growing this Fund or making it very difficult for people to love to be part of the Fund? Remember, we do not have a liberalised system but we want to encourage people to save. One of the attractions is; I can access it when I need it. In absence of what I call an emergency fund, we need to put up a condition where even involuntarily savers have a window to tell them it is “Volenti non fit injuria”; so, voluntary assumption of risk - you put in money but to access it, you should please wait, we are still looking at the conditions. 
Mr Chairperson, can we be very clear to the voluntary saver and create an environment attractive to grow the Fund and attract savings? Because, that is our desire beyond having to lock in the voluntary saver and say, “yours is different” because for the mandatory saver, it is very clear and there is no ambiguity. Clarify for me the conditions for the voluntary saver and then we migrate.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I thank the Leader of the Opposition, and I want to start with the principal Act to state that in the principal Act, 10 deals with voluntary membership. It delves into how the employer, who is not registered, can be registered, how employees can be registered, and how a statutory instrument that is in the principal Act –

What we have just passed under 7 also has inserted Section 13A on voluntary contribution. It deals with the issue of; “A member may make voluntary contribution to the fund over and above his/her standard contribution.” 
“A member who wishes to make a voluntary contribution or may authorise his –” 

Therefore, if you read the whole of 13, it also spells out aspects to do with the voluntary contribution. So both in the principal Act under 10 and what we have inserted under 7, deals with the key principles of your concern. 

However, the 7 which we have passed, equally mandates the minister in consultation with the board to now make specific provisions for procedures of how you can make voluntary contribution and access the benefit. 

So, I would really think that we do not need to recommit because these two deal with the principle and gives the power to now make regulation to further give details of what your concern would be.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Bakkabulindi?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. When you look at Section 24A: mid-term access benefits, and you look at what we passed yesterday, the amendment of the committee; “Where the minister shall, in consultation with the board…” – I would have said, we have now catered for the voluntary. I would even say we could delete the 24A(1). 

However, for purposes of bringing it to the body, it does no harm to show that even the voluntary person can access but with conditions on the mid-term and that, at the same time, the tagging of 45 years does not affect the voluntary person. 

Therefore, I do not see anything that is disturbing here, except that we can say that a member who has made voluntary contributions to the fund shall be allowed mid-term access to his benefits, subject to the regulations of the board, in consultation with the minister. And then the details will be in the regulations. 

So, what we have done now is packing it in the body of the law and at the same time expanding it in the regulations. I do not see any vagueness in it and I propose that we move and we do not recommit the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are taking us back, and this is how you are taking us back: It has been agreed, from what I have gathered, that a voluntary contributor is not a beneficiary of mid-term access. And the reason is that the voluntary contributor can access that money, all of it or part of it anytime they want; they are not restricted. So, because law restricts the other contributor or the mandatory contributor is restricted by law not to access anything except under those exceptions created like a person has suffered an accident and can no longer work, medical situation and all these things that the exceptions created to give this person access. This is the only way in the law as it is now. 

We are saying that because of this situation that has happened, we now grant them additional access called mid-term access. This mid-term access is only applicable to the mandatory contributor because that person cannot access the money. The mandatory contributor is now being given a right of mid-term access by the provision of this amendment. That is the purpose. 

Therefore, section 24A cannot be dealing with voluntary contributors. You cannot take us back there. Let us move. I think we are clear. 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Can I concede now. Let us delete 24A (1) on voluntary contribution and we move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it necessary? We have proposed to remove the word “voluntary” so that you remain with the contributor only; the mandatory one, who is now being considered for mid-term access. Is it necessary to delete one? It is only necessary to delete the word “voluntary” and that had been agreed on. Can we proceed? Hon. Ssemujju, do you still have a matter to raise? 

MR SSEMUJJU: No, Mr Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Can we proceed, honourable members?  

MR ESENU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I was just looking at the slight error made by the drafting committee. I think the location of 24A, which talks about mid-term access – if you look at the main Act –, comes under the heading of survivors’ benefits. The two are different. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Survivor’s benefit is when the contributor has died. 

MR ESENU: That is correct. I suggest that section 24A comes immediately after the age – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we leave that to the drafting people to harmonise it? Thank you. I am going to put the question to the amendment because they have proposed that we remove the word “voluntary”. I put the question to the amendment to delete the word “voluntary” from clause 12, section 24A (1). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no other amendment in clause 12. So, I will put the question – 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, the committee has proposed to delete the words “not exceeding” in section 24A(2) and replace it with the word “of”. It would then make it read -  “(2) a member who is 45 years of age and above and who has made contributions to the Fund under section 7 for 10 years is legible to mid-term access to his or her benefits of a sum of 20 per cent”. This means that it is mandatory, whether you want to or not, you must requisition for 20 per cent. 

The reason we had said “not exceeding” was because we envisaged some people saying “I do not want all my 20 per cent”. So, you should give room for someone who does not want 20 per cent. 

If the committee feels that the words “not exceeding” can be abused by the minister, we could create exceptions. I would propose to add the words “except where the member voluntarily requests a sum below 20 per cent” so that we provide for that discretion for a member who might not want to withdraw up to 20 or the actual 20 per cent to have leverage to withdraw. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What you are proposing is to just come back to what the Bill says. So, why change it? 
MS AMONGI: I want it to be like that but the argument from the committee member was that if you say “not exceeding”, then the minister can have discretion and even someone who wants 20 per cent, might use that discretion to deny that someone. 

This is why I wanted to satisfy their doubt; that we leave the principle of 20 per cent to stand alone and we provide for exceptions. I leave it to the House but I want the House to understand that there might be people who will not come and say “I want 20 per cent or 10 per cent or 15 per cent”. If we leave it the way the committee is proposing, it ties everybody to demand for 20 per cent. 

If it so pleases the House, we can retain what is in the Bill. But if it pleases the committee that we settle the doubt, then we make an exception. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the provision as is in the Bill gives the latitude to a member who wants mid-term access to apply for 5, 10 or 20 per cent but not exceeding 20 per cent. Now, the fear of the committee is that the minister can restrict that. If the minister did that, he would be acting outside the provision of the Principal Act. In which case, that regulation would be nullified. If that is comfortable enough, the provision as is in the Bill would be satisfactory. Is that okay? 

MS KABAHENDA: Chairperson, when we go to 24A (3), the minister is given the prerogative in consultation with the board to prescribe these terms. That is where our fear came from; that he or she may use this discretion to even go to determine the percentage that should be accessed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That would be outside what the law says. The minister has not been given that power. Where would this minister get these powers from? Certainly not from the Act.  

MR ODUR: The learned Attorney-General had conceded to a very important fact. That if the words “terms and conditions” can be removed – he was okay with it so that it just reads “procedure for accessing”. What the minister would do, would be to prescribe the procedure. I remember the Attorney-General said that he is okay with the words “terms and conditions” since it would take care of the concerns of the committee. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, the drafting as it is – we were having a discussion of the provision earlier and we discussed this. I was explaining to you that any person who makes a statutory instrument, which is outside the principles and the wording of the law would be illegal. 

The minister cannot change the terms or conditions set in the Act. He or she cannot change the age, the percentage or the years of contribution. However, he or she could ask you for a national ID. He could ask you to fill out a form. That is a term and condition; to fill forms. If you want to get this money, the terms and conditions are as follows: fill the form, bring it on Tuesday, you will get it in 10 days. I think this provision is good. 

As the Chairperson has rightly guided, any statutory instrument made by the minister, which is outside this principle will be null and void. I pray that we allow the provision to stand as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course we adopted his initial proposal in (1) where we were stopping at a certain point. Did we take a vote on that one? We will take the vote on the initial amendment as proposed by the Attorney-General, where we were stopping at contributions. We will take a vote on that after the Leader of the Opposition raises what he needs to raise. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am seeking the comfort of the chairperson of the committee and the minister where a member qualifies and we have left the time period within which one would access the funds open. When you meet all the conditions and you apply, what would then happen? What if you apply in January and by December, the files are still moving? Are we able to move clearly in the Bill and prescribe the time period from when the application is submitted to put pressure on the system to process members’ application faster? This is because the tendency in these funds is that the delays will become so inordinate and it loses essence as a result. Is the chairperson or minister comfortable with this gap?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, we have tried to address that by ensuring that these regulations are done within a limited time so that all these things are brought to the information of Parliament within the 60 days. It will be very difficult for us to legislate on the date and process and say, “If you deliver the statement, you take it to this desk and then move it here and back”. 

We will insist, if the law is passed as it is, that in 60 days, this whole process is brought to Parliament in its completeness. We shall also take your guidance, Mr Leader of the Opposition, into consideration to ensure the process because there is a purpose. The purpose was to help someone get out of a difficult situation. Therefore, the fund must be mindful of that. That is why we even conceded to the 60 days as opposed to 90 days that the minister wanted to expedite this process. The Bill has been here too long; we really want to put it behind us. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Can we now take a decision on the matter? 

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Chairman, there is this narrative about unemployed people who have been employed for a certain period of time. They have reached 45 years and they had been saving but they did not manage to save for a period of 10 years. There are so many of such cases in Northern Uganda. During the NGO time, they worked. Some of them worked for five, six or seven years. From that time until now, they have not secured any employment and neither do they have any savings. I am of the view that this provision of saving for at least 10 years should be amended and we reduce the number of years. 

Secondly, I am also of the view that for anybody who can prove, with a competent authority like a court of law, that they had saved for a period of time and he or she could not access any employment to reach the 10 years, they should be allowed to access their mid-term savings.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That is provided for in the law. If the person has been out of employment for a year and he can prove that he has not been employed for a period, they can apply to withdraw from the funds. Here, we are talking about people who are still in the fund who would like to get access to their money while they are still working. This is well provided for. 

Therefore, if you know of people in Northern Uganda who have been out of employment for 10 years and they have not been able to access their funds then – (Interjections) - That is a challenge and it is an administrative issue that you may want to bring to the attention of the minister so that it can be addressed. That would be abuse of the law as it exists.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you. If you have put it here under Section 7 that a member who is 45 years of age and had been saving for at least 10 years, it becomes so restrictive. Unless that clause - I have not read it anyway. You can help us, as the Attorney-General so that we see whether it cures those two areas. Somebody who has worked for less than 10 years and does not have a job may find it difficult to get a loan from the commercial banks because he or she does not have the ability to get it. You have your savings but you are no longer getting any money to do any small business. If it has been cured somewhere, please help us so that we at least – 

However, if it remains the way it is now, it is so restrictive. Somebody may interpret it that “the law does not provide for people who are 45 years old but have not saved for 10 years”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are two issues. One, are conditions that are already existing in the law as it is on how people can access money that they have contributed. One of them is where you have lost employment and now you cannot contribute. All you need to prove is that you have not been working for over a year and you need your money. That is already in the mother Act as it is.

What they are dealing with now is to create another exception because of this COVID-19 pandemic so that those who are still contributing and are continuing to contribute can have mid-term access to a percentage of what they have kept with the fund. That is what is being proposed now; another exception to grant access to members who are contributing.

The other one for losing a job after five years is taken care of in the law. The one that is not taken care of in the law is these ones who are still contributing and they are hard-pressed by the circumstances created by COVID-19 pandemic and they need some help from the funds that they already have. So, they are given mid-term access. We are dealing with mid-term access for people who are going to continue to contribute. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think you have made it clear now and because of that, we can proceed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 

MR BYAKATONDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, for the guidance. Further, I would like to allay the fears of the workforce, especially the honourable colleagues. This Bill that we are making is not a standalone. It derives its mandate from the International Labour Organisation’s (ILO) Convention; 102. You find that these conventions have a number of branches. 

Actually regarding things that are not mentioned like maternity, if the board thinks otherwise, it is okay. They say member countries are free to have at least three or four of the mandates. You find that things like housing and education, if the board deems it fit, are okay. 

Mr Chairman, this is basically to intervene regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Otherwise, most of these things are covered. If the board thinks otherwise, they can actually go for other branches like housing, education, maternity, survivors’ benefits and injury. That is what I wanted to propose as my input.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we take a decision and move on with the rest of the Bill please? I think this matter is clear now, isn’t it? Let us proceed. Learned Attorney-General, would you like to restate the amendment for decision in Clause 24A(1).

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I propose Clause 24A(1) to read, “A member who has made contributions to the Fund shall be allowed mid-term access to his or her benefits accrued from the contribution.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed in clause 12 on 24A(1). I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other matter on clause 12?

MS ACAN: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give more justification on section 24 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have enough justification and we are about to make a decision. Would you like to allow us to take the decision now or unless you disagree with how far we have come?

MS ACAN: It is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? I now put the question that clause 12, as amended, stands part of this Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13
MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, in clause 13, we propose to insert a new clause, immediately after clause 13 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, then we should deal with clause 13 first because you are inserting a new clause immediately after it.

MS KABAHENDA: Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 13, agreed to.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new clause immediately after clause 13, to read as follows: “Amendment of section 34 of the Principal Act: section 34 of the Principal Act is amended as follows: 
(i) By substituting subsection (2) with the following:
2) A member’s account in the Fund shall be closed and his or her membership shall cease on the happening of any of the following events:
a) When an immigration grant is paid;
b) When a member voluntarily opts out of the Fund upon receipt of the member’s total age benefit under Section 20 of this Act or;
c) When a member dies and his or her survivors’ benefits are paid out in accordance with Section 24 of this Act.”
(ii) By substituting subsection (3) with the following: 
    a. “(3) if, on the closing of the member’s account under subsection (2), any sum of money is standing to the credit of his or her in the Fund and is unclaimed in the subsequent period of seven years, that money shall vest into the minister who shall pay it into the reserve account;” 
    b. By inserting, immediately after subsection (3), the following: “(3) (a) the board shall, every year, publish the names and details of all dormant members’ accounts in the Fund in the newspaper of wide circulation within Uganda.”

Justification:
    1. To allow continued voluntary saving of a member even after the age of 60 years;
    2. To minimise the possibility of a member’s money being prematurely deposited into the reserve account; and
    3. To put on notice any member or dependant with interest in the dormant account. 
I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, for the amendments moved. The issues related to the member for the money so lying idle and become the property of the minister. I am trying to imagine whether we can have, in addition to these conditions precedent, a clause for appeal in the event that the minister partakes of this erroneously and subsequently, the beneficiaries emerge after the money has been paid to the reserve account. 

I do not know whether the chairperson does see that possibility of this because I do not see a provision for appeal. We need to take cognizance of possibilities, in this fair land, that a situation can emerge when someone is away, either voluntarily or involuntarily and by the time they emerge, their humble savings have been appropriated, Mr Chairman.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a fundamental problem with the proposal in (d) and the problem is constitutional. Money is property in the first principle of law. Right to private property is guaranteed and protected by the Constitution of the Republic Of Uganda.

I would like guidance from the Attorney-General on whether this particular proposal does not amount to expropriation to compulsory acquisition of private property and whether the seven year dormancy of accounts is a justifiable cause for expropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May be, we should also deal with the question: where is this reserve account housed?

MR KIWANUKA-KIRYOWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is a proposal from the committee but the reserve account is in the Principal Act. That reserve account has always existed to deposit money belonging to the unknown. It exists, it is an account.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR KIWANUKA KIRYOWA: In the Bank. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is it in the bank or Fund?

MR KIWANUKA-KIRYOWA: Mr Chairman, you ask a very interesting question; I cannot say I have a direct answer to it. However, I think I should ask where this reserve account is. Anyway, to answer the question of the Leader of Opposition–(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: If I got the question right, NSSF runs an account where they put money for the unknown. There are companies that deposit money and do not indicate the beneficiaries. There was a time they had more than either Shs 200 million or Shs 20 billion. It is on the account of NSSF but the beneficiaries are not indicated.

Therefore, that is the money they deposit there as they begin hunting down who the beneficiaries are. There are companies that are irresponsible; they just submit a total without indicating the beneficiaries.

MR KIWANUKA-KIRYOWA: In fact, currently, NSSF’s suspense account for monies that are not -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are now talking of suspense account yet, we are talking about the reserve account.

MR MUGOLE: The NSSF has a suspense account where they keep that money, whereupon if there is no claimant, the minister sends it to the reserve account. Currently, it has been cleared from Shs 7 to Shs 2.7 billion.

MR KIWANUKA-KIRYOWA: Thank you for the information. To answer the Leader of Opposition, section 36 of the Principal Act has made provision for that situation where an error has been made. For example, I contribute my money and it is sent to the reserve account. That can be withdrawn if it is a mistake. They can send it back to where it is supposed to be – and to answer hon. Oywelowo’s question, it is not an expropriation. You have given it to me, I did not take it. The only thing is that you have brought it to NSSF and NSSF does not know where to put it but puts it somewhere waiting for you to come with details. So, I did not take it and so, it is not expropriation. 

The Chairperson: But is there a process of appeal or the law already takes care of that?

Mr kiryowa KIWANUKA: Yes, the process of appeal is, actually inbuilt. I think that is section – but there is a procedure where you have a complaint about your account – when your statement is not clear. That process should answer that question. If your money cannot be found, that is how you appeal. However, this money remains available to the Fund until it is explained away. If a person shows up, they will always have the money available.

The Chairperson: The Leader of the Opposition was very worried that this money is going to the Minister. (Laughter)

Mr odur: Mr Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi had made proposals and touches on this particular matter for an amendment, which has been circulated on Section 36 of the principal Act, which talks about the reserve account. There is also a proposal for Section 35. When it comes to that, he has given me permission to move this amendment that will address some of the concerns that are being discussed now. 

The Chairperson: Very good. So, can we now conclude with this particular – oh we are on the new clause. 

Ms amongi: Mr Chairperson, I want to introduce amendments that will define the “minister” as the Minister responsible for Finance because this clause is amending section 34 of the principal Act. Section 34(c) states, “…and if on the closing of the member’s account by virtue of this subsection, any sum of money is standing to the credit of his or her account in the Fund, the sum shall vest in the minister forthwith.”

Here, I want to replace the word “minister” with “Minister responsible for Finance.” 

On subsection (3), “Any sum standing to the credit of the account of a member which has vested in the minister by virtue of subsection (2).” 
Again, I want to substitute the word “minister” with the words, “Minister responsible for Finance.” This is because matters related to members’ accounts are financial matters. Therefore, the Minister responsible for Finance shall take the lead in this particular aspect. 

Ms kabahenda: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want to affirm what I said yesterday that the Minister in charge of Social Security and Labour will oversee all this. It is good that she is bringing “Minister of Finance” as an in-section definition. Therefore, our definition for “minister” in the Bill still stands. I submit.

The Chairperson: The question is; do you agree with the amendment? 

Ms kabahenda: I agree with her, Mr Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: Thank you very much. After the chairperson has agreed, what does the Member for West Budama have to say about this?

Mr odoi-oywelowo: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I beg for your indulgence to grant me some five minutes to deal with this issue. Two legs; the first one, I will tell you a short story and then for the second one I will address you –

The Chairperson: I think you leave the story. Let us deal with the substance. (Laughter)

Mr odoi-oywelowo: Mr Chairperson, the story is very relevant. It is my illustration –

The Chairperson: You are the one who has messed it up. Now, go to the real thing.

Mr odoi-oywelowo: Of the proposed amendment. A West African country went to the World Bank to borrow money for a project known as “Rabbit multiplication project” – for the multiplication of rabbits. There arose a dispute between two ministries; the one of finance and that of agriculture on where the loan should be housed. 

In that West African country, every time they borrowed the loan had to be domesticated by legislation. The people from the ministry of finance argued that since these were monetary matters, the rabbit multiplication project should be housed in the ministry of finance. The people in the ministry of agriculture argued that rabbit multiplication is an agricultural function and the loan should be housed in the Ministry of Agriculture. 

However, there was also a third leg – the peasants of that country who argued that the country did not have to borrow in the first place. Rabbits produce without any prompting. Actually, the peasants argued that rabbits are the only animals that mate immediately after a litter; the male will be on top of the female one immediately after. 

The proposal by the honourable Minister brings this debate exactly to that ambit. She is proposing that we debate whether funds for rabbit multiplication should be controlled by the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Gender. I am shocked this came from her. We have told her consistently that she is the line manager of the Fund – the National Social Security Fund. 

The Minister is now saying 0774543727 that the funds that are not claimed should be managed by the Minister of Finance and our position is that these funds should still remain a property – the Attorney-General has just given us the assurance that these funds will still remain a property of NSSF accessible to a member who may come up at any time even after the expiry of the seven years. I do not know why she wants to pass on this to the Ministry of Finance. 

The second one is the de minimis rule. The Romans dealt with the interface of the law and issues and came up with a principle – an enduring legal principle; De minimis non curat lex translated into the official language of this House, “Of trivia, the law has no cure.” These are trivial issues – small issues that we should not be dealing with in this piece of legislation. They are in the periphery. 

I do not know whether my sister – and I have a lot of respect for her – cannot rise and withdraw this amendment. Or, if she is suggesting that she does not have capacity to deal with all matters pertaining to the Fund, she should also state so on record. I beg to submit. (Laughter)

Ms opendi: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Recall that there was an issue that was controversial as to which minister should be responsible for this Fund – the NSSF Fund.

Yesterday, we were informed by the Attorney-General that there was, after lengthy discussions involving different stakeholders, an agreement that the Minister responsible for Gender, Labour and Social Development will be in charge of this Fund. However, on matters regarding finances, it will be the Minister of Finance. 

Therefore, I do not know why we should spend time again discussing this matter when the Minister of Gender has come up clearly to say, “This one is financial; let it be for the Minister of Finance.” 

My brother from West Budama, I know, there is talking about rabbits and finance - whether rabbits should be in Finance or Agriculture, I think there are no rabbits here. Let us go by the minister's proposal and move on, Mr Chairperson. Thank you.(Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The person in charge of the Bill has made a proposal to improve what she had initially proposed to Parliament.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of Members to the current Principal Act 16, which has another minister. It is payment in respect of certain Government employees. It says, “The Treasury may make payments to the Fund in respect of those Government employees, specified by the Minister responsible for Public Service who are under fifty years of age.” 

It is already a legal precedent that in one law, if expertise is in another ministry, you can make a provision for the function of that minister in the law. This will not take away the fact that the lead minister responsible for this particular aspect is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Therefore, it is for harmony and placing expertise, where it is but still working together. 

My honourable colleague, I am very capable. I thank you for having the confidence in me. For purposes of harmony, let us put the aspect where members accounts have expertise - and we will still remain with other financial matters, which include issues related to the budget for the Fund; the supplementary budget, the main budget, approval of the budget, overseeing the management and appointment of the board, appointment of the Managing Director (MD), Deputy MD, and all the staff under the Minister in charge of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

This is a small issue of members’ accounts; borrowing and auditing. That is what we are proposing to take to the Ministry of Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a new clause. The proposal has been amended and we have adopted the amendments. I now put the question that the new clause as amended stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
New clause, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the honourable minister has something to say. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to introduce insertion of new clauses before the chairperson completes her amendment – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairperson, I need your guidance. If the minister responsible for this Bill did not introduce an amendment before the committee, can she, at this stage, introduce new content that we have not processed? I need your guidance, Mr Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am actually not sure where that is coming from. We have just concluded a decision on a proposal for a new clause, which we have adopted. I was waiting for the Clerk to call the next point of our decision. 
Honourable remembers, we are now handling clause 14. If there is any proposal before clause 14, this would be it but if it is after clause 14 or any decisions to be taken on clause 14, this is the moment. Hon. Odur - 

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Like I said earlier, hon. Nandala-Mafabi had sought to amend section 36(b) of the Principal Act. The notice was lodged to your office and it was shared. I would like to move it on his behalf now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Is it a new clause? 

MR ODUR: It is not a new clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What clause is it amending?

MR ODUR: It is amending section 36 of the Principal Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 14 is amending section 39.

MR ODUR:  Yes and I thought since section 36 of the Principal Act is before section 39, it could be addressed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR ODUR: The proposal is to amend section 36(b) to provide that money received from unidentified persons be transferred to the Consolidated Fund within one year of collection. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi informed me that he had consulted the Attorney-General and he was okay with this amendment. 

The justification is: 
    1. Any lost property, which has no owner, belongs to the State and the State takes custody until the owner is found. 
    2. These funds transferred to the Consolidated Fund can be claimed by any one person, if at such a point, that person becomes available. 
    3. The Government never ends, and hence, is the custodian of lost property. If one Government ends, it is safe there. 
    4. This will avoid abuse of these funds by NSSF, since it has no owner and lacks accountability. 
    5. This will assist to identify unclaimed funds by the beneficiaries. 

That is the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am just wondering how that sits with the honourable member for West Budama.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I still have the same problem with the proposed amendment- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I think this is where the real issue is. We sorted the other one. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: There is a fundamental problem with this proposed amendment, Mr Chairman. First, it is not true that any unclaimed property belongs to the state. However, let us look at the economics. If there are funds that are not claimed for a period of time, those funds are better off staying in the possession of NSSF; NSSF is better off trading or investing those funds and generating more income. If you send it to the Consolidated Fund, it becomes income for the Government. 

Secondly, we know where Consolidated Fund derives its revenue from. It is in the Constitution; taxes are one of them. All Government monies are deposited in the Consolidated Fund, not members’ contributions, honourable colleagues. I request the learned Attorney-General to withdraw his consent to this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He has not yet owned it. Honourable members, please, let us deal with this. By taking funds from the Fund and transferring it to the Consolidated Fund, is already wrong in principle. How do you now get money from the Consolidated Fund? We have to propose a budget, come to Parliament - on my money; moreover private money (Applause) 

Hon. Odur, would you like to reconsider this amendment?

MR ODUR: Well, Mr Chairperson, I informed you that I moved it on behalf of my senior colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You took responsibility to shepherd it.

MR ODUR: Yes, I did and this is subject to discussion in this House; the powers for which I move it. Let Members debate and make a decision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we will just put it to vote. We will not have a debate on this matter. Let us put this matter to vote. The proposal is that the funds that are not claimed for the specific periods that have been stated in the amendment should revert to the Consolidated fund. That is the amendment being proposed. I put the question to the amendment that the funds be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable minister, do you have any new proposals?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have a new amendment of the principal Act which would insert - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Procedure -

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairperson, I have already raised this matter. In fact, the standard is like hon. Nandala-Mafabi has done. You write to the Speaker and you get the amendment circulated so we appreciate it.

Is the minister, therefore, proceeding well by ambushing Parliament and bringing new things that have not been considered by anyone?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, indeed the minister wrote on 18 November, addressed to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker; notice of amendments to the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021. This was circulated and actually, it is on the iPads as well. Therefore, the honourable minister has stated this on the record.

Would you like to receive what she is proposing and then we deal with it so that we do not waste time on the procedural matter? Let us hear what it is. If it is something we can accept, we accept. If it is not, we reject it.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, honourable chairperson. I would like to move a new insertion and new clauses to introduce substitution of the word “minister” in those sections with the words “minister responsible for finance” and that would include section 31 in the principal Act, which deals with the power to borrow.

“The board may, subject to prior approval of the minister, borrow money by way of loan or overdraft for the purpose of its obligation or discharging any office function under this Act upon such security and such terms and conditions related to the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest as the board deems fit.” In that, I propose to replace the word “minister” with the words “minister responsible for finance”.

32 - Accounts and Audit
It deals with proper keeping of books and records of accounts, receipt, expenditure of monies, financial transaction of the fund assets and liabilities.

I want to propose that where the reference of the minister is made under 32 and under 3, the board to submit to the minister a copy of audited statement of accounts, the “minister” there is replaced with the words “the minister responsible for finance.”

33 - Annual Report 
“The board shall not, later than six months after the end of each financial year, make and submit to the minister a report showing the performance of the fund during that financial year.”

Under 1, the “minister” is replaced with the words “minister responsible for finance” and under 2, “The minister shall, as soon as possible after receiving the report and a copy of audited books of accounts, cause the annual statement of the accounts and the report of the board to be published in the manner as the minister may direct.” 

In addition, in 2, the minister, under head note, paragraph 1 and under note paragraph 4, shall be replaced with “minister responsible for finance”.

We have already handled 34.

35 - Interest on Accounts
This gives power to the minister to declare the interest on members’ investments and accounts. Under 2, paragraph 2 where the minister, shall after consultation with the board, declare the rate of interest for that financial year, the reference to the “minister” be replaced with “minister responsible for finance.” 

35 (i) Minister, under paragraph -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing that in section 35 subsections 1,2,3,6 and 7, reference of the “minister” should be substituted and in its place, it should be “the minister responsible for finance”. Is that the proposal?

MS AMONGI:  Yes. The last one – 36, which is reserve accounts. The word “minister” is replaced by “minister responsible for finance”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I think this was the agreement. It is only implementing the decisions we took about this dual mandate on the specific issues of finance, audit and all those things while the overall supervisory authority remains with the ministry. Procedure -

MR BASALIRWA: I want to thank you, Mr Chairperson, for the guidance you are giving and I appreciate the minister. Yesterday, there was an issue regarding amendments and you were guiding us on the implications of rule 128 vis-a-vis rule 132.

The procedure issue I seek to raise relates to whether these proposed amendments were actually discussed in the committee and form part of the report of the committee to avoid the issue hon. Ssemujju raises of an ambush. 

Is this just enough for the minister to say, I wrote to the Speaker or the Clerk? All the proposed amendments must go to the committee and they are considered by the committee. The honourable from Agago yesterday also had the opportunity to canvass this matter and the implications of rules 128 and 132. What do we bring here for amendment and what goes to the committee for consideration? Mr Speaker, please provide some guidance on that aspect. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we reach Committee Stage of Bills, amendments are open with a condition that whatever you intend to propose as an amendment must be shared in advance so that it is internalised by Members, and then when you come to propose it, they can have a look and say no, we have looked at it, it is okay or we have looked at it, it is not okay, then they make the changes. 

The difference is when you just show up here, no communication to anybody and you just say amendment and the amendment is standing alone not riding on something that has just been proposed. That creates the complication we try to avoid.

These particular proposals were shared with all the Members; I have seen them. So, it does not fall within the other one, which would create confusion. This one has been looked at. Our technical people at Parliament have looked at it and that is why we accept that it can be considered. 

The proposal is that – 

MR MPUUGA: Thanks for your indulgence, Mr Chairman. We left this place yesterday, close to 7 o’clock. Ordinarily – at least on my side and my office, we were not privy to this, yet we had gone over all issues in this particular Bill. 

With due respect to the honourable minister, this House has two sides. You cannot share by ambush because that is indecent. For one to claim that I have it on my iPad – the iPad is not person-to-holder. When I receive a proposal, I share it. I am actually being ambushed. It is very rare that such – the amendments sought are not flimsy; they are fundamental. 

Therefore, I would like to make a humble proposal - because we are not considering these amendments to then lock away the Act. The consultations made by the honourable minister probably avoided me and so, I am unable to process them in a minute; I have just received this. In fact, as she read through, I was recording because even when I left office to come here, I had not seen them. 

I, therefore, decline to consider these as shared by ambush. Indirectly, we considered – when we were considering supervision – the participation of the two entities - we considered dual supervision and a decision was taken by this House on this matter. It is an indirect way of introducing dual supervision, this time round vide an ambush. 

When you look at them, you notice that all that we rejected is returning vide this. I need to be re-educated, that actually – I am trying to understand. What is gender running away from? What is wrong with gender receiving reports and directing actions on them? 

The Ministry of Finance, which seems to be a cloud hovering over Gender, is properly represented on the board of the entity. Why are we preoccupied with “minister” to mean Minister of Finance? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Leader of Opposition, the document that I received – and that is why I got my level of comfort that it was proper – is actually copied to you. It is copied to Prime Minister, 1st Deputy Prime Minister, 2nd Deputy Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition, Government Chief Whip, the Attorney-General and the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, among others.  

This is what I received and that is where I drew my comfort from; that there is a possibility – but be it as it may, we took a decision on the issues of financial and investment matters, and so on and so forth, that they be handled by the Ministry of Finance. The overall supervision of the Act remains with the Minister of Gender just like another aspect of this law is superintended over by the Minister of Public Service. These kinds of mandates are there but the overall supervisory responsibility rests with the Minister of Gender. 

The changes that are being proposed are consistent with our provision, that matters of borrowing and audited accounts should be left with the expertise of the minister of finance, who will then forward them for processing. When they are coming to the House, it is actually Gender that brings them to Parliament. But the actual works are done the way it has been agreed. 

I think we had gone over this and made some agreements yesterday, and so, we should not reopen this discussion today. We will just be delaying the process and it will not be helpful. So, I suppose that this amendment is in the spirit of what was agreed on. What is being proposed is actually implementing what we agreed on but we are now putting it in the law so that it is clear. 

I would propose that we consider it as it is and see if it conflicts fundamentally with the principles we adopted? If it does not, we move on. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Chairman. We have been moving well and the position has been harmonised. I would like to appreciate the leadership of the chairperson of the committee on these issues. I have not heard her comfort – whether she had consensus on this and they were shared with her as a critical person. Can we hear her voice on these proposed amendments, which I do not regard flimsy. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to reiterate that the minister in charge of social security and labour will be the overall minister. Earlier on, I wanted this – like the minister presented - to be just an in the definition section that is actually administrative, like Public Service does, Finance does but the overall supervisor of the NSSF Fund is the minister in charge of social security and labour. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we proceed, honourable members? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairperson, this is the reason the President did not assent to this Bill. I do not want anyone to hide. Someone can say the Speaker of Parliament will be the overall head of Parliament yet he will not chair Parliament – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will not be someone; it is the Constitution. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: I am just giving an example-(Laughter)-that he will not chair the Parliament and all the functions are taken away. It happened to me – if you can allow me, Mr Speaker. One of the – let me leave that, I do not want to follow the path of hon. Fox Odoi. But it happened. Someone was appointed overall head of an institution but all the functions were vested in someone else. 

Hon. Betty Amongi – I can see her conflicted because the appointing authority does not want her ministry – not her as a person but does not want her ministry to be the overall supervisor of NSSF. That is why you are now emasculating it; accepting to supervise but taking away everything. 

I was a member of NSSF until I came to this Parliament and I can tell you that institution has suffered. It has suffered multiple supervisions. The reason Finance wants it is beacuse they want to access that money, borrow it on whatever terms they like and even determine how to borrow it. 

I am really shocked by the way this Government works. Even things that are administrative – you people in Gender, if you want expertise in finance, must you put it in the law? I assume that all the technical people in Gender are competent. There are accountants there as well. And you have all of them. What does Finance have, in terms of technical people, that you do not have in Gender? Don’t you have accountants? Don’t you have economists? (Applause)

They are just – this is trickery; that they surrender NSSF to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so they begin accessing this money the way they have been doing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. “A Member shall not be permitted to suggest improper motive to another.” The rules say so. I am just restating them.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, if that was the implication of my statement, I apologise. I am expressing fears. We know how NSSF has been running. The fear is that the minister – You can imagine; these are amendments are 10. Everywhere there is the word, “minister”, she says we now remove and put the word, “finance”. So, for you, what are you going to supervise if you are sending everything to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Is it the buildings or the vehicles? (Laughter) It is because this amendment is crazy, from where it started, everything is “finance”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, it is your amendment. The honourable members for workers who are always volunteering information, why don’t you speak in these moments? (Interjection) None of you has stood up and yet you are here. 

MR BYAKATONDA: I would like to contribute, Mr Chairman, before - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not how we do it. 

MR BYAKATONDA: But what do we do? We have been standing – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We start with the minister always. 

MR BYAKATONDA: I am requesting that I make a contribution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I will give you the chance. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, I want to start by stating that this particular amendment is not coming now. You recall that this Bill was passed by the 10th Parliament and it was the one that introduced these provisions I am reading. I have the provisions of the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) which made proposals on Sections 31 to 36, and extracted certain functions to give to the Minister of Finance. 

On the analysis of the functions that are embedded in this Act, the first function is to mobilise workers to contribute. When they contribute – (Interjection) - yes, through our labour officers and the Government structures and others. The registration of workers’ organisations is done in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and they contribute. 

When they contribute, then the other function is to make sure that their contribution is safe and the NSSF has money to manage the Fund. That is what is called the budget for the Fund, which is still under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - to ensure that the annual budget for the Fund, whether it is a supplementary or any other funds, is managed by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The board is the supreme body of the Fund. The mandate to appoint the board has been given to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, including the Managing Director, Deputy Managing Director and all the staff of the Fund are those that will take investment decisions; those who will make sure that the books of accounts are kept well before they are audited. All those functions are with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The overseeing of the day-to-day management of the Fund will remain with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

When it came to those other functions related to borrowing - if the Fund wants to borrow; as the chairperson of the committee is saying, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will still remain the minister. Once we have made a decision to borrow, then the board can now go to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and say we want to borrow. If accounts – (Interjections) I will take all the points of clarification, but can I first explain the audit? If the audit is undertaken - and in the Act, it is the Auditor-General that will undertake the audit - that is where we are taking that mandate to the finance ministry. 

Interest on accounts. In assessing the interest, is it going to be 11 per cent this year? How have the funds performed? Are the bonds – For you to declare interest, you must assess how the investment on bonds for the Fund is. How is the investment for securities? How is the investment for housing estate? Then you amalgamate all the investments, compute the interests and declare them. That is what I am saying we leave for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

That is the rationale - and Cabinet took a decision on the matter. It was thoroughly debated in Cabinet and I provided the letter which I wrote to the Speaker and copied it to the Leader of the Opposition. 

I want to confirm that this letter dated 18 November 2021, submitting the proposed amendments, that was addressed to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker has an attachment of the Cabinet decision extract. The letter was copied to the Prime Minister, the Second Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General, the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition and the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and it was received. 

I want to read it because I do not want to lie. It was received on 19 November 2021 by the members of staff at the registry of Parliament called Mr Wilson Kitaka and Mr Lawrence Akena. The number the person put as he was receiving the letters for the Clerk to Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition, Government Chief Whip, the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is 0702100999. The second person who signed has put the mobile number as 0782799596.

So, I am no longer in charge of the administration of Parliament. I delivered the letter and it was received. I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I have the representative of the workers to say something on this matter? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I just want to supplement on what the minister has said. This has been a long journey - to reach where we are now. Most of the stakeholders have been involved. I get the concerns of my colleagues. You have been asking, “What are you remaining with?” The overall body is the board. Let us also reflect that the main objective of the Fund is social security. We are concentrating on money alone, but we are forgetting the main objective of the fund.

Once the board is being appointed by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Security, then the control is over because it is the same board that is going to pass whatever resolutions, either to borrow or not. Initially or formerly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was appointing the board of NSSF. The finance minister was appointing the board of URBRA. It was again the same player that was borrowing, lending and supervising.

The board, under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, is now going to do the overall supervision. So, to me, my major interest is not the money alone, but the objective of the Fund.

Secondly, if we go back to the 1980s, when the NSSF was formed, we would be talking in terms of millions of shillings. Now we are talking in terms of trillions of shillings. If we say you deal with how to handle that money, yet I am supervising you - I think the Minister of Labour is still in charge. I pray and plead that we support this. Otherwise, to reach where we are, a lot of meetings took place. Thank you very much.

MR MUGOLE: Mr Chairman, first of all, for the record, whenever I speak, parliament staff come to ask what my name is? I am Mugole Mauku David Stephen, Member of Parliament for Kabweri County. I am not a workers’ representative in the House but I am a workers’ representative outside the House because I am the Deputy Chairman General of National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) and I have been a workers’ representative on the NSSF Board.

What should I say in this particular regard? Number one, Parliament, NSSF and the Government went for benchmarking last year in Ghana. You sponsored a number of Members of Parliament, that I do not see and we went to Ghana, the most well-run pension sector in Africa.

We found that the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) in Ghana - in fact, the law that we are passing now is a precursor to the bigger law, in consonance with what hon. Opendi said yesterday that even the Public Service needs to have a contributory fund. In the future, these will be merged. 

SSNIT, which is well run-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Come to the point.

MR MUGOLE: The SSNIT, which is well run, reports to two ministries. The board is under the Ministry of Employment and Labour Relations in Ghana but the financial matters, because of the colossal sums of money - currently, the NSSF, which is 17 trillion, is 10 per cent of the GDP. This is why the Ministry of Finance must take charge of certain aspects. 

However, the audit is done by an organ, which is supervised by Parliament; that is the Auditor-General. Therefore, there is no cause of alarm. We have tried to go around and I agree with you because I would like to be open. Hon. Ssemujju, the President did not sign the Bill because of this particular controversy. I do not want to say “no” because he thought that the issue of money must be managed by the people who are employed to manage money.

In this particular regard, as long as the board - I have been on this board but I have never seen anything sent to the Ministry of Finance suggested by the board and the ministry says no. There are experts at the board. As long as the Ministry of Gender has selected the Board, then I would plead with you that we agree with this particular matter. 

The only amendment I would propose is on the annual report because this board reports to the Ministry of Gender. The annual report does not only have financial matters and it is captured in section 32E. After the audit has been done, the annual report should be given to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, either in consultation with the finance ministry or all of them but that must be expressed in the law. I submit.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am the Secretary-General of the NOTU.  Before coming to this Parliament, I have been a high activist of this law, which is why we have been forth and back. What happened to the voters, they said “go inside and maybe speak from there so that we are able to conclude this.”

I am saying this in view of what the honourable minister raised. Yesterday, we agreed to apportion issues of finance to the Ministry of Finance. What she was just doing today is to be specific about the following items: investment, borrowing, accounts, reserve, and go to finance. We are just aligning. There is nothing to me which is looking like an amendment.

My colleague has said it all. We went with hon. Musasizi to Ghana last year, when he was the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Parliament spent money and we found the duo system working in the same way.

What was it that we were fighting so much? Mr Chairperson, we did not want the Ministry of Finance to appoint the board of a regulator and appoint the NSSF board since there was now no separation of roles. This is why we said that once URBRA is appointed by the Minister of Finance, it is good enough to supervise NSSF. Let the Ministry of Gender appoint the NSSF Board and this is how we wanted this to move.

I would like to implore you Members of Parliament that workers are crying out there. What we have said is in line with all this agreement. Allow this Bill to proceed and we conclude. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal, let us track and see it. There is a proposal from hon. Mugole that section 32(2) should be left out of the finance aspect since it is about reporting. I would like to hear from the minister on that and then we see how to proceed. No, it is 32 (3). Is it section 33? The annual report is covered in section 33(1). I would like to hear from the minister on that, then we see how to proceed.

MS AMONGI: The amendment proposed by the honourable member regarding section 32, which is about audits - we agree with it because section 32(2) is giving the minister a copy of audited accounts and already the auditor is the Auditor-General, domiciled in the Parliament.

Therefore, the proposal by the Member is that a copy of the report be given to the minister in charge of labour, and I agree with that because it will not substantially alter. 

The second one is on section 33, which is the annual report and his proposal is that the annual report is not necessarily a financial matter and that we retain it under the ministry in charge of labour. We also concede on that and agree to the proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, can we take a decision on this matter now. Those specific ones in section 32(3) and the whole of section 33 remains with the Ministry of Labour. The other bits of things like borrowing that we discussed earlier are the ones that will go to the finance ministry.

The aspect of auditing has nothing to do with the Ministry of Finance, which is why it has been removed. It is with the Auditor-General, whose office is directly under Parliament. Are we clear on this now? Can we take a decision on this matter? Hon. Ssemujju, I am going to call for a decision on this matter now.  We have discussed it for a long time. Let us now take a decision on section 29. Do you have a proposal on section 29? What is section 29 about? Is it the financial sources of the fund? Hon. Odur, what are you saying?

Mr odur: I was saying that the same principle is under 29 and the proposal by the minister is not amending it so, 29 remains the minister who is not defined and yet, she is attempting to define -

The Chairperson: When it is just the minister, it is the Minister of Gender. The minister is defined. The exceptions being created are those ones that they are saying are for the one in charge of finance. If it is just “minister,” it is the one in charge of labour.

Mr odur: Following her own principle that financial matters are with Finance, here will it remain with Gender?

The Chairperson: Yes. Honourable members, can I now put the question to this matter, specifically on the amendment as proposed by the honourable Mugole to the amendment proposed by the minister. 

I put the question to the amendment that 32(1) and 33 and other aspects relating to reporting remains with the Ministry responsible for Labour. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: I will now put the question to the overall proposal by the minister for amendment that it forms part of the Bill, as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: Procedure -

Mr ssemujju: The proposals by the minister are amending more than one section. For me, this is the first time in the history of this Parliament that about four sections can be amended in an omnibus way. I have been here for 10 years but I was also here as a journalist. These things are amended section by section but the minister wants to amend 31, 32, 33, 35 - and we have amended all of them. Now, I am lost.

The Chairperson: Hon. Ssemujju, we proceeded by these amendments, one by one. By the way, if you recall, there was an amendment that irritated me very much here, where the Ministry of Finance brought a series of amendments that were five times bigger than the Bill they had submitted. That tormented me. I was very upset but there was no time so we decided to handle the processing.  

We sat here for two days processing amendments from the Ministry of Finance to its own Bill. It was a financial thing about the budget so we had to deal with it. 

Clause 14
The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 14 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 15, agreed to.
Clause 16, agreed to.
Clause 17, agreed to.
Clause 18, agreed to.
Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20 
Ms kabahenda: Mr Chairperson, the committee seeks to delete clause 20 like we deleted clause 8. The justification is that NSSF engaging with third parties shall expose members’ contribution to endless and protracted recovery court battles, which may cost more than what would have been intended to be recovered and therefore be costly on the savers’ contributions. 

The NSSF should internally devise or improve its internal mechanisms to directly recover from defaulting employers. Attempting to recover from third parties may cause delays in the collection of members’ contributions as well as conflict of interest on the part of those executing the task of the actual recovery from the third parties. I submit.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is that this particular clause 20 be deleted from the Bill. Honourable minister -

Ms amongi: We accept. We had already conceded.

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 20 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 20, deleted.
Clause 21, agreed to.
Clause 22, agreed to.
The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title
The Chairperson: I now put the question that the Title, “The National Social Security (Amendment) Bill, 2021” stays as the Title to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
The Title, agreed to.

Motion for the house to resume

1.32
The minister of gender, labour and social development (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

Report from the committee of the whole house

1.33
The minister of gender, labour and social development (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of the Whole House

1.34
The minister of gender, labour and social development (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.




Bills
Third reading

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

1.34
The minister of gender, labour and social development (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” -

The Speaker: Would you like to state it again? It was not very clear. It was as if you were speaking in Lango. (Laughter)

Ms amongi: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read the third time and do pass.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A bill for an act entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act, 2021”

The Speaker: Congratulations, honourable minister, chairperson, and thank you, Members. Today, I will breathe because I have been receiving phone calls and messages from the workers of this country. Parliament has delivered on what it should do to grant the workers of this country - those who qualify - mid-term access to the benefits they have saved. 

House suspended to 2.30 p.m. – What time is it? 

(The House was suspended at 1.36 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.07 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE UGANDA NETBALL TEAM, THE SHE CRANES, FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE AT THE AFRICA NETBALL 2021 PENT SERIES IN WINDHOEK, NAMIBIA

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the honourable member for Oyam.

3.08
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS Objective 17 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS, Uganda participated in the African Netball Championship 2021 held in Windhoek, Namibia, from 9 to 16 November 2021, among several African countries, including Namibia, South Africa, Botswana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Kenya, and Malawi; 

AWARE that Uganda’s She Cranes’ excellent performance enabled it to finish second in the tournament, with 12 points and 44 goals second to South Africa, who emerged winners; 

NOTING that the She Cranes was in the month of November 2021 crowned champions of African Netball, 2021 Pent Series in Windhoek, Namibia, having emerged victorious against the five African countries, namely; Namibia, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, and Kenya;

AWARE that the She Cranes has, through hard work and determination, brought honour to Uganda and held high Uganda's flag and improved Uganda's ranking at the international stage in netball and take cognisance of the following;
    i.  Qualifying for the Netball World Cup 2013;
    ii.  Winning a netball gold medal in All African Games 2012;
    iii.  Winning a gold medal at the Six Nations Tournament in Singapore in December 2013;
    iv.  Winning netball medal in All African Games in 2011;

RECOGNISING that it is the practice of Parliament to appropriately and timely honour, recognise and reward Ugandans who have deservedly excelled in various fields of human endeavour, including sports; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that;
    i.  Parliament unanimously congratulates and pays glowing tribute to the Uganda national netball team the She Cranes for its outstanding performance at the 2021 Africa Netball Championship, a great achievement of the country and the people of Uganda;
    ii.  Parliament reaffirms its earlier pledge to improve and increase the annual budgetary allocations to the sports subsector in order to adequately facilitate and develop sports throughout the country, especially through school talent development programmes, enhance sports competitions, support to the national teams and development of appropriate sports infrastructure and human technical and managerial capacity;
    iii.  Parliament continues to urge and encourage all Ugandans with potential talent in sports, especially the youth to emulate the example set by the She Cranes as an accomplished team.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) it is seconded by hon. Acon of Otuke, honourable member for Manjiya, honourable members for Dokolo, Kilak, Kanungu, Kibanda, Ssembabule, and the whole House. (Laughter)

Honourable members, before the Member justifies the motion, I have dignitaries from the Uganda Netball Federation in the public gallery this afternoon. 

They include:
    i.  Hon. Babirye Kityo Sarah - President Uganda National Netball Federation. 
    ii.  Hon. Brig. Gen. Flavia Byekwaso - Vice President- Administration. 
    iii.  Ms Elizabeth Ssempebwa Kitimbo - Team Manager. 
    iv.  Mr Kirunda Charles - Assistant Team Manager. He also plays netball.
    v.  Mr Ntale Daniel - Director for Marketing. 
    vi.  Ms Apolot Harriet - Assistant General Secretary 
The Executive include;
    i.  Ms Monday Amina - Secretary General
    ii.  Gloria Naava - Assistant Marketing Director.
The staff include;
    i.  Ms Chebet Winnie 

The team participated in the 2020 Africa Challenge Pent Series Windhoek, Namibia, where they emerged as the gold medalists and therefore they participated in the Netball Africa Championship, where they emerged as silver medalists. 

These achievements propelled the Uganda She Cranes netball team from position three to now position two on the African continent. They are here to observe the debate on this matter. (Applause) Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion briefly? You are very welcome. (Applause)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The team that the motion is being moved for is a very committed, passionate, and vibrant team that is lifting the Uganda flag very high whenever they go for any competition.
 
It is on record that the She Cranes has consistently, over the years, brought honour to this nation arising from their outstanding performances at the national, continental and international levels. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, this time round, the competition that the She Cranes participated in was two-in-one. The first one was the Pent Series. 
In this competition, the players or the teams compete against the giants of Africa. The competition was organised by the Government of Namibia and the She Cranes won the competition after beating Malawi. 
As I have said, this was a competition of giants meaning that the She Cranes is the giant of all giants on the African continent (Applause).

Mr Speaker, in this competition, we have the trophy that the She Cranes brought. Permit me to show the sign of achievement that the She Cranes came back with to show that the Ugandan team; the She Cranes is the giant of all giants in Africa. (Applause) That was just a sign of achievement. And if it is laid on the Table, it will never be taken away.

THE SPEAKER: No. You put it there and we debate when we are looking at it. 

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second competition was the most prestigious one, where Uganda participated with nine other countries. In this one, the She Cranes won silver, meaning that they were number two in Africa, after beating Malawi. 
The implication of the She Cranes winning or being number two, in this competition is that they have already qualified for the Commonwealth Games to be played in Birmingham, England for the Summer Games in 2022. 

Another striking implication is that it has improved our global ranking. We were number seven but now, we are number six, at a global level. This is not a small achievement for the country.

Thirdly, it also gives our country an opportunity to galvanise our ranking and participation in the next World Cup in South Africa 2023. So, we are already there. We have already qualified by this excellent performance of the She Cranes. 

The She Cranes have been raising the flag of Uganda very high, whenever they go for these competitions. They do not only stop at giving us a good position at the continental and international level. In this very competition that we are talking about, our own netball player, Ms Stella Oyella, was voted the most valuable player and the top scorer in Africa.

Mr Speaker, we also have our distinguished Ugandan players playing professional leagues at international level. A case in point is Proscovia Peace. This is a Ugandan playing at international level and she was voted the Netball Ambassador at the international level for the whole world. This is how far netball has moved this country, brought honour and pride to our country. She is not alone. We have many other players. 

Aware that our players are now at a professional level, playing even in Europe and elsewhere, we request that this Parliament and the Government finds it very prudent this time round to increase the budget for the netball team. (Applause)
I would like to give an example, Mr Speaker. This very team, which went, competed and brought for us this trophy had 15 players. Ten of them were new, energetic young girls and yet, they won and secured a silver medal for us. How could it have been, if we had gone throughout the country and identified the talents that Ugandans have? We could have been seeing many trophies here. I would like to assure this House that in netball, in the very near future, we shall be looking towards getting the World Cup for the first time for this country.

Also, in this competition, other teams brought in their professional players who are playing out but because of lack of resources, the She Cranes could not find money to bring back their professional players. 

I think time is ripe enough that we have to identify young talents. We need to move throughout the country. Netball should not be only a game of few people around Kampala. We have a lot of skills, a lot of potential in the north, west and east and at the centre here, that if we go out identifying these talents, I am telling you, we have a comparative advantage, as far as sports and specifically, Netball is concerned. That can move us to another level at the global level. 

Much as we are number two, by this performance in Africa, we do not have umpires, we lack coaches and we do not have many officials. We need to train coaches. Uganda or She Cranes depends on the umpires from South Africa and yet, we are competing against South Africa. In games, where you are playing against another team and you do not have your own to manage the game, that means something is wrong somewhere. 

I would like to take this opportunity to call upon this Parliament, during budgetary time and to call upon the ministry, and the Government that we need our own umpires. We need extra coaches. Once we do this, we shall be able to manage the games at all levels; home, continental and at the international level. 

This Parliament passed a resolution and committed to increase the budget for the sports subsector. We also passed a resolution for the minister to come with a plan before this Parliament to tell us how we are going to move ahead with improving the sports subsector, which has demonstrated its ability to take this country forward and employ very many young people. 

Mr Speaker, netball specifically is a field dominated by the ladies or the girls or the women. With the problems that we have along that line, I think if we increase the budget, we shall be solving a number of problems. 

Before I end, I can see the Minister of Education and Sports seated and writing very seriously. Still on the same note, I want to ask the minister who is present here, the issue of the house, which was donated to the late John Akibua. Can you please, honourable minister, tell us what the ministry is doing to get the land title of this house, which was donated to the late John Akibua and when it will be handed to the administrator of the estate of the Late John Akibua? 

Finally, I would like to thank the players. Unfortunately, they have a league game this afternoon. Most of them are not here but the few – Yesterday, and the other day they were here but the few who have represented the team, I want to congratulate you very much for moving the country this far. Thank you. 

I thank the coaches, the management, the trustees, all the officials, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Parliament of Uganda. We have done a lot for the She Cranes. As Parliament of Uganda, it is on record that whenever we go for the East African Parliamentary games, we bring trophies back; we have brought trophies here for four consecutive years. This shows the level to which netball has reached in this country.

Finally, I normally see the President hosting different teams and giving them some token of appreciation. I thank you for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member for Nakaseke District, hon. Sarah Najjuma. Would you like to speak at this moment? 

3.29
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion to pay tribute to the She Cranes Netball team for their excellent performance. The netball team has, for a number of times, excelled in netball thus putting Uganda on the international map. It ranks sixth in the International Netball Federation according to the world ranking, second in the continent and first in the East African Region.

I thank the President of the federation, hon. Sarah Kityo Babirye, former Youth Member of Parliament for Central Region, our coach, Ssalongo Fred Mugerwa, the Executive, the Board of Trustees and the players for such an outstanding performance. 

Allow me to point out key concerns. There is unfairness in budgeting and allocation of resources. When you look at the football federation, they are allocated Shs 10 billion and this money is deposited on their account; it does not go through the National Youth Council. However, when you look at the Netball Federation, they were allocated Shs 28 million per quarter, which is Shs 112 million per year. This money has never been received by the federation. The money that they received was mobilised because they were going for a tournament. 

It is unfair to allocate Shs 10 billion to the football federation and Shs 112 million per year to the netball federation, which has never been received. 

There is also limited motivation for our players. Recently when the She Cranes were going for that competition, they spent a month in the camp and two weeks for the competition. Each player however received only Shs 500,000. 

The federation cannot be competitive since they are limited to international build-up friendly matches where players cannot be exposed so that they are marketable in other countries. There are friendly matches but they cannot compete so, our players are really not exposed. 

Our performance granted the country an opportunity to host the next international netball event. However, due to financial constraints of the federation and lack of facilities, this cannot happen. 

In the just concluded African Pent Series and African Championship, few players were taken for the competition. By the time they reached the final competition, they were already drained. I am sure this affected their performance. Maybe we would have been number one but we ended up being number two. 

Secondly, we could not get our own players who are in the international clubs. We have two players; one is in the UK. The second one has been in Australia but there is a club in the UK that has taken her. We could not get them back because of little funding. 

My prayer is that the netball federation should have an independent budget where money is deposited on their account the way it is done with the football federation. 

In 2017, the She Cranes won the African Championship and the President promised each player Shs 10 million. Up to now, the money has not been received. I request the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports), hon. Obua – I think he is around – to take note of that and make a follow up. 

I do not know why the She Cranes are handled like this. Is it because it is a netball game? Is it because it is a women’s thing? I see planes taking the football players; they are always given our bombardier to take them for games but when it comes to the She Cranes - In Uganda, we have a tendency. We leave people to struggle alone and then we jump after their success. That should stop. Thank you, I beg to second the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The motion that I propose for your debate is that this Parliament, by a resolution, pays tribute to the Uganda Netball Team, the She Cranes, for their outstanding performance at the African Pent Series Game 2021. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now. 

Since we would all like to make a contribution, I have to impose some timeframes. I will give two minutes to each Member who will rise to speak. Is that fair? 

3.35
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I listened attentively to the mover of the motion and then the seconder. I want to fully agree with the contents, recommendations and the prayers therein on two grounds. 

One is that sports, as we all know, is a unifying factor. Secondly, sports can help promote development because unity is a precursor for socio-economic transformation. 

As far as unity is concerned, in sports we find ourselves of different colours, as somebody one time sang, but one people. In this case where Uganda is moving towards socio-economic transformation, it is important, therefore, that we embrace sports and support it fully. At the end of it all, we should be able to achieve the social status that we are looking for. 

Mr Speaker, in West Budama County North, in recognising the importance of sports, we recently launched the Leopards. This is a football team that embraces literally every youth across the constituency. I appreciate that we are talking about netball but I am applying it to football because football is actually part – (Member timed out.)

3.37
MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do associate myself with the mover of the motion. Sports is a very important component in the development of the country. I am talking passionately as a father of a two time Olympian. Currently, some federations are not even sponsored by Government at all.

To mold an Olympian is a lot of sacrifice. I had the opportunity to speak with the previous netball executive because they were doing wonders. Most of the media do criticise officials who accompany these teams but actually, it is the officials who are sponsoring the sportsmen and women on the team because they are personally concerned and get connection with the people involved in sports especially the young talents. You cannot talk about talent without nurturing it or without training because as the mover said, there are no coaches. You have to get foreign coaches who are funded either by parents or officials. 

Therefore, it is my humble prayer and request to the Minister of Education and Sports; do not just look at sports as games, literally saying it is only about playing. No. 

First of all, it is an industry. If you look at boxing for example, Naguru used to be a boxing house and Uganda was ranked third in the entire world, after Cuba and the USA. What is happening now with the-(Member timed out.)

3.39
MR GEOFFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the senior alternative Minister of Sports, which my brother Bwiire sometimes considers as a shadow minister but I am the senior alternative-

THE SPEAKER: What is that title again?

MR KAYEMBA: Shadow Minister for Sports–(Laughter)-and now, I stand to support the motion and to congratulate our She Cranes on what they did in Namibia. Being sixth in the world after big sports countries like Japan and Jamaica is a big achievement. Our country is above all those countries. With that, we congratulate them.

However, the challenges we find - first is the budget for the sports industry. Imagine, it gets Shs 17 billion yet, we have 51 federations. The FUFA alone takes Shs 10 billion. Shillings 3.6 billion is used for administrative costs and we remain with Shs 3.4 billion, which is shared by 50 federations. That is not fair at all. We have lost many people who would have been big sports personalities because of lack of motivation. 

Therefore, my prayer is: let us pay the coaches that have done wonders in training these people. Let us motivate the players. I saw, when people won gold medals from the Olympics, President Museveni giving them cars and some money. Why doesn’t he do – as the minister -?

THE SPEAKER: No, if you wanted to speak as the minister you would have waited to come in at the end.

3.42
MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate our players and the entire team, for raising our flag as a country; the women at large and the young girls out there are so proud of you. Thank you so much.

Mr Speaker, I rise to speak about the issue of funding. You really wonder why there is a big discrepancy between Shs 10 billion that is given to the football federation and the Shs 120 million that is allocated per year but which has never been released. The minister responsible should give an answer to us and also a commitment of earmarking Shs 10 billion to the girls’ netball federation because they are equally taxpayers. Our parents pay taxes whether men or women; we all pay the taxes. Therefore, you wonder when the time to benefit from our hard work comes, we are the ones discriminated against and taken back.

I am sure that the She Cranes could have done better than this for many years but they cannot because they are not funded well like the mover of the motion has indicated. 

Secondly, the people in Rakai that watch football and netball on TV do not know what is happening. They think that it is just like a luxury; because there is no decentralisation of sports in the country.

Thirdly, when you look at the private schools that take majority of our primary school pupils, you realise that they all do not have playgrounds. The Minister of State for Sports should make it a priority to ensure every primary school, whether private or Government-aided, gets a playground to help the country nurture sports talents-(Member timed out.)

3.44
MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the She Cranes and to add my voice in talking about the issue of financing games and sports. 

In the West Nile region, we have a number of talents but our local games often stop end with us because we cannot afford to compete in games at national level. We cannot afford to transport our people from West Nile or Arua; the best talents end within there. We have people like Dorcus Inzikuru who became world champions but those were picked in the competitions within the primary and secondary competitions. Along that, and to the honourable minister when Dorcus Inzikuru won the Olympics gold medal, there was a stadium named after her; the Inzikuru Dorcus Stadium. 

Honourable minister, if you would interest yourself to go and see that stadium, now called Inzikuru Dorcus, you would be amazed.  

Whenever we have games there, we use ordinary tarpaulins to cover what is called Inzikuru Dorcus Stadium, which is in the centre of Arua City. Therefore, please, interest yourself in that. That stadium was given but after 10 years, nothing has been done about it.

Mr Speaker, I would request the minister to also allocate budgets that can be operationalised at local government levels because it is at that level that we can pick and nurture talents. If the small monies remain at the centre, we will not know where to get the best talent-(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, allow me to second the mover of the motion and thank her for bringing this very important motion.

THE SPEAKER: Do you second the mover of the motion or the motion?

MR AKOL: Oh! I second the motion and I thank the mover of the motion. I think that is right. 

Mr Speaker, most of the time, we do not mind funding the sports budget, yet, we have Ministry of Education and Sports. To make matters worse, when the seconder of the motion talked about the Shs 10 million per player that was promised; I was surprised. 

I used to think that the Minister in charge of Education and Sports is very close to the big man and so, that she can always remind him that there is a very important promise. Sports brings a lot of pride to our country and most of the time, when they lose, we do not care about them. We will always say, “They’ve lost,” but when they succeed, we join them to celebrate. 

I think it is important that at this point, we should think about creating a separate ministry for sports. Otherwise, mixing education and sports has brought problems in the country. Maybe, Minister Obua would have done better. If you remember recently, he gave footballs and netballs. That means he has been thinking about these boys and girls. These ladies and women can play. 

This is segregation. If there is a budget given for football, why do you forget about netball? I think it is key that we come out clearly to think about creating a separate ministry for sports so that we strike – (Member timed out.)

3.48
Mr hassan kirumira (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the mover and the seconder of the motion. We have been talking about the girl-child in our country. Empowering the girl-child is very critical in sports. 

We are much aware that sports require nurturing and nurturing requires financial investment. That can only happen through proper budgeting and appropriation. We have to walk the talk and substantively invest in our sports. 

We are aware that we celebrate these people every time and again they achieve something, locally and internationally. We throw parties for them. That means that we appreciate their work. I think it will be very meaningful if we are part and parcel of their growth patterns and then celebrate with them at the end of their careers. 

Mr Speaker, I support proper budgeting for our sports activities. The girl-child has to be empowered in terms of growing in sports. The girl-child has to be supported for the growth of sports in our country. I submit.

3.50
Ms rita atukwasa (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion and to add my voice to congratulate the She Cranes for their triumph. I applaud them because not only do they stay fit, but also they are a mechanism in which Uganda is publicised and we get tourism growing high. 

Also, they are an example to promoting health and sports as we continue to get troubled with non-communicable diseases. I think months ago, we were here appealing to Government to include free services for non-communicable diseases. Sports is one of those ways we can prevent it. 

Most importantly, the gender and equity certificate provides that in the budget process, it should be used as a mechanism to ensure that resources are equally distributed. 

The issue of the budget - I think that gives us a good window that as we approach the budgeting cycle, the sports sector should be subjected to that so that at least we can allow minimal discrepancies. However, such huge discrepancies in budget allocation speak volumes for gender inequality. 

Therefore, I implore everybody that wherever you will be seated in the budget process, let us tackle it at that level. By the time the minister comes, it will be done. 

As I conclude, thank you so much, the She Cranes; I add my voice to applaud you. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, we will try to move and cover all of us who would like to speak. For now, let me start from Dr Bwanika.

3.52
Dr abed bwanika (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion. Allow me to associate with our team that has done us proud. They have branded this nation and put us on the international map.

With our meagre resources, we might not be able to fully fund every sports discipline in this country but we can invest heavily in those areas of sports where Uganda has distinguished itself. One of it is netball. We can fund those areas where people have already invested and have shown that we have capacity; netball, football, boxing and marathon. If we do that, we will be able to build the sports sector of this country. 

I want to ask that the Minister of Sports be compelled to bring to this House the comprehensive plan on development of sports in this country so that we can inform ourselves in terms of investment and the infrastructure that we need as a country. 

Lastly, the President made a pledge to the national netball team. I know – (Member timed out.)




2.54
Ms rose obigah (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest in honouring and appreciating the She Cranes. It is indeed a big honour to this country that they have done us proud. 

Mr Speaker, in the same vein, I want to thank you. The recent balls we received were from your docket. This is a good gesture to develop the talent in the rural areas we come from. This good gesture has not been seen in the office of the Minister for Sports. I do not know whether in his net as a fisherman, he is about to bring an empty one. It is a serious business. We expect seriousness from the word go. 

Ms Peace Proscovia is right from my village. I remember when she was at the university, she was given a scholarship for excellent performance but it was without accommodation. I was sharing the same room with her at the university. Thank God, just because of talent, she is now leaving in the UK; but how many? 

If we deliberately put emphasis and supported, especially through the office of the Minister of Sports, I think we should do more than this. The She Cranes, if at all we were to talk about the 30 per cent for equality or equity, honestly, it cannot be Shs 120 million. 

Let us come out of our comfort zones and support these young ladies so that we bring down the rate of the youth who are able to do something useful for this country. Thank you so much She Cranes. I am so proud of you. Thank you.

The Speaker: Yes, the mover of the motion introduced a new name for the team, “Giant of giants.” You could use that as well instead of “She Cranes” all the time. (Laughter)

3.56
Mr sanon bwiire (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to appreciate the She Cranes, specifically, the netball team for marketing Uganda. These days, I am informing the world that we are now the “giant of giants” in Africa as far as netball is concerned; the second best in Africa and sixth in the whole world. Colleagues, this is a very serious achievement. 

We have so many ways of marketing our country but strategically, sports have given us a very big achievement in this world. I am new in this Parliament but previously I was watching Members of Parliament debating sports in this very House. Resolutions have been made; can we increase the budget? 

I would like to appeal to the Government - even what we have achieved - Government has invested some funds but it is not enough. Can we track the Minister for Sports on the preparations they made since we are now coming out of the pandemic? How are we going to completely recover? This is because COVID-19 even hit the sports sector. Which plans do you have for us to completely recover from the pandemic and achieve more? 

Mr Speaker, sports has helped very many youths. It is like – (Member timed out.) 

3.58
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues in congratulating the She Cranes for their outstanding performance; the giant of the giants of netball - not only on the African continent but in the world. 

It is not usual, Mr Speaker, that in one session of Parliament, two similar motions are moved to congratulate and pay tribute to the gallant sportsmen and sports ladies of the Republic of Uganda. It has happened in this session of the 11th Parliament. It is, therefore, in order that whatever they deserve is duly given to them. They have done us proud. They have been the best and outstanding ambassadors of the Pearl of Africa. I wish to see the bombardier and our birds in the sky actually not flying the crane but the She Cranes. 

In the next budget, I would like to see some things in budgeting addressed so that we do not talk about them again. We only stand here to pay tribute and it is done. If they have done this amidst the challenges and we give them what is due to them, I think Uganda can be number one in the whole world. 

I have always had faith in the Pearl of Africa. Mr Speaker, let us give the sportsmen and ladies what is due to them. Let us have facilities throughout the Republic of Uganda so that from Nyabushozi up to Napak, you can have gallant sportsmen and ladies representing the country – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, your time was up. You just amended it. 

4.00
MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and also to congratulate the She Cranes for the victory. 

I have been observing here - and even before joining this Parliament that when a matter comes to the Floor of Parliament welcoming back those that have come back home with medals, almost every Member of Parliament gets excited and is supportive. However, when it comes to budgeting, we do not see that coming out. This has happened for a long time. 

I am the President of the Paralympic. I remember in 2014, we presented a petition here in Parliament and a lot of beautiful resolutions were made here. However, none of them was implemented. 

I think this habit of bringing different federations here to plead for funding individually is not helping this country. I would like to request the Committee on Education and Sports and the Committee on Budget to think about budgeting for the sports sector in this country. You can imagine the sector receiving Shs 17 billion and then, it is cut to Shs 10 or sometimes to Shs 8 billion. 

Just like the honourable member has said, sports is one of the things selling this country world over but we are not helping sportsmen and sportswomen to be proud of this country.

Our athletes train in the camp for a month. They go for a trip without any allowance. Someone trains for a month and then goes back home without even transport. That is what is happening in the sports federation. 

Today, we are receiving the She Cranes. I heard that even the basketball players want to have an opportunity here in Parliament but there are 51 federations. If each federation comes here, where will we get that time? 

Mr Speaker, I think you should direct the Committee on Education and Sports and the Committee on Budget to at least begin with Shs 55 billion for the sports sector in the Financial Year 2022/2023. That will help us and stop Members from coming here to the Floor of Parliament, time and again, to request for funding. Mr Speaker, I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there is a point that is being lost and I thought it is important. This Parliament usually acts on the basis of votes that are visible; that you can trace and say this is it. When that happens, it is easy to monitor and see what is happening there. 

The point being made here is that money is not traceable for the Netball Federation because it goes to the National Council of Sports. Then, it is up to the National Council of Sports to do it. Would it be possible - and without really saying they are favouring some people - would it not be something to consider; taking the example of FUFA and transferring the same arrangement to the Uganda Netball Federation so that we  stop saying they are not doing this and that. We just want to use the examples already set to keep on adding until everybody is taken care of. I do not see that point being developed strongly. Would you like to develop that point? I would like hon. Magogo to speak to this matter.

4.05
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Mr Speaker, this Parliament has the advantage of having somebody who goes to the kitchen to cook. I would like to, first of all, clear some information. 

Netball is a sport for men and women. People may not be aware of this. We have a national team for both women and men. Football is also a sport for men and women and we have a national team for both women and men. I just wanted to put that information clear so that we do not make the comparison. 

Secondly, whereas it is true that there is an appropriation of Shs 10 billion to football, not on any occasion has it even been achieved because of the suppressions sometimes and the cuts that come. 

Thirdly, FUFA does not have a vote. That money goes to the National Council of Sports. Therefore, it is not true that we have a vote and we receive money. That money goes to the National Council of Sports but it is ring-fenced. 

I would like to advise that considering the performance of netball and the pride our sisters have brought to us, a similar arrangement is done for their federation, where ring-fencing is done so that there is improvement in how much they are receiving. (Applause) 

It is also true that there are other federations that are also doing well. As we speak, the basketball team has failed to participate in the qualifiers for the World Cup just because of Shs 300 million. Therefore, whether we are going to come back here and - we might be missing that opportunity, because they are not going into the qualifiers. 

I, therefore, call upon the Members that it is very important - Let us not look at the Shs 10 billion. Football as nine national football teams and the girls are the champions of CECAFA and COSAFA and they are going to the World Cup if they win the next match. 

Is there a ceiling that sports must get only Shs 17 billion? Can't we get Shs 100 billion so that every federation and sport - We are talking about 70 per cent of the population of this country being youth.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why are you always asking for Shs 17 billion? Can’t you ask for more and this House takes a decision on this matter? Honourable minister, I need you on this particular issue, please speak on this matter. Honourable minister, is the Shs 17 billion cast in stone?

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for the clarification you have sought. 

I vividly recall that when this Parliament paid tribute for the best performance ever in the Olympics of 2020, one of the resolutions was to the effect that the Ministry of Education and Sports and specifically the sports subsector submits its ideal budget for consideration by the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, we complied in the affirmative and submitted our ideal budget to this Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: How much was it? 

MR OBUA: I can consult and come back but this particular budget is before the Committee on Education and Sports, if my memory serves me right and it was the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker in the Chair when it was laid on the Table and it was referred for consideration. 

The budget we are requesting for is definitely even more than Shs 25 billion which has been the highest budget for sports. We operated two years ago at Shs 25 billion but because of the first wave of COVID-19, we came down to Shs 17 billion. Now, with further budget cuts of 40 per cent, we are operating at Shs 10 billion but they do not even release the Shs 10 billion. 

Mr Speaker, our ideal budget is already before Parliament. We pray that it is considered. The Republic of Kenya spends an equivalent of Shs 450 billion on sports. That is the investment of the Republic of Kenya. The Republic of South Africa spends an equivalent of Shs 277 billion on sports. The highest the Republic of Uganda has spent is Shs 25 billion on sports. 

We humbly pray, Mr Speaker, that the budget we submitted - I can consult and get the figures then come back and state in the affirmative - be considered. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, now you know where the matters are and where our actions are required to be directed. 

4.12
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to second the motion and congratulate the She Cranes on that achievement. 

I tend to think that usually the sports where we have women are not well considered or well-funded because usually, at the table where they determine funding, you have more men. 

In regard to the guidance by the FUFA President, I want to support the idea of ring fencing the budget for each and every sport. I played rugby while I was at university and they are good contenders. However, you never see them here because they are not well funded. 

The idea of ring fencing funding should go to each and every sport. We should not say it is only for those that actually bringing in medals or trophies because you never know - In universities, we have students who are on sports scholarships but when they come at the national level, because there is lack of funding, they stop there. We kill dreams if we do not insist on ring fencing funding for each and every game or sport. 

Therefore, I want to propose that in the next budget, the minister should come with a clear budget for each and every sport so that we can approve and be able to change amounts - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.14
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Divison North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate our netball team; She Cranes for the great performance. Some of us who have passionately spent in sports feel like crying when we see our gallant sports women and men suffering. 

Sports in the Republic of Uganda have turned out to be a very great foreign exchange earner. We have seen some of our young brothers earning a lot from their different sports. However, when we hear that the Government of Uganda has failed to perform its duties, like allocating big sums of money into sports and yet we all know that it is only in sports where a number of Ugandans have remained believing in their country - It is only in football, netball, boxing, where someone talks about sports and all Ugandans feel they belong to this country. 

Mr Speaker, we have seen the President of Uganda decorating officers who have done nothing for this country. We are waiting to see the same happening to our sportsmen and women in this country. 

The Government has failed to nurture talent yet we all believe that it starts from our primary schools, secondary schools and other tertiary institutions of learning. 

Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Point of order -

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to say that His Excellency the President has been decorating officers who have done nothing? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: What do I do with that? Please, guide me on where the violation is.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I am saying that officers, who get decorated, get decorated for the great performance they have made for this country and they are decorated by the President of this Republic. Therefore, is he in order to say that they are decorated for doing nothing?

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not in order, honourable member. (Laughter) Nobody decorates anybody for doing nothing.

MR KAWALYA: I have said that because I mean it. 

THE SPEAKER: No, when you are ruled out of order, you do not mean what has been ruled out of order.

MR KAWALYA: Mr Speaker, I wish to see the President decorate our netball team also for their great performance. I beg to submit. 

4.17
MS HELLEN AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. This is the time to light up Uganda but how are we going to light up Uganda? One of the ways is through sports. 

I will talk about the issue of motivation. I think we should look for the female and the male role models to motivate this young generation who are engaging themselves in sports. That will motivate them. Let us get at least one day and talk to them in a gathering to motivate them. That is how some of us got motivated in different sports categories.

Secondly, let me talk about budgeting. Let the budgeting be balanced. Let us not have equity and equality into sports. Let us balance because this will help us to develop sports in our country. 

Then finally, I am going to talk about economic constraints. The Government should work upon this to help our young girls who come from poor families to develop their sports career. Thank you very much.

4.19
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank both its mover and the seconder. 

I would like us to believe that the She Cranes is a world class team and we deserve to have world class umpires, coaches and officials. It is very absurd that when our team went for the tournament, the coaches who were handling the tournament were not on our side. As the mover elaborated, it was South Africa that won the first tournament and we won the series because South Africa did not participate in that category.

Therefore, I would like to also add my voice to the voices of other Members who have requested the ministry and all stakeholders responsible to avail enough funds to the She Cranes or to the Netball Federation for us to accommodate, build capacity and train our own coaches. I mean world class coaches, officials and umpires who can still also be employed at the international level. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about the decentralisation of the Netball game in our country. We have talked about schools and universities having play grounds in schools but there are these young girls – we know - who have been affected by the lockdown– (Member timed out.)

4.21
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the She Cranes, the president of the Netball – who was a former Member of the 10th Parliament, Sarah Babirye - for the wonderful job she did with the team.

This is one of the three key things that I would like us to support – I am on the Committee on Education and Sports and I am trying to be very close to the ministers of sports and finance, to make sure that what I went through does not happen to the current generation. 

What we need to do is to balance the budget, as has been stated. If we talk about Shs 10 billion, it is like peanuts in terms of dollars because it is just $3 million. We should look for something better than that. 

On Monday, we had one of the greatest Ugandan athletes becoming number three in Olympics. He ran a world record in a half marathon, that is 21 kilometers, in 57 seconds and he was given $150,000. So, sports is one of the richest thing that we should stand–(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: He is our marathon person; that is the exception I am giving to him. (Applause)

MR ACON: This is a marathon concession calculation. It does not mean we should not support. We come from deplorable backgrounds as sportsmen and women. We are talking about the She Cranes but if you ask each of them a thing or two, you may find some of them have no food yet they are making our country proud. 

Being second in the continent is something incredible. So, as a country, we should push harder to increase the sports budget to help our sportsmen and women because we have to support them. I would like to encourage the Ministry of Education and Sports to find schools in which to place these athletes because if one’s leg or hand cannot function, the brain must function to do a better saving for that person’s life. 

I would also ask Government do something for the top federations that are doing great work for this nation. For example, the She Cranes came from nowhere. Now when you go to any part of the world, you will meet people wanting to know which location Uganda is on the world map. You now can find people drawing the map of the world and looking for the direction of Uganda because of sports not politics. Sports has lifted this country from the rubble to something. (Applause) Thank you for this moment. I have not got much to say.

4.25
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At least I have caught your eye although I am sorry; I had gone out in protest. (Laughter) But I appreciate that you saw me. 

THE SPEAKER: Because you were already on my list.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for being impatient. I also would like to thank the mover of the motion and also appreciate the She Cranes, for giving us this name that we are now talking about and are proud of.

I appreciate that the minister had already brought in the request for additional funds as we talk about the need to increase their budget. So, I urge the minister that in that budget, much as we are talking of ring-fencing it, look at how whatever little is availed is used because some money is normally given to build sports from down in the primary schools. But I want to tell you that when the primary schools are in competition, they are always either on the case of Members of Parliament or some people, soliciting for money and yet they budget for that activity. At times, the money is spent somewhere else. 

You open your eyes properly because I have witnessed what I am talking about. The money does not go to those primary schools for the sports and yet you are building sports from the ground.

There is a problem. I do not know for the other federations, but if that money is well used for everyone to benefit, then maybe we will move a step forward. I thank you and I support the motion.



4.27
MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank these gallant ladies of this country, the She Cranes, for a wonderful job. I support this motion as a great sportsman of this country. 

My colleagues have talked about ring-fencing some of the money for the federations, but I think we need to do a little more than this. Many times, we have seen great sportsmen and sportswomen in this House, and many of them have been invited to the State House for dinner with the President because of what they have done in their fields of sports, but I feel we need to do a little more. 

The Act where the National Council of Sports gets its mandate is over 40 years old; it came into existence in 1964 and many things have changed. When you look at the Act, you may find that the Minister of Education and Sports has a lot of power over National Council of Sports. For example, the minister appoints four to five people to be represented on the National Council of Sports. Many of these federations are not represented at the National Council of Sports. Most of them are really fighting on their own. They do not even know what is happening in the National Council of Sports.

I feel this is the time we need to amend the Act of 1964 where National Council of Sports gets its mandate to do its work. I feel a lot of things must be done if we are going to develop sports. We need a comprehensive – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: (Interjection) Motion? [HON. MEMBER: “Mr Speaker, you had given me just after him before the motion.”] It is a point of motion; it is an interruption of the debate. [HON. MEMBER: “Thank you, Mr Speaker.”]

4.30
MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One, I associate myself with the motion before Parliament. Two, I rise under Rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion that this matter goes to the Committee on Education and Sports. For example, I have just learnt that we have over – 

THE SPEAKER: No. We have already debated this motion for very long. You should have raised this at the beginning. Let us conclude this matter. 

4.30
MR STEPHEN SSERUBULA (NUP, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also associate my appreciation to the team for the work well done. I come from Lugazi Municipality where there is a lady called Ms Halima Nakaayi. She won us a gold medal in 2019. She comes from a village called Ssese that you have to go to through Mabira Forest and there is no electricity there. The parents dedicated their time to educate their girl on how to run to become a champion.

In 2019, Ms Halima Nakaayi won a gold medal. When she was asked what she wanted most, she told the President, “I only want to build for my parents a decent house.” Ms Nakaayi’s parents are aging – (Member timed out.)

4.31
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to congratulate the She Cranes upon the great achievement for this nation. 

Being that I am part of the Parliamentary Netball Club, I really appreciate what they go through. It is at this time that I call upon the parliamentarians, particularly the Executive to prioritise further what they bring on the table. It is because when you consider the matter of facilities, if we have gone through this moment of training when we do not have facilities as parliamentarians, what about other Ugandans elsewhere in far deeper villages? Consider the previous budget, which was presented as a supplementary; how come the sports budget was not so much part of what we just passed?

At this moment when schools are about to open - For example, in Wakiso, we have Mandela National Stadium Namboole. It is used by over eight districts and it is an international football field which embraces all games in the country. What is its state now? Shall we continue hosting international games at other stadia? 

So, it is high time the Executive prioritised what it brings to the Legislature. At this moment, we are expecting that nothing more should be brought to this Parliament minus the sports budget.

Finally, I also add my voice to Parliament’s to ask the Executive to see that we separate the ministries. If every time we come here and pay tribute to many performing sports, but you find that no one is there – I beg your pardon and I withdraw that. You find that that priority to see that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will come this side. I will have the Members for Rubanda District, Kanungu District and Bunyole County East in that order. 

4.34
MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. I also congratulate the She Cranes for coming back home victorious. 

We heard from our President of FUFA where he said that in football, they ring-fenced Shs 10 billion. That means that even if Shs 12 billion is sent to the ministry, Shs 10 billion is strictly for FUFA. Is it fair? 

THE SPEAKER: We left that line. What is already there is not even being received in full. So, let us just get more instead of using that as – 

MS AKAMPURIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance and encouragement. We need to stand for these games. However, I request the Ministry of Education and Sports that even when they are coming with their budget, at least, sports should be given priority. This morning, as I was going for training at Lugogo, something that hurt me very much was when I heard that Uganda’s basketball team will not go for a competition because they are lacking Shs 300 million. These young men and women wake up – (Member timed out.)

4.36
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I congratulate the She Cranes for keeping the candle burning for Uganda. 

We all know that sports have the capacity to change lives and ability to push gender balance. It teaches young girls and women resilience, team work and confidence. Young girls and women who are in sports tend to defy bias and stereotypes. These women tend to inspire other young girls who are coming up to participate in sports. 

These women, in sports, also tend to promote equal opportunities and gender equality. Therefore, it is my humble request, as parliamentarians and the Government, to support all kinds of sports in this country such that everyone who participates can excel in their talent. I beg to submit.

4.37
MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I congratulate myself for catching your eye, for the first time. 

I would like to thank and congratulate the netball team - 

THE SPEAKER: Would it mean that this is your maiden speech?

MR MUTEMBULI: Yes. That is why I am congratulating myself, Mr Speaker, for catching your eye. We have talked a lot about supporting netball in this country. However, let us walk the talk. How many of us here support netball clubs in our respective areas? Very few of us.

Right now, you may find that people are organising football tournaments in their respective constituencies but you will never hear of anyone organising netball tournaments. Therefore, I want to implore my colleagues that as much as we are blaming the Government for not supporting netball in this country – we should be able to do something.

I want to congratulate my sister, Ms Faridah Kadondi, one of the players. She is from Butaleja Global Netball Club, where I am the patron.

I want to also thank hon. Sarah Kityo who is doing great work. Five days ago, I received information from the manager of our netball club that hon. Kityo had gone to Butaleja to encourage our girls to participate in 

Mr Speaker, in a very special way, we should thank hon. Kityo for the work she is doing. I would like to encourage our girls to participate in netball so that tomorrow, they can be another Kadondi. I do not know whether my sister Kadondi is in the Public Gallery for recognition - so you can know that in Butaleja, we produce very good netballers. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will finish from this side because we need to roll this up. Let me have the Member for Namisindwa District. Member for Buliisa, the bus left the station because at the time I wanted you to speak, you were not here. 

4.40
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like my brother, hon. Mutembuli, this is also my maiden speech. I would like to congratulate myself for catching the Speaker’s eye.

I am going to comment on two things. One is the number of the players that are normally picked to go and participate. I have played netball my entire life; even today, I am the Captain of the Parliamentary Netball Team. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, you need 14 players and substitutes so that in case of any injury, you have a player to replace. It is very unfortunate that whenever the She Cranes are travelling, they are limited with the number of players they go with. This makes them overwork and it limits their performance.

I would like to appeal to those who are responsible for that - we know that the funding is little, however, there are ways we can reduce the accompanying team and increase the number of players so that these people are given extra players to travel with in order to perform better.

The second issue is on the allowances. These girls play netball as a source of income. Now, you take them for one – (Member timed out.)  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is your maiden speech, Captain of the Parliamentary Netball Team.

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am humbled. Mr Speaker, you cannot take a player for one month out of home and when they return, you pay them Shs 500,000.  Mr Speaker, you are a sportsperson and you know the needs of a sportsperson. Shillings 500,000 is a mockery to our gallant daughters. We need to change.

Lastly, if this Parliament fails to increase the budget of sports, then I think we will have failed forever. Why do I say so? In the Chair, is a boxer and a biker and that is the Rt Hon. Speaker. (Applause)

We have a FUFA President and the Deputy Speaker of this House is closely affiliated and associated with the FUFA President. (Applause)- 

THE SPEAKER: Should I put a question to that? (Laughter)

MS KAYAGI: Mr Speaker, the minister for Sports, for the first time, is a footballer. This Parliament is full of sportsmen and women. Even the Chairperson of the Budget Committee plays football.

Mr Speaker, we have all it takes for us – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have just been informed that the Government Chief Whip plays wrestling and golf. (Laughter) But wrestling is not one of those sports that is still -

Honourable members, shouldn’t we prepare to close because we have given this debate quite some time?

4.45
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to the giant of giants; the She Cranes for the outstanding performance in the recent games. 

I have two issues to raise in this regard and I am praying that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Government may make a deliberate effort in identifying talents; in this case, the netballers. It is not about only going to schools but we need to identify talents even from our communities.

Two years ago, I organised a netball tournament. When I went to the communities, I was surprised that we had very good netballers in those communities who are not in school but girls who stopped somewhere. However, they were able to compete favourably with those in higher schools.

Three, we have a very big challenge in this country because there are very few trainers for netball. If we have to improve these sports, we need the concerned authorities to bring on board many trainers in netball so that our girls out there can be able to get fully involved and participate in this sport. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much and I would like to insist, as the rest have said, that if we have to see any – (Member timed out.) 

4.46
ms sarah opendi (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Speaker. I join colleagues to second the motion and to say that it is very unfortunate that we always gather here to pay tribute to our gallant sons and daughters that excel in different fields. We were here talking about the athletes, we raised the same issue about the little money being ring-fenced for FUFA yet football in this country receives other donations from other organisations. When it comes to the She Cranes, there is minimal support. 

I want to beg - Time and again, money for Members of Parliament has been cut to support the She Cranes. Why?

The Speaker: No, Members of Parliament have donated. I think that is the better way to put it. (Laughter)

Ms opendi: Okay, we leave it at that. The point I am trying to make is, if Shs 10 billion is ring-fenced for FUFA, that should not be the case moving forward. I want to request the Committee on Education, please bring that report here so that we can conclude this matter. We have just passed a supplementary for other sectors. We need to pass another. Even if it is Shs 20 billion or Shs 5 billion, let us pass it. We need to support the different disciplines.

The basketballers – (Member timed out) – Mr Speaker, this is UWOPA. Can I request for a minute to conclude.

The Speaker: Honourable members, stop negotiating for time. We have agreed on it. Please conclude.

Ms opendi: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I play basketball myself. This team excelled in Rwanda and they were going to hopefully excel in Angola and move to the international scene for just Shs 300 million. What resolution are we making as Members of Parliament? They need the money to move next week. What resolution are we making? 

We have been told that the She Cranes will need money. I have already been told about a sheet of paper that is supposed to be moving around for Members to contribute some money to this group. Can we also agree on that? If it means Shs 200,000 or Shs 100,000 from each Member of Parliament, that will be some money to help them move. Let us have the report from the Committee on Education so that we can pass money and the She Cranes move to the next - We are told in a month's time they will be moving out to participate in a different competition and they will need funds. 

I know Government systems are sometimes slow but once a resolution of this House is made, Government can put that into consideration. We participate in basketball as Members of Parliament? Can we support this team with at least each Member of Parliament - we are 500. If we deducted – (Interjections) - if we donated Shs 100,000 each, how much will that be? 

Mr Speaker, can we raise Shs 300 million for the basketballers so that they are able to move and participate in this sport – (Interjections) - Can I suggest that Members of Parliament contribute Shs 100,000 each and support the basketball team so that they can be able to travel – (Interruption) - Yes, honourable member.

Mr aogon: Thank you, hon. Opendi, for the opportunity. Colleagues, what the honourable colleague is talking about is very serious. I know that and want to acknowledge it. However, let me give this information. Recently, when we passed a supplementary budget, there was a provision to cater for a company's bill of around Shs 3 billion. Why would we go to this level of always contributing money yet Government is the one which has more money than ours? (Applause)

It is our duty to appropriate. If we need a way of moving forward, can we organise and say, “Government, release money to this team.” The ministers are all here, the Government Chief Whip is around. We need the money. Thank you.

Ms opendi: Thank you. On that note, we want to urge the Government. Shs 300 million is not a lot of money – (Interjections) - Can I propose that the Minister of Education and Sports, who is right here, finds the money between now and next week and supports the basketball team so that they can be able to go and participate in this other sport, other than constraining the Members of Parliament. (Applause)

Football is well supported. Hon. Magogo did mention that there is a football team for women and for men. I am sure if we went to this other football team - I hope, hon. Magogo, there would be no complaints that, that other team is not being facilitated and all the money is for FUFA men and not FUFA women. I hope that will not be the complaint that we shall receive here. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we are trying to draw to a close. We have given this debate sufficient time. Please bear with me, we still have an Order Paper to complete. I would prefer that, if it were possible, we pause this here, draw to a close and then we move on. We have used almost two hours and that is a long enough time to have this debate because of the significance of what this sector is beginning to do for this country. 

I think we have tried to listen to most of you who have contributed. I will have a comment from - the shadow minister has already spoken. If there is a comment from the Leader of the Opposition then I will have the minister and we close this matter.

4.54
The leader of the opposition (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the House in paying tribute to the nation's netball team for bringing honour to our motherland. At a time when gloom was atop the horizon, they returned a smile on our faces. We do congratulate them. 

The glowing tribute from Members and the airing of frustrations of sportsmen and women should provide a kind of awakening to my very own friend and brother, the honourable Minister of Sports, to engage his next gear. After all, the House of Parliament has expressed solidarity with your needs. Go back to your desk and put forward your best feet so that we can lift sports.

We are Africa's number one youngest population. What do you do with the young population? Part of the investment you can do to harness the energy of the young people is to invest in sports. Sports are no longer for mere fitness and happiness. It is an investment worth billions of dollars. 

I have visited a number of countries in West Africa that have invested in sports. A single sports man or woman transforms an entire community. I have been to Kapchorwa and seen what their gallant sons, in their humility, have done to change the lives and fortunes of the rest of the world. 

We owe it to our young people to do it for them, honourable colleagues. We do not legislate through sloganeering. The minister owes us a duty to present the plan. I will join him to support the plan to invest in our young people. We need to invest in regional sporting arenas. We need to invest in stadia. 

The land grabbers have threatened some of them in the countryside. One way of preserving them is for Government to invest in upgrading them. In Masaka city, for example, we have a plethora of them that belong to the city. However, the threat lies with leaving them undeveloped. 

I would like to invite the minister, going forward, to make provisions for a comprehensive plan to preserve regional stadia by upgrading them. There should be sports arenas and not football pitches, to make provisions for a number of sporting disciplines so that we can harvest the vast talents of our young men and women. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.58 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, let me start by saluting the Parliament of Uganda for always dedicating time to discuss one of Uganda's brands or products; sports. 

I would like to quote something from what the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah said one time while addressing the youth leaders of Northern Uganda. He said: “Hard times do not create heroes. It is during the hard times when the hero within us is revealed.” 

The heroes we are seeing in this sports subsector are being created under such circumstances. We have presented our case - I was here when the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament called me – Mr Speaker, for the record of Parliament, the humble modern and ideal budget that we submitted in the circumstances for consideration by Parliament of Uganda totals to Shs 96,179,142,180. These proposals are already before Parliament of Uganda. 

The second point I would like to emphasise is that despite these budget cuts and suppression, Mr Speaker, including these two tournaments, where our ladies performed, were catered for by Government of Uganda, through the National Council of Sports. In this particular championship, Government, through the National Council of Sports, had to pay for full board accommodation for 19 days in Namibia, from 29 October to 17 November. 

Government also provided air tickets for the 27 member team - and most of them were players because they knew they were going for a two-in-one tournament and the humble out of pocket 

In the circumstances of the budget we are receiving, let me confirm that even with the budget suppression of Shs 10 billion, at the end of the financial year, not all the Shs 10 billion would have been released. You will find that less has been released to the National Council of Sports. 

Therefore, as a Parliament, kindly understand the predicament we are operating with. That is why we are humbly requesting that the budget proposal we have submitted for the next financial year be considered by the Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, there are some specific issues that I need to respond to. One is on the limited number. I have stated in this particular - we had a 27-member team. An issue was raised on consideration of the budget for sports, especially facilities – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Order

THE SPEAKER: I have not allowed that point of order because I know its origin. It started from a point of - honourable minister, please, proceed. Stop negotiating, honourable member.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the minister for giving way. At least, I have been following whatever you say and I take it seriously. Recently, when you came for the opening of the children’s forum at Munyonyo, you stopped us from lamenting and said we must move forward. 

The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is if he is aware that within his docket, he has the best tool to use to get money for sports, other than waiting for budget tickets - This is what you have. This is the clarification I am seeking. 

Mr Speaker, the only tool we have - which other countries are using to manage the sports sector without fighting with the Government to get a budget - is that they use their Acts governing sports. Take an example of Ghana; it was a battle for Parliament - why the national team used Government money to go out for football because they said that multinational companies were supposed, under their law, to provide them with the money. 

If you have MTN, Airtel and Stanbic Bank - if you have a good law - before they open up business here, they must take charge of a batch of sports and when they are running their business. 

Therefore, can you go back and look at the law that establishes the National Council of Sports? We should get that law that gives us that opportunity of getting resources from those big companies, which would help us run the sports sector, other than lamenting each time that there is no money and yet, they take all the dividends they made from this country back to their country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So, what happened to the point of order? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, it collapsed when you refused it.

MR OBUA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, if the senior honourable colleague of Parliament had given me an opportunity, I would have come to that. 

There was an issue raised by the District Woman Representative of Wakiso on consideration for facilities under the supplementary budget and she mentioned Mandela National Stadium. 

Mandela National Stadium renovation and upgrade was part and parcel of the supplementary budget that this Parliament passed. There was money to the tune of Shs 67 billion arising from the bill of quantities that was conducted by the Minister of Works and Transport, which was part and parcel of Supplementary Schedule No. 1. 

Just yesterday, we appeared before the Committee on Education and Sports, jointly with the Minister of Finance on the matter of two proposed stadia to be constructed with funding from the China grant. These two stadia have been dropped but because of the protracted struggle, that we have had, the two stadia, Akibua and Buhinga, have been reinstated. They have been cost-listed to benefit from this brand for the period 2021/2023. (Applause)

We are not taking these challenges while “lying down” and we are not lamenting. We are lamenting but also moving forward in terms of advocacy. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me now come to the issue of the law. Hon. Ssewungu has always raised this, including yesterday in the meeting of the Committee on Education and Sports, and this is what I had to say; One, we have a policy of 2004. We realised that when you proceed to either amend or repeal the 1964 Act, without first starting with realigning through review of the policy, you may end up with a good law, but not standing on a good policy. 

We started with the review of the policy to inform the law of a modern time. And I remember committing on this Floor when we again paid tribute to the Olympic team, that by the end of this financial year, we should be done with the policy in order to give rise to the repeal - in my opinion, it is even repeal, not amendment of that law. That law is old and obsolete; it must be repealed, but it can only be anchored on a modern policy. That is why we are seeking to start with the policy. 

On the issue - let me just correct this record of Parliament from hon. Obigah, who stated that the balls did not come from the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

I want to affirm that the Ministry of Education and Sports under the leadership of the First Lady and the Minister donated the 8,000 balls covering football and netball to Parliament of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: And I announced it here.

MR HAMSON OBUA: And you announced it. This is just to correct the record. I want to just emphasise that even within the limited budget we have - I have been here - this is my year number 16, and this is the first time that all Members of Parliament are receiving such a donation. It is the first time in my 16 consecutive years in Parliament - (Interjection) - just correcting the record, my senior colleague.

The issue of the Inzikuru Stadium; we are working on what the President had stated that his mission and vision is to construct 18 regional stadia in the 18 traditional regions of Uganda. And to kick-start the actualisation of this dream, he started by putting those two; Akii-Bua in Lango subregion then Buhinga in Kabarole.

When we are done with those two, we shall be on reducing balance, Mr Speaker. Now, I do not know whether the one of West Nile Region will be named Dorcus Inzikuru. However, West Nile is one of the 18 traditional regions, and we have already started with these two. 

The promise of Shs 10 million to She Cranes - I am hardly two years at office from the day I stepped in office when the office was handed over. I beg to pray that if I am reminded in writing, I will be able to remind His Excellency the President about this promise. 

The issue of the house donated to the late Akii-Bua. Mr Speaker, we followed this matter; it was even raised yesterday. Just today, I signed another reminder letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Where we have reached is that his property was valued by the Government Chief Valuer. We are supposed to pay the stamp duty. Now my letter is requesting the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to either pay or waive the stamp duty such that the Uganda Land Commission can proceed to effect transfer into the names of the administrator of the late John Akii-Bua; that is where we have reached for now in line with the laws of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, let me end on the note of the national basketball team. From the time I took over leadership, my emphasis was; one, proper planning by federations that are 51 in nature, because the international sports calendars are normally announced well in advance, especially by the international federations to the respective national federations. 

Issue two was about accountability - timely - because our hands are tied by the law passed by this Parliament; when you receive money from Government, account for it in time, in order for you to get the second advance. I want to lay on Table a letter signed by Mr Nasser Sserunjoji, FUBA President addressed to hon. Dennis Hamson Obua, Minister of State for Sports, Kampala. 
The letter is dated 22 November 2021. The subject is “Request for World Cup qualifier funding”. 22nd of November is Monday this week, and the letter is here. I just want to proceed and read this letter towards the end. It says: “...This is, therefore, kindly to request your urgent intervention and save the situation as the team is supposed to travel not later than 23 November 2021 (Tomorrow).” It is here 22 November but the team is supposed to travel not later than 23 November 2021 (Tomorrow) - (Interjection) - it is contained in the letter. I am going to lay it on Table for the record of Parliament. 

Honourable members, this letter is seeking for a grand total of $ 115,392. This is over Shs 400 million when you convert it - 22nd and latest 23rd, the team must travel. That means the team should get visas, COVID-19 test and everything within that limited time. 

Mr Speaker, you have always emphasised that we can do things better, and I want to still emphasise that we can do things better - when this budget is even attached. That delegation is supposed to be 24 but there is no list of delegation members attached. The budget is here, page one and two is a content page, number three is the budget, planning for 24 people but the list is not there. Yet this is supposed to be cleared by Government. 

The Government through EFT is supposed to get these resources. Of course, we know we have limited resources, but they are things that we can even get on credit. For instance, air tickets. Therefore, I want to appeal, just like I have always done to our sports federations that let us plan in advance. This is my humble appeal. 

As we are in the process of consulting, the president of the federation yesterday went and announced that “Team Uganda” for basketball has withdrawn; uncoordinated movement of troops. 

For me, my question is; why always basketball? We are here paying tribute to these girls for flying our flag higher and higher, but under difficult circumstances. However, because they informed the system early enough, the system was able to consult and whatever was within our reach, had to be provided, the team had to be facilitated to travel, sleep, train, and eat. Of course, the out-of-pocket is an issue. 

We even committed that if funds get to the sports subsector, we can pay them their arrears. If this Parliament can give us the resources we require - I am not running anywhere because I know constitutionally, the mandate to appropriate falls with the Parliament of Uganda on proposals that come from the Executive. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we find ourselves in this predicament. Let me lay this letter on Table for the record of Parliament, such that we also appreciate the predicament under which, sometimes, we are put to work.

Finally, let me salute our girls, the She Cranes.(Applause) When I spoke to them, I had nothing but only to motivate them because I knew they were going like David facing the Goliaths of this continent. I told them, the best you have is to make choices at a personal level. Give yourself your personal best; give your country, your personal best. 

Mr Speaker, the She Cranes have already put us on notice as the Government, including Parliament, that come 2022, they have already made history for the first team to qualify for the 2022 Commonwealth Games (Applause). They have put us on notice. I think this time round, they must not travel without what is required for them. 

They have put the organ in charge of appropriation on notice that in 2022, we are going to England. They have equally put us on notice that come 2023, we are going for the World Cup of netball in South Africa. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, this, to me, is an invitation to treat. If we do not get better funding, we will come back and lament and say they went for the World Cup and Commonwealth with the same funding, when they went for qualifiers. But if the funding is made better - we committed that we can pay even the arrears for these particular qualifiers on condition that we are given more money. We can pay. They have marketed the country. Presidents and your team, I want to thank you. 

Coach Mugerwa, who is also the coach of the Parliament team, I want to salute you and the technical team. Our girls continue along that trajectory. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate that we never invited our professional players for netball. We picked from the available players within clubs in Uganda and they were able to take a second position at Africa Cup of Nations for Netball. What a performance! (Applause) Supposing we had brought all our pros, who are playing in England, best clubs in the world for netball, probably, the results would have been better. 

But our ranking has improved. Let me state for the record, that in Africa, we are now number two, after South Africa and Malawi is number three. In the whole world, we are number six.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for dedicating time. We only pray and hope that by the grace of God, if the sports subsector is given more resources, we can do more. From the little resources, if we are able to bring better results, better performances, better ranking, breaking and setting four world records within a very difficult time; best performance in the Olympics, best performance in the world school sports games, best performance so far by the Netball Federation and the She Cranes, we can, if supported on funding and infrastructure be able to deliver more.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and thank Parliament for giving us time. We hope and pray that we can work collectively. This is not an individual achievement; it is collective. When we say thank you, to these ladies, we give them motivation and inspiration. Thank you. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The honourable minister said “by the grace of God, we shall accomplish”. The grace of God is already there. (Applause) What is lacking is our own commitment. The grace of God is always there; it is there. It is here now, with you and with every one of us. So, let us now inspire ourselves to do better to help this sector to grow. The grace of God is already there. Let us act. (Applause) 

I now put the question on the motion that this Parliament, by resolution, pays tribute to the Uganda Netball team, the She Cranes for their outstanding performance at the 10th Africa Games 2021. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Motion, adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two things that I need to do. There is an urgent Bill that we have been monitoring with the committee, which has just submitted its report and we need to start the process because there are discussions going to go in the region about it and so, we need to show that we have also started the process of finalising. We may not be able to complete it anytime from today or tomorrow but if we start the process, it will give us leverage on how to give speeches about what we are going to do. 

This is the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Special Provisions Bill, 2021. It was before the committee already and we want to accommodate it now and then we can receive a statement from the Leader of the Opposition. Thereafter, we will see how to conclude. Can we cause alteration to the Order Paper to accommodate this matter? 

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021
5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Opolot Okaasai) Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for West Budama, Adjumani East, Bulisa, Rakai, Oyam, Rubanda County West. I think the motion is properly seconded. Would the minister like to speak briefly to this motion?

MR OKAASAI: Mr Speaker, the Bill seeks to fully define the legal and regulatory framework for the EACOP project in Uganda by enabling aspects of agreed upon – through negotiations – the inter-governmental agreement and post-government agreement to ensure the project is implemented in Uganda lawfully.

It should also be noted that the United Republic of Tanzania has already passed a similar law to enable the implementation of the project in Tanzania. The Government of Tanzania and Uganda granted the project a number of incentives to ensure that the pipeline is least costly and the tariff is fixed. These incentives can only be put into effect – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR OKAASAI: I will not give you the page because it is in the remedies and proposed objectives. The Bill, therefore, seeks to: a. Provide for the tariff regime application to the project during the different phases of operation, which is the construction and operations period
b. To enable the Government and Uganda National Oil Company to pay the transportation tariff in kind;
c. Ensure that the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project obtains the required authorisation in a timely manner;
d. Grant and protect the land rights of the project including enabling the Government to support the project in the acquisition of land;
e. Define the local content regime applicable to the EACOP Project and ensure that Ugandan citizens and enterprises optimally benefit from the project through prioritisation, ring-fencing and joint ventures, among others;
f. Guarantee third party access to the pipeline and define the tariffs to be paid by the third parties. This is important in ensuring that the crude oil from any future discoveries can easily commercialised. Therefore, it is an incentive to encourage further exploration for petroleum in our country;
g. Provide for the decommissioning of the project after cessation of activities;
h. Define the force majeure events applicable to the project in case of failure or delay in performance of obligations arising from acts of God or related forces outside the control of the party;
i. Provide for the procedure for transfer and assignment of rights and obligations;
j. Ensure access to electricity by the project;
k. Enable the fiscal regime for the project based on incentives granted by the Government of Uganda and the Government of Tanzania;
l. Empower the minister to make regulations to give effect to the Bill and facilitate implementation of the project;
m. Give the EACOP Bill supremacy over other laws on matters specifically covered by the Bill;

Those are the objectives of the Bill. I wish to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this Bill was received and forwarded to our Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. The report is here, it is actually quite big. I would like to invite the chairperson of the committee, for today’s purposes, to just lay a copy of the report on the Table. 

We will see how we can begin the handling of this matter when the copies are already circulated. We will handle the report next week. I will not propose the question for debate today, we will do it next week. 

5.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Mr Speaker, before I lay the report of the Committee on – 

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I had asked you to do so please do it. 

MR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources in respect of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Special Provisions Bill, 2021. It is accompanied by the minutes of the proceedings and the stakeholders’ views. I beg to lay them on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the full text of the report has been received. It will be processed and posted to your online systems so that we can begin looking at this. When we resume next week, we will begin the process of debate on this motion for second reading. After that, the chairperson of the committee will report. From there, we will have a full debate on the principles of the Bill and see how we make progress with the rest of the decisions on the provisions of the Bill. Thank you.

5.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I appreciate the circumstances under which the report is being laid and I hold no qualms about it. I also thought the chairperson would make mention of the fact that there is a minority report but for lack of time, they could not process it. This is so that the records capture the report’s existence and the author utilises the space to complete and upload it. I thought he would do so. 

This was not a Bill brought under rule 119 as an urgent Bill but we can understand when there is a delay to have it processed. We can accept proper processing. However, I thought the chairperson of the committee would recognise that so that the records are very clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rule on this minority report is such that at the conclusion of the debate on a particular Bill, a report is prepared and agreed upon. Where some Members have an area where they do not agree with the majority of the committee, they give notification to the chairperson that, “Chair and Members, on this particular aspect, we do not agree with the position of the majority and we will be filing a minority report”. 

The opportunity is then given to them to prepare a minority report. Once it is ready, it is submitted to the chairperson of the committee and actually attached to the main report so that when the chairperson of the committee is presenting and whatever he lays should ordinarily contain the minority report. Mr Chair, does that report you have laid have a minority report attached to it? 

MR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My committee examined the Bill and we held a very detailed discussion until this afternoon. We came up with a report of consensus. I was very surprised, when I was already in this House, to be served by our staff with two notices. One is dated 23 November 2021, which was yesterday. In other words, this was even before we concluded the discussion. It was authored by hon. Nyakato Asinansi and addressed to me and copied to you, among others, giving me notice of an intention to write a minority report. 

THE SPEAKER: So, the copy of the minority report is not available? 

MR OTAALA: Yes, Mr Speaker. The copy of the minority report is not there and I am not privy to it. I have been notified while I was in this House. 

In the same breath, I have also been served with a notice from hon. Christine Kaaya telling me about her intention to write a minority report. 

While we were discussing and concluding our report – 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let us not go beyond this. The point is, honourable members, as the Presiding Officer, I know the processes that have gone into the production and making of this report available. Notification had been given to the chairperson of the committee of the intention to draw a minority report. I think the circumstances dictate, just like the name of the Bill says, special provisions. We also need to apply special provisions to accommodate the minority and when we come next week, we have the minority report also.

Therefore, those with intention to raise the minority report, please, do not just give notice; prepare the text and submit. When we come on Tuesday, if it is not there, I shall say, you gave a false notice. Okay but then, when it is brought, we will allow you because the chairperson will be presenting. At the conclusion of his presentation, by that time, hopefully, we will have already gotten the minority report. You will then say, “I also have a minority report” - whose notice will have been given – “Mr Speaker, allow the Members who have minority opinions to proceed with the presentations since the chairman is not presenting today but next week.”

STATEMENT ON THE SHRINKING CIVIC SPACE IN THE COUNTRY

5.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This particular statement brought under Rule 51 certainly arouses curiosity including its title. I have delegated my able Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs to present on my behalf. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, counsel, proceed.

5.37
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono North County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement on the shrinking operational space of the civil society organisations -

THE SPEAKER: Can I give you 10 minutes? Proceed.

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA:  Maybe in 15 minutes.  This is a statement on the shrinking operational space of the civil society organisations in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, in a democratic Government, Civil Society Organisations are a channel through, which citizens are mobilised to participate in influencing policy decisions, management of public resources to contribute to national development.

Civil Society Organisations are champions of transparency, information sharing and holding the government accountable in pursuit of service delivery. Hence it is prudent that the State closely works with Civil Society Organisations in ensuring qualitative service delivery while preventing abuse of public authority and resources. 

To the contrary, however, it has been observed that the State is increasingly clamping down Civil Society Organisations operations in Uganda. The clamp-down is both systemic and targeted. 

Given the foregoing, it is incumbent upon Parliament to inquire into the operations of Civil Society Organisations particularly political parties, Non-Governmental Organisations, media and journalists, cultural and religious institutions. 

Mr Speaker, in the area of political parties, the State has been highly repressive towards organised effort of dissent. Opposition political parties are not accorded a condusive environment within which to operate as per the dictates of a free and democratic leadership enshrined under Article 29(11(e) of the Constitution of Uganda. 

Security forces deter them from popularising their parties while on the other hand facilitating popularization of the ruling party. For instance, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) has not been deterred from undertaking mobilisation tours in Buganda Region while the National Unity Platform (NUP) has been blocked from holding radio talk shows and party activities in Mbale and Lira districts. 

The Police and the Army have on several occasions, under the guise of regulating public order, reigned in on political activities and prevented the opposition from organising and conducting their activities in an orderly and democratic environment; hence offending the civic space. 

The security organs have selectively and conveniently used the Public Order Management Act to blatantly stifle political dissent. The Act, under section 8, had given the Inspector General of Police or any person designated by the IGP powers to unilaterally stop gatherings or protests merely on subjective suspicion that such gathering or protest would result in breach peace.

However, Mr Speaker, the Constitutional Court, in the case of the Human Rights Network and four others v. the Attorney General (Constitutional Petition No. 056 of 2013) annulled Section 8 of the POMA. In effect, the prohibitive powers were clipped because those powers were unacceptable and demonstrably unjustifiable in a free and democratic society. 

The decision is a hallmark in creating an enabling environment for political dissent that is pertinent in shaping democratic and just leadership in Uganda. Hence as a matter of urgency, the impugned section should immediately be removed from the Public Order Management Act. Surprisingly almost a year after the Constitutional Court judgment, which was delivered in March 2020, prohibitive powers were still applied during the recently concluded 2021 general elections. 

Opposition leaders were harassed, assaulted, and some even faced kidnap. 

For instance, on 3 November 2020, the President of NUP was violently assaulted shortly after being nominated to run for the Presidency of Uganda. 

The President of the Forum for Democratic Change was equally violently arrested by Police and the Army. He was presented to the nomination venue bare-foot and all roughed up. Actually, the entire presidential campaigns were characterised by use of excessive force and live ammunition targeted at dissenting political candidates and their supporters in the pretext of enforcing COVID l9 containment measures. 

In November 2020, the demonstrations that followed the arbitrary arrest of Hon. Kyagulanyi led to the killing of more than 50 people. Several hundreds of his supporters were abducted by the Police and Army, many of whose whereabouts remain unknown. 
Later in December 2020, the hon. Kyagulanyi campaign team was violently arrested in Kalangala and court-martialled on trumped up charges. 

After the elections, the Police and military placed the President of NUP under house arrest, completely restraining him from his office and lawyers. 

At the same time, Police and the military besieged and barricaded off the headquarters of the NUP for over a month. This hampered the preparation and eventual filing of the presidential election petition against the disputed presidential poll by Hon. Kyagulanyi and his legal team. 

Relatedly, the National Consultative Forum for Political Parties and Organisations, established under section 20 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, is yet to influence reforms geared towards addressing the government's repressive approach towards political parties in Uganda. For instance, the forum has not weighed in or made any known its position on the current indiscriminate attacks on opposition political parties, agitation of the President to curtail issuance of bail and trumped up charges against hon. Ssegirinya Mohammed of Kawempe North and hon. Allan Ssewanyana of Makindye West. 

This is mainly attributed to the lukewarm support from the Electoral Commission, which has hindered the actualisation of the forum’s mandate stipulated under section 20(4) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. 

The forum is mandated to ensure compliance with Code of Conduct, advancing complaints of political parties to the Electoral Commission and resolving disputes amongst political parties, among others. 

Unfortunately, the Auditor-General, in the report of 2020, noted that the forum is poorly planned for by the Electoral Commission.

On the issue of non-governmental organisations, over the years, civic space for NGOs and community-based organisations, has shrunk due to the historic mistrust of the State with organised groupings of people advocating for civil and fundamental rights and freedoms. They have continuously faced the high-handed repressive hand of the State through orchestrated break-ins, closure and suspension of bank accounts, especially those perceived critical of Government. For instance, in 2017, the offices and accounts of Action Aid and Great Lakes Institute for Strategic Studies (GLISS), were closed.

The legal regime and regulatory framework are also very cumbersome and extremely taxing. It is exceptionally hard to register a non-governmental organisation, and even much harder for an NGO to get accredited periodically. For instance, section 44 of the NGO Act has restrictive provisions that require NGOs to seek approval from District NGO monitoring committees, Local Government and NGO Bureau before extending activities to the new geographical area. 

The multiple registration itself constrains the widening of footprints of NGOs into new areas. As a consequence, the complementary role of NGOs to the efforts of Government is adversely affected as far as fighting gender-based violence, provision of clean and safe water, building and supporting schools, health centres, as well as road maintenance, among others is concerned. This also downplays the contribution of NGOs to the economy, particularly in terms of service delivery, providing employment opportunities, and associated tax payments.

Whereas it is quite hard to ascertain the total number of employees of NGOs in Uganda, according to the NGO Bureau of 2021, as per the report of 9 October 2021, the total number of employees of NGOs in Uganda is 2,205 indigenous and foreign NGOs operating in Uganda. Assuming every NGO employed 10 people, they would in total employ 22,050 people. The people pay taxes and support a number of dependents.

More still, the NGO Bureau is overreaching in execution of its mandate. In August 2021, the NGO Bureau announced suspension of 54 NGOs on assertion of expired permits, failure to file annual returns or failure to register with authorities. It was noted that most of the NGOs that were suspended were monitoring elections and advocates of protection of human rights. 

However, some NGOs adduced evidence that they were unduly suspended, for they had fulfilled requirements for permits renewal. 

Of late, the State has made it known of its insecurity about the donor funding towards NGOs. This was evidenced in the presidential directive issued on 02 January 2021 ordering the closure of the Democratic Governance Facility (DGF). It was asserted that DGF was subverting Government under the guise of improving governance. 

This State of affairs orchestrated clamp down on the financing of NGOs through the DGF adversely impacts on the operations of civil societies in Uganda. 

These manoeuvres were further extended through clamped up charges of money laundering against advocate Nicholas Opio, a renowned human rights lawyer and the Executive Director of Chapter Four, Uganda. Fortunately, the charges were later dropped due to lack of merit.

In the area of media and journalists, Article 29(1)(a) of the Constitution, enshrines freedom of speech and expression, which include freedom of press and other media. This can only be restricted as provided for in Article 43 of the Constitution in circumstances that are acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society.

Unfortunately, in disregard of the Constitution throughout the entire campaigns in the recently concluded general elections, police and the army specifically targeted journalists that covered the campaign programmes of the Opposition candidates. This was envisaged in the campaign trails of the presidential candidates of hon. Kyagulanyi of the National Unity Platform and hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi of the Forum for Democratic Change. 

Many journalists were violently assaulted and harassed such as John Cliff Wamala of NTV, Daniel Lutaaya of NBS Television, Waiswa Moses of Busoga One Radio, among others. Others were shot at and sustained grave injuries such as Ashraf Kasirye of Ghetto media, among others.

While others were arrested and prosecuted under the General Court Martial such as Kalema Richard of Ghetto Media and Lukeman Kampala, a freelance photojournalist.

Surprisingly, the commander of the operation in which the police and the army beat up journalists that were covering the National Unity Platform leaders as they delivered the petition to the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Kampala, who ought to have been charged in Court Martial has never been apprehended for any offence. 

The high-handedness of security personnel has resulted in intimidation, coercion, limitation of free space and expression; curtailed transmission of information and gravely hurt democratic principles and growth of the country. 

Mr Speaker, this has not been helped by the inexcusable suspension of the media houses, journalists and talk shows by the Uganda Communications Commission. This usually happens when the State has expressed displeasure for media coverage of protests or arrests of Opposition leaders and engaging in debates critical of unpopular Government undertakings. For instance, in 2019, UCC suspended 39 journalists from 13 Media houses on allegations of breach of minimum broadcasting standards during the coverage of protests against the arrest of hon. Kyagulanyi. 

Such hefty and unjustified sanctions undermine the quality of journalism in Uganda and create an environment of fear. This is as per the letter to the Uganda Communications Commission originated from the National Association of Broadcasters in 2019.

Such circumstances accentuate administrative gaps, deeply abuse the natural justice and undermine sector growth for the Commission has on many occasions failed to dispense justice in a free, fair and democratic manner. 

Unfortunately, Government has failed to constitute Uganda Communications Tribunal, which would have handled the complaints relating to the decisions of UCC, as provided for under Sections 60 and 64 of UCC Act.

In the area of cultural institutions, in 1967, cultural institutions were abolished due to mistrust between their leaders and the State. They were later restored in 1993. However, it has been a bitter-sweet relationship between the traditional/cultural institutions and the Executive arm of Government. Several properties, which had been confiscated by past regimes were not given back to the respective institutions from the restoration to date. Instead, the Government’s policy is to hand them back in piecemeal. 

Tokenism, in form of cars and cash is yet another policy the State has employed to strategically and conveniently portray itself as the provider. Some of the leaders of these institutions watch on in silence as excesses are committed by the State through extreme violence, arrest and kidnap, murder, corruption and poor governance. 

It may be perceived that such leaders cannot speak up and sensitise their subjects in fear of losing out on the brown envelopes from the President. Consequently, such leaders failed to hold the state accountable. 

Worth noting, Mr Speaker, the State has extended its long arm into the dynamic of some of the cultural institutions, causing divisions and disharmony of Government influence in the leadership contest in some cultural institutions. It has created tension that has threatened peace and stability within their subjects. 

The state involvement in the cultural institutions dynamics also undermines the cultural sovereignty of those institutions. For instance, in his missive entitled “Museveni writes to NRA mobilisers on land and sectarianism”. The President described cultural leaders as parasites that live off the wealth of their subjects. He further alleges that institutions such as Buganda Land Board are illegal entities. 

This has been occasioned by the cultural institution pushback of the repressive and exploitative advances of Government, particularly in excess of the land. All these attacks, subsequently, distort the civic roles of cultural institutions and undermine the propagation of citizen inclusion in governance. 

Religious institutions
The Government has increasingly demonstrated its displeasure with religious leaders for holding it accountable. In the just concluded election cycle, religious leaders were in one way or the other accused of undermining the Government. For instance, following the 2021 General Elections, hon. Vincent Bamulangaki Ssempijja, the Minister of Defence, as well as the former Minister for Presidency Esther Mbayo, on several occasions, rebuked the religious leaders for the dismal performance of NRM Political Party. 

The state also coordinated a degrading narrative meant to undermine the religious leaders in order to derail the religious institutions and preclude them from taking part in shaping the political and democratic landscape of the country. For instance, the President terms religious leaders as parasitic and sectarian, as per the Daily Monitor of 13 November 2021. 

On the other occasion, the Government has been seen to undermine the authority and control of educational institutions founded by religious institutions. For instance, in religious founded schools that are now Government-aided, the Government has on several occasions been criticised for transferring teachers and head teachers, without ample consultation from the founders. This has led to standoffs that further widen working relations and subsequently shrink the civic space of religious institutions. 

On other occasions, the state has appointed religious leaders into political positions without approval and consent of their superiors. These two have led to the tension between the state and religious institutions. 

Of concern too has been the extension of gifts to the religious leaders in the form of cars and cash. The Head of State has long employed tokenism seemingly to buy their support.  This presents a risk of undermining the duty and objectivity of some religious leaders; consequently, compromising the use of their platforms in holding the government accountable. 

Recommendations 
Political parties 
    1. It would be prudent to increase funding of the National Consultative Forum to empower it to fast-track its statutory obligations under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. The enhanced funding would improve the operations of the forum to build the capacities of the political parties in Uganda and propagate dialogue at the national level with the intent of wiping out political persecution and strengthening the democratic values. 
    2. There is a need to amend the Electoral Commission Act to redefine the role of police and armed forces during elections. The role of conducting elections should be the reserve of the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission should be solely in charge of and in direct command and control of co-opted police and other internal security personnel deployed in the electoral process. The army should not play any role in the electoral process over and above those listed under Article 208 and 209 of the Constitution and the Uganda People's Defence Forces Act, 2005. This would go an extra mile in ensuring that the operations of police during elections are not politically motivated, as noticed over time. 

Non-Government Organisations
    1. There is a need to amend the Non-Government Organisations Act 2016 and dispense with the said unnecessary and restrictive multiple registration and accreditation process. 
    2. There is a need to formulate a committee of Parliament to investigate the operations of the National Bureau for Non-Governmental Organisations and the recent suspension of the 54 for Non-Governmental Organisations. 

Media and journalists
    1. The Minister responsible for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance should report to Parliament why the Uganda Communications Tribunal has not been established, as required under the Uganda Communication Commissions Act. 
    2. The Minister responsible for Internal Affairs should brief the House on the measures taken to apprehend perpetrators of violence meted out on journalists during the recently concluded general elections. 

Cultural institutions
The Prime Minister should present to Parliament a comprehensive inventory of the confiscated properties owed to cultural institutions and are due for restitution and compensation accompanied by budgetary implication of restitution or compensation as well as payment schedule of the same. 

Religious institutions
    1. There is a need to streamline the Education Service Commission to work on the recommendations and technical guidance of religious institutions, as far as the transfer of teachers and head teachers is concerned in institutions founded by religious bodies. 
    2. There is a need for development of a donation policy that elaborates the criteria of who deserves a donation, the purpose, form and value of the donation. This will ensure certainty and consistency in handling of government donations. 

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the honourable Leader of the Opposition for this statement. We had hoped that it was going to take a shorter time so that we could have a debate. However, under Rule 53, it has its own timeframe for debate and the rules say it should be an hour. It is now 6 O'clock. Usually, by this time, the debates are a bit difficult, especially when matters are fresh. 

Honourable members, because of some occurrences and developments, we will not be able to sit tomorrow. Therefore, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2 O'clock.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 November 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)
