Wednesday, 12 November 2014

Parliament met at 3.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I will begin by amending the Order Paper to delete item No.4: Prime Minister’s Question Time. The Prime Minister is representing Uganda in Lusaka, at the burial of the late Zambian President and the others are not in position to handle this issue. So, we shall do Question Time next week.

Secondly, we have in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, some of the most senior medical practitioners in the country. They are here to witness the presentation of a motion to form the Uganda Medical Society. We have Dr Nathan Mugisha, President of the Uganda Medical Association; we have one of the most senior people in that profession, Prof. Paul D’Arbela; you are welcome. We have a very senior person again, Prof. Yusuf Mpairwe; you are welcome. We have the one and only Dr Jane Bbosa; we have Dr Obuku Ekwaro, Dr Myers Lugemwa – he deals with Malaria; so you should look at his face closely; and Dr Ivan Kisuule; you are all welcome.

So, I will be amending the Order Paper again to bring up their motion to come immediately after the laying of the papers so that they can go back and treat the people of Uganda.

Now, the third matter I want to communicate, honourable members, I have received reports, which I hope are not true, that some of the members send their personal assistants to attend the committee meetings and some go for the field visits. So, I want to remind members that you cannot attend the meeting by proxy. Next time you send your personal assistants, we shall arrest them. You must be there in person. That is a requirement of our practice. 

3.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to your communication to members attending the committee and their personal assistants. I am seeking your clarification because sometimes when the committees are sitting, even the press do attend. Probably, if the personal assistants are attending without signing the book for the members, couldn’t they be allowed to listen and take notes? I don’t have a personal assistant but I am just looking at the wide perspective that maybe you can take the notes on behalf of the member but not sign in the book as the media people or other members do attend. Could that be allowed? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we don’t recognise your personal assistants. We know you, you are the elected Members of Parliament; we don’t know those people. So, you must be there personally. If you can’t come, tell us you can’t come. We shall arrest them for impersonation – (Laughter) - If they sit there like anybody else, that is fine but to say I am representing so and so, no. If they are sitting as spectators, then that is fine but not to participate on your behalf. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we don’t have the Order Paper on our iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Your iPad has a problem, let us proceed.

LAYING OF PAPERS

A PUBLICATION ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCE, VOLUME IV – 
FEBRUARY TO DECEMBER 2013

3.21
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, under Rule 167(3), the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation is required to make a statement on the status of the implementation of assurances upon which the Leader of Government Business shall respond. 

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, this committee has completed assembling all the pledges that were made both by His Excellency the President and the ministers and the Prime Minister on the Floor of this House, available under Volume IV, as I lay it on Table. 

Furthermore, the Office of the Clerk will make available, copies of this Volume so that every Member of Parliament can have it in order to assist us track these pledges. 

It is also my hope that as the committee extends invitations to honourable ministers to make an appearance before them in order to respond to some of these issues which have been made in form of commitments to this country that they do respond positively to our invitations.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay this Volume IV of the Government Assurances and Implementation committee report, ending the December, 2013. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Members, the report will be available and the date will be allocated for us to discuss it. 

Now in introducing the doctors, we missed out Dr Denson Nyabwana who represents the medical practitioners in KCCA. You are welcome.

Honourable members, before the commissioner comes, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers from Mwana Nursery School, Iganga, represented by hon. Peter Mugema and hon. Kwagala. You are welcome. We also have another group from Buyende – Gema Kumwino, represented by hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa and hon. Kadogo. You are welcome. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2013 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

3.23
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Parliamentary Commissioner): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following institutions:

    i. The Parliamentary Pensions Scheme
    ii. The Justice, Law and Order Sector 
    iii. The Ministry of Local Government – Uganda Good Governance (UGOGO)Programme
    iv. The Inspector General of Government – DANIDA Project under Uganda Good Governance Programme – Component III
    v. Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development/Project Coordination Unit (PCU) Component
    vi. Ministry of Water and Environment – Joint Water Sanitation Sector Programme Support 
    vii. Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 
    viii. The Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project- IGG Component IDA 4626-UG 
    ix. The Uganda National Council of Science and Technology – Millennium Science Initiative Project IDA Credit Agreement No. 04174-UG
    x. Coordinating Office for Control of Trypanosomiasis in Uganda (COCTU)
    xi. Uganda National Council for Science and Technology – Transfer and Commercialisation of Low Cost Charcoal Manufacturing Technology for Entrepreneurs and Farmers in Uganda Project UG – 0074
    xii. Uganda Heart Institute
    xiii. Second Private Sector Competitiveness Project (PSCP II) – IDA Credit no. 3975 UG
    xiv. Pride Microfinance Limited 
    xv. State House
    xvi. Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
    xvii. Office of the Prime Minister
    xviii. National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank
    xix. The Judiciary Department
    xx. NEC Tractor Hire Scheme Limited
    xxi. The Uganda Registration Services Bureau Liquidation
    xxii. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
    xxiii. The Uganda Petroleum Institute - Kigumba
    xxiv. The Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project
    xxv. Nyabyeya Forestry College
    xxvi. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Government of Uganda Consolidated Financial Statements 
    xxvii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Treasury Operations 
    xxviii. China Uganda Friendship Hospital – Naguru
    xxix. Butabika Mental Referral Hospital
    xxx. Kyambogo University
    xxxi. The Microfinance Support Centre Limited and Rural Income and Employment Enhancement Project
    xxxii. The Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project 
    xxxiii. The Road Sector Support Project I - ADF Loan No 2100150009644, and 2100150013494 and Grand No 2100155004668 Kabale-Kisoro
    xxxiv. The Rural Financial Service Programme – IFAD Loan 591 
    xxxv. Makerere University – Support to Research Activities at Makerere University 
    xxxvi. The Uganda Development Corporation
    xxxvii. The Rural Communications Development Fund
    xxxviii. The Ministry of Water and Environment – Programme Management Support under the Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support
    xxxix. The Uganda Coffee Development Authority
    xl. The Cotton Development Organization 
    xli. Postbank Limited Financial Statement; and
    xlii. The Education Service Commission

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Nokrach. All those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

3.33
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Uganda Medical Society Bill, 2014” in accordance with our rules 110 and 111 of our Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The motion and the draft Bill have been uploaded on the system for Members to follow the presentation, but it appears there is some challenge with the system.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted it’s Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and in accordance with clause 4(b) of Article 94 and rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND AWARE that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under objective XIV(b) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provides for the state’s duty to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy access to health services and objective XX expresses the state’s commitment to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

ALSO AWARE that in order for the state to achieve the constitutional objective of provision of health services to its citizens, there is need to have a well regulated and coordinated medical profession, platform through which members of the medical profession can advance for the most viable medical practises;

NOTING that since presently there is no law in place that brings members of the medical profession together, the proposed law will aid the promotion of medical and allied sciences, professional development and maintenance of high standards of professional ethics through a one united voice persuaded that in order to plan, organise and implement programmes, protect and preserve the legislative and social economic interests of the medical profession as well as ensure that medical professionals make a meaningful contribution towards provision of quality medical services in the country, there is need to have an enabling law in place;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that this august House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Uganda Medical Society Bill, 2014” in a draft of which is here too attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just briefly to give a justification that we have over 4,000 medical doctors in Uganda who are registered by the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council which is a professional regulatory authority that registers doctors’ practice. But when they practice, they get scattered all over the country and sometimes it is very difficult to trace where these doctors are.

The council is a preacher of the law but we also have the Uganda Medical Association which is an assembly that brings together doctors in Uganda. The executive committee is what we have introduced - the distinguished doctors in the gallery - but this is just a voluntary association of willing doctors and the doctors who are not in the association are less than 200 members.

There is a concern amongst us, the medical doctors, that there is need for better coordination of the medical doctors to have a platform where the doctors can make a meaningful contribution towards provision of better quality services in this country. 

And, therefore, the gist of this Bill is to create the Uganda Medical Society so that the assembly of doctors is created by law; so that the association of the doctors is given legitimacy through legislation; so that all the doctors who practise medicine in Uganda belong to this medical association or society and this will have very many benefits as the Bill will later on outline.

But the main concern of the medical doctors is that they need this kind of platform so that they can contribute towards drafting of policies, implementation of programmes and generally service provision in this country. But also if we create a society of doctors, this is going to promote and maintain the honour and interest of the medical profession in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the lawyers call themselves, “Learned friends” and as doctors, we call ourselves, “educated friends.” So, we would want, through the creation of the medical society, to restore the dignity and honour of the medical profession and once this Parliament facilitates that process to create this society, then doctors in this country will have this platform where they can engage with the Minister of Health and all those bodies responsible for the provision of services and we shall play a bigger and meaningful role. 

But also, it will be very easy through the medical society to instil self-discipline and ensure that professional ethics are promoted within the professionals. I am sure that some of you get disappointed with the behaviours and actions of some doctors in this country. If we have a medical society that brings together all doctors, the way the lawyers have the Uganda Law Society, then it becomes easy for the doctors to regulate themselves, to discipline themselves so that we can promote and facilitate professional ethics within the profession.

Also, it will be easy to ensure that there is continuous medical education because the profession of medicine requires that you must update knowledge; you must learn and study and acquire knowledge all the time because things change. There is technological change and therefore if we have a society, it becomes very easy to transfer this knowledge to the spectrum of doctors at all levels.

Therefore, there are lots of advantages and without taking a lot of time, I want to beg that the honourable members of this Parliament associate themselves with this positive and progressive intervention of assisting the medical doctors in Uganda to create a society so that all of us can enjoy better health services in this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

And in accordance with our rules, I want to lay on Table the draft Bill, “The Uganda Medical Society Bill, 2014” and the motion which I have just moved. Thank you very much.

3.42
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second this motion in totality and with a lot of honesty and humility. As hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi said, we have very many doctors in this country that are scattered and are not uniting. Something strange happened about two years ago: I watched a young doctor subjecting a man with terminal prostate cancer to surgery just because he wanted some money. It happened and this young doctor got away with it, the patient died and I did not see anybody bring this person to order.

I can tell you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that medicine is very complicated in that something which somebody learns for more than 60 years, you cannot learn in only one day. It is very difficult. It is like the lawyers, their language is very complicated. Similarly, ours is also very complicated and to bring a doctor to order, you must be a learned doctor or you must be an educated person. 

So, ideally when it comes to ethics; we have very many young doctors and young health professionals that are not practicing ethical medicine at all. Everything has become business and you see everybody crying. It will be very unwise of us to be in this Parliament when we know that we are learned and leave when we have not enacted a law that can bring these doctors together and we bring them to order whenever they make mistakes. 

We have a variety of quacks; these are not learned doctors but call themselves trained doctors. They have stolen money from everybody. In this medical station here near the Office of the Prime Minister, they do not control them at all. You have seen people who even go on the radio to advertise branding themselves as the best doctors in the whole of Kampala. We have our own things but people are not following them at all. People who come from outside - there is a hospital which I cannot mention now because this thing must be passed first - that is charging people thousands of dollars for something very small and they are going unchecked. We are saying, who will bring these people to order if it is not this Society that is created?

What we are trying to do is to save you and ourselves from the embarrassment of people who have chosen to practice bad medicine in this Country and have gone unchecked. 

Madam Speaker, if you went to a hospital today you would see how the medical professionals of these days are behaving compared to those in the past; you cannot understand what is happening. The Kiyongas of those days - they come here and cry painfully when they know that some young doctor is making a mistake but when there is no way of –(Member timed out.)

3.45
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka); Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, ladies and Gentlemen, I stand here to second the motion. Of course as you know, we are created by God and we come into the world and when we come into it, God put in some arrangement and that is healthcare workers who must do the repairing. Of course finally we go but for a number of years, there are ups and downs when we fall sick and we must be cared for. Those people who care for our lives are the medical or health professionals. But of course today, our system - the health service - is full of problems and a number of people are dissatisfied. We, the healthcare workers, are not satisfied with the system just like the users of the system and of course the person providing the funding is also crying because the objectives are not being fulfilled. 

There are number of reasons why this is so; there is the issue of the human resource that is the health professionals, the doctors. These must show the professional competence, good knowledge, skills, attitude and exhibit good behaviour and personal integrity. They must adhere to the ethics but as you know what is going on due to a number of reasons, some of these things have not been put into practice. From my point of view, we need therefore to provide a legal platform which will enable the medical workers to provide peer support as it is very important in the professional practices.

This legal framework will also enable the medical doctors to participate in policy formulation including a say in the selection and training the medical workers –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is only seeking leave of this House to print a Bill; so, we can discuss the details when the Bill comes. I want to put the question that this House does grant permission to the honourable members to move a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Uganda Medical Society Bill, 2014.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

So, the Bill should be published and the Minister of Finance is required to give a certificate of financial implications in not later than 30 days from now. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCE (CONTROL) BILL, 2007

THE SPEAKER: We may have a problem, is there anyone standing in for the Minister of Internal Affairs? 

3.50
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs are both not here; we had expected the senior minister to get back into the country this afternoon but it appears he was unable. Our humble prayer is that we handle this matter tomorrow when he is around as he is the authority on this Bill and therefore, he would come in handy. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you know that we had completed the debate and we are going to committee stage. So, we will defer the consideration of the committee stage to tomorrow. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

3.52
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (MR BUCYANAYANDI TRESS): Madam Speaker, I have had the opportunity to discuss the content of the Bill with the Committee on Agriculture and we agreed on those details of technical nature but there was serious and significant departure from the original Bill in the sense that the Committee on Agriculture wanted to establish an authority rather than the Bill being implemented by the technical arm of the ministry. And for that departure, I need to consult Cabinet over this issue. So, I beg to ask for an extension of about two weeks so that I can consult with Cabinet on the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret that I will not allow you to postpone debate on this matter. The last time you came on the Floor was in December 2013 and you asked for two weeks and we gave you all those weeks. I now invite the chairman to read our report. 

3.53
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to make a slight correction on the reporting. We are reporting on the Bill called “The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010.” I thank you so much for giving us this opportunity as a committee to present our report. 

The Plant Variety Protection Bill was passed on 22 December 2013 and in March this year, we came on this Floor to submit the Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010, and hon. Bright Rwamirama requested Parliament to give the ministry three weeks and up today, we have not had an interruption whether to say that we review the committee report so that we come back and - we have been engaged with the ministry and I feel, we should proceed. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Minister, this shows that we need to fasten up the process of making Bills as required by our Rules of Procedure. And having presented this, allow me to present to this House the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010.

The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 8 February 2012 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The Bill is motivated by the need to move forward the legislation on plant protection in order to safeguard Uganda’s agriculture against foreign pests and diseases and to ensure the quality and safety of Uganda’s agricultural imports and exports in order to enhance her competitiveness in the local, regional and international market. 

 Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: The Ministery of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries; the National Agricultural Research Organisation; the African Forum for Agricultural Advisory Services; the Uganda Forum for Agricultural Advisory Services; the Science Foundation For Livelihood and Development and the Makerere University College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences.

The objectives of the Bill are:

    i. To consolidate and reform the law relating to protection of plants against destructive diseases, pests and weeds.
    ii. To establish the legal frame work to prevent the introduction, spread and establishment of harmful organism that may adversely affect Uganda’s agriculture, the natural environment and the livelihood of the people and other related matters.
    iii. Seek to provide for the enforcement of phytosanitary quality and safety standards for plants and plant products moving in international trade to enhance their competitiveness.
    iv. To regulate the introduction of new plants in accordance with the international commitment of plant protection, particularly the International Plant Protection Convention.
    v. To provide for appropriate institutional mechanisms for effective implementation and enforcement of health, quality and safety standards for Agricultural exports and imports. 
    vi. To repeal and replace the existing Plant and Protection Act, 1962 as amended in 1964.

Observations 

The current system is that it cannot effectively handle early warning signs of diseases, ensure quick interventions methods and provide high quality disease-free seeds and planting materials.

Under the development strategy implementation plan, Government made an undertaking to form an autonomous body to handle such issues. With reference to the International Plant Protection Convention, there are provisions and requirements for the establishment of a National Plant Protection Organisation.

For purposes of East African Community harmonisation, Kenya and Tanzania have already strengthened institutional arrangements. Uganda should come on board by forming an authority that can quickly understand the value of importing planting materials and rapid response to disease and pest outbreaks for faster commercial growth.

On policy and principle, the Bill seeks to regulate imports of plants against destructive pests, diseases and weeds; regulate export of plants and plant products and ensure regulatory functions by Government.

The Bill proposes remedies to control quality and safety of chemicals and seeds in imports and exports. The committee noted that institutional arrangements need to be reviewed and updated. 

There is no proper mechanism of implementation of the law, if enacted. There is need to have laboratories at boarder points and trained personnel to respond effectively to diseases or pest outbreaks for internal improved monitoring.

Plant diseases affect mainly peasants who are not able to handle on their own; there is no mechanism for protecting or handling epidemics. Local Governments should be involved because they are very important implementation levels being at the grass roots.

The Bill does not emphasise commercialisation of agriculture. There is no provision to compensate the importers in case of loss when the imported materials get spoilt in the process of verification. 

There is need to have laboratories at boarder points with trained staff so as to monitor entry and exit of plant materials.

The existing law has defects in that there is need to safeguard against foreign pests and diseases and ensure quality and safety of exports to enhance competitiveness.

Corporate liability is not provided for in the Bill. The Plant Protection Act of 1962 (as amended) in 1964, focused mainly on certification of imports, certification of exports for plant safety and helped to enhance competitiveness in the international market.

The committee recommends that the Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010, be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

As I submit, I beg to lay the minutes of the interactions we had during the interface with the various agencies and the various documents which were submitted together with all the details, and these are the signed committee minutes, the signed report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Plant Protection and Health Bill, the copy of the Plant Protection Act, the minister’s talking notes, information about the International Plant Protection Convention, the Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010 and the desired institutional framework, presentation by SICAFODE – one of the agencies that made a presentation; presentation by UFAS and AFAS, presentation by the College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, presentation by MAIF, report of the workshop to consider the Plant and Protection Bill, the Legal Comparative Bills Analysis, the Plant Protection Act of the Republic of Tanzania and the Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Act. These are the documents which we considered and I beg to lay them on the Table. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the Committee on Agriculture. Honourable members, we have a slight problem, there is a bit of interference on our servers because there is work going on, on the lifts, but everything is being done to ensure that the services return as quickly as possible. So, we are free to debate.

4.02
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we have not managed to have copies on the iPads but I wonder how different this Bill is from the Biosafety and Biotechnology Bill, because when you listen to hon. Kasamba, the chairman, he is even talking of putting structures on the borders. 

The other Bill also talks of putting structures on the boarders so that we manage to protect any exportation of any bad species. So, what is the difference? Couldn’t we be able to harmonise these two Bills because we are likely to create two institutions which are going to crash?

Madam Speaker, I would request that before we go far, we have time to harmonise the two Bills so that we move together. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we are not allowed to legislate in anticipation. Yes, we received the report on the Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill but we have not debated it. We haven’t passed it.

4.04
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise to support the Bill as presented by the chairperson and I thank the committee for the very good report that they have presented. In my view, the development of new species or varieties for agricultural development of this country is very important and the other issue is that it is also important to protect the species which are inside the country from harmful imports of plants from foreign countries.

Madam Speaker, these days I am reading from newspapers that there are poisonous plants in our national parks and other areas of the country, and it seems some of these poisonous plants were actually imports which came into the country maybe with tourists or other people and some of them are growing wild in the country. So, it is very important to have the Bill to protect our country against such imports but also to allow the development of new varieties of plants or improvement on existing varieties within the country so as to improve agriculture and increase the resilience of the agricultural industry. Therefore, I am very much in support of the Bill as presented by the chairperson and I thank the committee for the good work done. Thank you.

4.06
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. There is a multiplicity of diseases that are attacking crops in this country. These days we experience major disasters arising from pests, vectors and numerous diseases that are not being properly regulated and sometimes I wonder where the Ministry of Agriculture had gone. 

In fact in Kayunga where I come from, we used to be the food basket of this country; today, the area is devastated with poverty because coffee and bananas were destroyed by these numerous diseases. 

What disturbs me is the speed of response from the Ministry of Agriculture and I keep wondering where they are, to the extent that a disease attacks and you see nobody at all responding to these problems and the farmers remain very helpless. I hope the emergence and the passing of this Bill into an Act will help to awaken the Ministry of Agriculture to appreciate that we have a serious problem and that agriculture is a very key sector in this economy. 

There is a proposal to create an Authority; this is a welcome move because this Authority could have a lot of business. This is an area that has been appropriately regulated and I hope that we are able to see this Authority in place in the coming few months. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.08
MR JOHN NIZEYIMANA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to support this Bill. I am an agriculturalist and my friends and other people involved in agriculture –(Interjection)– and other farmers in Uganda have always faced problems of diseases, poor feeds and some chemicals related to fertilizers but they are not even fertilizers. 

Madam Speaker, I can confirm that even when the fertilizers are being imported in Uganda, there is no body to check and find out whether these fertilizers are going to help the farmers. You will find in an area that the fertilizers being taken there do not even correspond with the soils in that particular area and therefore, this is why an authority is needed to make sure that if for instance this particular area has got certain alkalinity and acidity of the soil; it has got at least a type of soil and maybe the climate - this will need to be handled and we know if a fertilizer is being taken to an area, for instance the drugs for spraying and the like are taken to a certain field, it would just be effective. 

Agriculture is the heart; at least it should be the basis for this country to transform. For a long time we have been seated; we have not calculated how much we can get from agriculture -(Member timed out.)

4.10
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County	Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report of the committee and I want to thank them for the work they have done. 

Madam Speaker, we are aware we are already in the East African Community integration and we are sharing and cooperating in a number of areas and one of them is agriculture. And just as the committee has presented, our neighbours have already moved ahead and put laws in place to guide on how research and control of movement of seeds and breeds of animals should be controlled in their countries. 
And aware that we are sharing the research, as a country, there is need for us to have a law to regulate on how we are going to cooperate with them and also help to know whatever is coming in which is good for our country and it is for that reason that we need to support this report and have this law put in place. 

Secondly, terrorism is in the world and people are advancing and some of them are doing research to have some plant varieties or animal varieties that can be harmful to human beings. And for that reason it is necessary as a government and as a country for us to know whatever research is being done; how they are being tested so that we know they are safe to people and environment. 

Today we are suffering from the water hyacinth. It was brought here thinking it was a good flower that would make the water cold and sweet but it turned out to be actually a danger that we have to pay millions and billions of shillings to protect. 

Just yesterday, Madam Speaker, as I was coming from the constituency, the water hyacinth blocked Lake Kyoga and the ferry could not move and people got stuck in the water. Actually the whole of this week, people are not able to travel. These are some of the reasons why we really need to know because where we do not have control over anything and anybody does his research and brings his variety of seeds, goes to Kenya and buy anything that is not palatable to our environment, I think that will not be good for our country. So, I thank the committee and we should support it. Thank you.
 
4.13
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I thought the Minister of Agriculture would be very happy to see this Bill and amendments made as quickly as possible because that is the great need the country has.

In my constituency, the farmers are suffering from counterfeit seeds. The seedlings they are purchasing - anybody just wakes up and starts to trade in seedlings and many of the farmers are making losses. This is a very important law that should regulate the way agricultural feeds and plants are being managed and handled in the country and the minister should be very desperate and I am sure he has changed his mind to get on board.

Our scientists have been very desperate because they feel we, the lawmakers, do not match the development and growth of our scientists. They have advanced these laboratories; it has been a long way to ensure as a country that we are able to be in control of our own product made by our own scientists. So, this gives us a very great opportunity to advance and also be competitive at the global market. I think this is the way to go if we are to move the country to the middle class we are talking about. This is where science relates very well with agriculture through the masses and using the law which would be a very important effective tool.

My concern about the autonomous body which is extremely- we pushed for an autonomous metrological authority but the government has frustrated us by not financing this body. Up to now we are making losses because when planting, we do not know the amount of rain. We don’t have accurate information and yet this autonomous body would be very effective for us as farmers to be able to realise the returns on our investments using the climatic knowledge. This authority needs to be financed. So, I hope this authority will not suffer the same consequence like the Metrological Authority. This authority is very vital; I urge the Minister of Agriculture, when this law is passed, to quickly first -(Member timed out.)

4.16
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): In principle, I support the Bill but I would like to associate myself with the concerns raised by hon. Waira Majegere. We need a law to protect plants health. But here in Parliament, we already have a report of the biotechnology and biosafety law. I have interacted with the Committee on Science and Technology and this morning I was in Buloba visiting an agro-laboratory. These people are not only doing research in biotechnology but they are also doing research in plant health. When we pass this law in disregard of the report that we have on biotechnology and biosafety, we might end up having two authorities doing the same thing and indeed this country needs the law on biotechnology and biosafety. We need also a law to protect plant and plant health but we need to harmonise.  

So, I would like to implore my colleagues that we need to give the two committees time just to interact and find where there are linkages; where they can harmonise and we come up with a law that will be sustainable, attainable and will be doing what this country needs other than rushing for the sake of passing this law. That is my submission.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Anywar, I want to say something about these two laws. First of all, the law on biotechnology and biosafety is not there; it is a proposal. We have not passed it and I don’t know if we will pass it or we shall pass it. We received a report, you are still consulting, you have not come back to me with your report and I don’t know what is in your heads. I don’t know what you are thinking. So, because I have this one on the programme, let us finish what we have; if the other comes, we shall look at it. Let us not mix them; the other is a proposal and not a law.

4.19
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this Bill and it is timely because where plant health is concerned, I think we have delayed. I support this Bill because from the committee report, all our neighbours have already had the law in place. As a region, we are going in for a common market. If we don’t put our house in order; if we don’t show our interest; if we don’t tighten the boundary of our country with this law, with a common market, anything comes in and anything goes out. 

Therefore, it is very important that this law is put in place to safeguard the interests of Uganda in the common market, and this actually will be reflected on what my colleagues are anticipating elsewhere. We must keep a very close eye on this common market and the laws which are there in the neighbouring countries which do affect us and hence impart on the health of our people.

Madam Speaker, I am also looking at this Bill to help us look closely at the plants we have in our country. We have many medicinal plants but we do not really own them. You find that so many people have come to research on our medicinal plants and that is why I stood very firm on Mabira because it is a forest where medicines for this country are found; so we have to protect it. 
You find that our researchers are funded by other people to carryout research on our plants and after they have discovered the medicinal value, they are taken out of this country. We don’t own them; this Bill should help us identify our worth of the plants and relate them to our common diseases. Some of us grew up in villages where before you could even go to hospital, you could treat yourself with herbs or plants surrounding you. 

You know the mululuza, it is a bitter plant; you use it on children or yourself and you will be fine when attacked by Malaria. We used to treat snake poison; I saw my grannies -(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising to support the committee on the Plant Protection Bill. My reasons are two:

One wonders how Uganda has become the destination of all diseases. You wake up in the morning and there is Foot and Mouth disease and swine flu; you wake up again and they tell you there is a disease called bird flu and then cassava mosaic and banana wilt. It is the reason we actually needed this law yesterday.

Secondly, my own brother who is a catholic priest in the United States had an experience of coming here and he was so excited with the grasshoppers and he took some to the United States of America. But before he could be allowed to cross to the other side of immigration, he was told, “We do not allow that in United States.” So, my brother rushed so fast to try to eat almost half a sack of grasshoppers but he could not finish them. He could not be allowed to cross the border. That tells you how it is very paramount to check our borders using all mechanism; using even the laws that we have to ensure that our plants are safe. 

Legally, we have the Uganda National Policy and Drug Authority which has now been changed to Uganda National Drug and Food Authority. Actually when we are talking about the plants, some of the plants produce food and some of these plants we will need to have their gene well protected. We could even go ahead and protect our plants right from the gene bank, then we come to where people meddle using biotechnology to produce new plants and food; this is where hon. Majegere is misleading us. If that law comes, it is still anyway in anticipation - I am a member of that Science and Technology Committee -(Interjection)  

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, I want to put it on record that I do not have any problem with any of the Bills and I support them. But what I was trying to do, is to bring light to this House to know that there is this Bill. 

The other one is talking about research and this one is also talking about research; the other one is talking about crops and this one is also talking about crops. So is hon. Anywarach in order to say that “The Majegeres” are implying - is he in order to call a honourable Member of Parliament representing the people of Bunya East constituency, Mayuge the ”majegeres”? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He was acknowledging your support for the other Bill. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: So, the biosafety Bill is about- if a person purports to create more life in plants and recreate; then he should take responsibility for purporting to create in case there is any danger that comes with associating yourself with that plant resulting into food on your table.

Now this Bill is talking about plant protection, actually we even need another Bill which should be the Plant Variety Protection Bill, because we need to protect our local varieties and plants from being attacked or misused because they become even biological weapons of destruction for us. We need this law but the question is; are we going to have any Authority different from the National Drug and Food Authority to be in charge, or we must have the Plant Protection Authority that will even look at plant variety? Otherwise, I support this Bill 100 percent. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, in December we passed the Plant Variety Bill. I do not remember what the entire Bill says but we did handle that Bill in December. 

4.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to fully support this Bill because when you look at plants and anything which is not regulated as far as plants are concerned, you see the full impact on the peasants and not anybody else. That is the reason why I stand here to fully support this Bill. 

I can give an example; last year some farmers in my district went and bought fertilisers and after spraying, four cows ate the grass that had been sprayed and they died and that is a great loss to a peasant from the village. So, I feel that we really needed this Bill even yesterday. 

But what worries me is that it seems there is no coordination between the ministries that we have, because one Bill was brought by Internal Affairs and the other one was brought by the Ministry of Agriculture and they are all talking about similar things. And here we are; they have come back before us without harmonising this Bill. So, my question is, when will the Ministry of Agriculture sit down and try to find out those areas which need harmonisation and really make us move in an orderly manner?

Secondly, I want to find out whether this Bill - because the other Biosafety Bill did not deal with issue of original plant variety - will enable us address that problem which was been bothering us a lot in the other Bill. 

I also support the issue of the creation of an authority because where there is authority, there are always standards and I believe this authority will go a long way to make sure that there is standard as far as the plants are concerned. Not only that, but the impact of these seeds, the fertilisers and the chemicals has a lot to do with the health of the people, the animals and even on the land where some of these fertilisers have been sprayed, you cannot grow anything and it yields as it used to before spraying some of these fertilisers. So, I believe that we needed this Bill yesterday and I fully support the committee that we should pass this Bill so that we are in the spirit of East Africa. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am totally opposed to the issue of passing the Plant Variety Protection Bill before we consider the Biosafety and Biotechnology Bill. I have realised one issue in Uganda: We have a problem, but amongst all the countries in this world, it is only Uganda where we can demonise what we don’t understand and at the same time demonise what we cannot afford. 
The two Bills are Government Bills - the Plant Protection Variety Bill and the Biosafety and Biotechnology Bill - but when you critically look at them, they are almost talking about the same thing; food, plants and so forth. The Plant protection Variety Bill is talking about variety of crops but when you look at the varieties of foods that we have -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to draw your attention to the title of this Bill; “The Plant Protection and Health Bill” the variety one was passed in December. Concentrate on protection and health.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is to call upon the two Committees to link up and harmonise what is almost related to each other. We want both Bills but it is like in one way or the other there are issues that are contradicting. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.33
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just a few questions to ask and this is in relation to the National Plant Protection Authority which is stipulated in this Bill. Maybe I will be assisted by the Minister for Agriculture to let us know how these functions have been done under the current setting without an authority and why it would be necessary to have an authority to this kind of undertaking as if it has come from God.

When we talk about phyto-sanitary measures, these are barriers of international trade. Are we talking about phyto-sanitary measures to plant varieties that are coming into this country as a barrier of entry of products or plants from another country or are we are talking about phyto-sanitary measures to prevent plant varieties going to another country?

So, I would like to know whether this kind of phyto-sanitary measures and laboratories are going to be international bodies which are going to be an establishment of international standards whereby products going out and coming in have got a unified standard which can be at international level. Because if you have laboratories which are only recognised nationally, they may not be recognised at the international level; so, what you pass here may not measure up to, for instance European standards, and therefore, you will not have created an avenue for export trade effectively if at all it is not at international level. So, the questioning is, of what standard would we like to establish this? 

Finally, I can see a lot of advisory work to the minister and withdrawal of certificates and so forth. I do see an issue in respect of soils; I am not seeing it in this kind of docket. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture will confirm that we only have two soil laboratories in Uganda which happens to be an agricultural country. And I would expect that some of these measures concern themselves with the land and the toxins drawn therefrom. I do not see within this docket and establishment an effort to ensure how effectively soils laboratories in Uganda can control toxins that can invade or that can come into plants which may affect even the international trade as well as the health of the people who are going to consume them. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.37
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In principle, I support this Bill. We must really speak the truth; we do not have supportive documents to guide us through the Bill. But at least we know Uganda is a developing country, we know what goes on in our villages. We know how our plants both edible and nonedible are being attacked by foreign diseases; some come from outside, some come naturally from here. So, the sooner we have this law that can protect our plants, the better, Madam Speaker. 

You know very well that these foreigners bring in plants unchecked. You know that foreigners often take our medicinal plants especially outside unchecked which is absurd and we watch some of these things happen and we don’t care. It is high time we did something that can really put an end to these dangerous activities.

The reality is that most countries you know very well have these laws. You cannot enter even Kenya here our neighbour or America - you have been to these places - with any plant or with any food. (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Col. Mwesigye, for giving me this opportunity. Recently we were coming out of Seychelles and we happened to pick guavas of very nice variety and we thought we would carry it to Uganda. On reaching the airport, Madam Speaker, we were stopped and they said, “You cannot get out unless you are given a certificate by the Ministry of Agriculture.” I was so shocked. To me it was like picking a mango in the village and putting in the pocket and going away. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you my brother. Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, in my opinion, we should have had this law last year. Therefore, whether we have the documents or not, I support the work of the committee and we should go ahead and do whatever it takes to pass this law.

And my colleagues who think of the biosafety and the biotechnology law, when this law comes you can consolidate; we have the powers to consolidate these laws; there is no harm. It is within our mandate that we can consolidate these laws even tomorrow. Therefore, we should do whatever it takes to proceed and do something to protect our agriculture and plants. I rest my case.  

4.40
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are debating a matter of grave national importance because agriculture is the backbone of our economy and I think anything to do with plants is of serious importance to that sector. 

Now, we are talking about the Bill which report we have now before us - the Plant Variety Protection and Health Bill. But Madam Speaker, the Bill that was given to us earlier on, a Bill originated in the year 2010 and given to us in 2012 is based on the Plant Variety Protection Bill -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, we debated the Plant Variety Bill in December and passed it.

MRS OGWAL: But we are talking about the same thing.

THE SPEAKER: No, madam, please look at the item on the Order Paper, you can borrow mine. Honourable members, on my Order Paper, item six reads; “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010” But Members have understood; they have been debating plant protection; at least that is what is in the Hansard. 

4.42
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with the committee’s side of protection, but my observation is on formulation of that authority. If we are talking of Government reducing expenses, what we see in authorities is quite alarming, discouraging and provoking the civil servants who do the donkey work, into corruption.

Madam Speaker, you cannot believe that a driver in the Uganda Communications Commission earns Shs 1.8 million while a driver in the civil service earns peanuts of about Shs 200,000. What is the magic there?  Heads of department and departmental staff are doing the donkey work. Is there no way we can harmonise and strengthen the department instead of creating authorities, which to me are exploitative and unrealistic? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4:43
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to support the report of the committee. This Bill is very important for our country but from the report, I did not hear issues concerning climate change and yet the Bill talks about the Plant Protection and Health Bill. 

I do not know whether we shall have healthy plants in our country if our government is not thinking about measures to mitigate climate change in our country. We are aware that we receive uncontrolled rainfall in our country whereby some areas are flooded and sometimes we get semi-arid conditions. 

Our farmers do not have fertilisers and we are talking of plant protection. We are aware that most authorities created in our country are not able to control whatever is imported into our country. I will give an example of URA; very many Ugandans are smuggling in counterfeit products. Are we very sure that even GMOs will not be imported into our country? (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable colleague that we already have the Environmental Protection Act and that Act goes deeper to handle issues to do with climate change.

MR WANGOLO: I thank you very much for that information, my colleague. However, what I was talking about is a very serious issue of climate change. Regarding the Environmental Protection Act you are talking about, you are aware that as we talk, NEMA has failed –(Interjections)- it is true. We have land titles for wetlands. What are they doing? These are the issues I am contesting here, that if we pass this Bill and we put an authority, which is not effective enough to control this, we are going into problems. 

We are aware that in Africa, we have more than nine countries that have passed laws to legalise GMOs. We have BP maize in place, BT cotton and BP soya beans. These are quality seeds that will be imported by Monsanto. If we do not have a vigilant authority, all these planting materials will be imported in our country and we shall experience a problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I understand a wrong report on the Plant Protection Bill was posted on your iPads but the hard copies are coming. Now I do not know whether it is the authority, which should be blamed for lack of implementation but I think that if we have focus, we can achieve what we want. 

If you go to Botswana and you are driving there, you cannot enter that country until your feet and the tyres of the car you are using have been disinfected. So if we have focus, we can do it. 

Regarding the counterfeits, we have not provided money to the Ministry of Trade to take her inspectors. She needs over 40 inspectors and we have given 19. That is the problem. We have not given her the support to deal with that. So we need to focus and agree on what we want to achieve. It is not an authority or the lack of one but proper focus.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for acknowledging what I was trying to push through all along. My issue now is since we have been debating a different report -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Osegge, other than one or two Members who were talking about variety, the bulk of Members have addressed Plant Protection. Do not take us back. Do not divert us, hon. Osegge. 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, what I wanted to emphasise is the title of the Bill which is; “Plant Variety Protection and Health”. Now the message that Members are giving is not bringing out the health aspect and that is largely because we are looking at a different report. You need to acknowledge this if you want to debate, alright. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want to debate, hon. Osegge?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, it would be right for us to debate the right report and probably with your permission, we could delete what we have debated. This is because for a reader who is going to look at this, looking at the title of the Bill and seeing what Members have been debating, they might get confused – 

THE SPEAKER: What report did the chairman present?

MS OSEGGE: The chairman read, Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010. That is where the mistake started - 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, please clarify the situation.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, even before I submitted, I made a correction, which is on the Hansard that when the Order Paper was being prepared, it was mistakenly written as, “Plant Variety Bill”, which I corrected. I said the report I am reading is for Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010. I stated that we passed the Plant Variety Bill on 23rd December and in March when I submitted this report, hon. Bright Rwamirama came here and requested for three weeks and I stated it straight away. So it is not true that anybody is debating a Plant Variety Bill. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned, I heard the report and it was on Plant Protection and that is the debate. Others may have strayed but the main debate is on Plant Protection.

MR MARTIN MUGABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I want to ask the chairperson. They have come up with a proposal of an authority and we all agree that we are spending a lot of money on wages and salaries. I want to ask if we cannot create a department instead of an authority. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked the Clerk to issue hard copies of the Plant Protection Bill report. So maybe for now, we can defer the second reading. Has it come?

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, we have copies of the report unless we are talking about the hard copies of the Bill itself. The first report that was mixing us up has 11 pages and this one has 38 pages. This one has been uploaded onto our iPads so we can continue with the debate.

THE SPEAKER: So you do not have the copies of the Bill? But they are there, honourable members. Yes, they are there on your iPads. Hon. Bayigga, hon. Ibi, hon. Ssasaga and hon. Osegge have seen copies of the Bill on their iPads. Honourable members, I put the question that The Plant Protection and Health  Bill be read for a second time.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2010

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: We normally defer clause 2 until after the consideration.

Clause 3

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit that we substitute clause 3 with the following new clauses:  

A new clause 3: Establishment of the National Plant Protection Authority;

1) There shall be the National Plant Protection Authority, which shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession, a common seal and capable, in its corporate name, of:

    a) Acquire, hold or dispose of movable and immovable property;
    b) Sue and be sued in its corporate name; and
    c) Do all acts and things that a body corporate may lawfully do.

2) For avoidance of doubt, the National Plant Protection Authority shall take over the functions formally performed by the department responsible for crop protection in the ministry and any other functions incidental to crop protection -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, my documents are different from yours. My clause 3 was on phyto-sanitation and inspection service.

MR KASAMBA: Yes, and that is what -

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are introducing a new -
 
MR KASAMBA: A new clause 3, which replaces the former clause. 

 2) 	For avoidance of doubt, the National Plant Protection Authority shall take over the functions formerly performed by the department responsible for crop protection in the ministry and any other functions incidental to crop protection and health performed by any agency or government department. 

3)	Any reference to the department of crop protection in any document or contract shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a reference to the National Plant Protection Authority established under this Act.
 
4)	For the efficient discharge of its functions, the National Plant Protection Authority shall establish district and regional offices in such areas as it deems fit. 

5) 	The authority shall be under the general supervision of the minister.

The justification is that in establishing an authority, Uganda shall be fulfilling its international obligation contained in the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), which requires, among others, for contracting states to create an independent body to oversee and coordinate all actions aimed at preventing and controlling the introduction and spread of pests and plants as well as plant products locally and those moving in international trade.

The authority shall therefore be the successor body of the crop protection department in the Ministry of Agriculture, which has for a long time had limited success having been at the fore of the fight against the transmission of pests, diseases and weeds domestically and across international borders. 

Furthermore, Government, after realising the challenges faced by the crop protection department, made an undertaking under the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan 2010/2011 to 2014/2015 to establish an autonomous body to manage plant protection in Uganda. 

The establishment of an authority is merely a fulfilment of Government’s undertaking and will go a long way in achieving the desired goals of protection of plants against pests and diseases in Uganda.

The amendments to an authority will put in place a robust structure that will be efficient and competitive regionally and globally to offer plant protection services and attract the associated resources and funding, including internationally generated, Government and from donors. 

The authority will be responsible for holistic delivery of services in plant protection and health services, tapping into the synergies between both preventive and control measures and remedy the current problems faced by the crop protection department, such as, lack of capacity to fulfil Uganda’s international obligations, inability of the department to deal with the issues of plant protection, diseases and pest identification, implementation of an early warning system for pests and diseases, inspection, examinations and others.

The synergistic approach will ensure that all plant imports are free of diseases and pests, the seeds planted are free of diseases and pests, besides good value for cultivation and use. 

An authority will be in line with the international practices with numerous countries establishing a single independent body to handle all issues involved in the plant protection.  I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on the Floor there have been debates for and also against this authority. Are there still Members who do not want this authority?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Chairperson, his proposal has sense in that it seeks to commercialise that function. But it is a major departure from what cabinet had passed and that is why I was saying that even though the debate continues on the general Bill, I should get some time to consult cabinet on this matter only. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you have had almost nine months to consult. Surely, you would be taking this House too much for granted. 

MR KAKOOZA: I have one problem, Madam Chairperson. We know the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture and creating another authority is another cost. When you look at section 4; duties of the Commissioner for Crop Protection; it has all the duties, which could have been done by an authority. I am finding it a problem because we are talking of reducing expenses and yet we are creating monsters in ministries. This will be a very difficult system to manage.

When you look at the history of this country, you will find that these authorities were there; they failed and now we are bringing them back in the ministries to add more cost. The cost we put in these authorities under ministries could have been reduced and taken into departments so that they do that particular task. This is a scientific type of work for a commissioner who is qualified within the ministry to do. This is a department, which can be given full powers to deal with such.

When you read section 4, the duties of the commissioner for crop protection -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish with (3). By the way, if they have all these, why haven’t they been doing it? Where have they been?

MR KAKOOZA: This is the law empowering them now in clause 4 because the duties of the commissioner were not there. That is why this law is talking of the duties of the commissioner for crop protection. It is elaborated in this section that they will have to perform those duties, which were missing. They are empowered by this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But what were they waiting for to have a law to address diseases in this country? Honourable members, I do not know whether you have had the experience that I have had. I represent farmers but this month you go there and they say “We have got banana wilt.” I write to the minister saying, there is banana wilt in Balawole. 

The next time I go to Bulopa they say, “There is cassava mosaic” and I write to the minister. I go to another sub-county and they are saying even the potatoes - honourable members, the situation is dire for the farmers.

MR KAKOOZA: I am still on the Floor. Madam Chairperson, it is true but the history - what is preventing NEMA from doing its job? The authority is there but does it do the work as it is supposed to be done? The problem is the cost; they are not facilitated.

The budget of the ministry is not more than 3 percent and we are creating more expenses in this same ministry by asking it to allocate money to do a job, which could have been done thoroughly within the department.

If you want to improve the effectiveness and the efficiency - Madam Speaker, I sit on the COSASE. Look at the Communications Commission. We passed a law recently and found that these guys were given money and everything else but they have never performed any standards of these TVs or radios. This is an authority that is getting a lot of money from Government coffers.

Why should we create monsters, which do not do the job instead of empowering the department and we reduce the cost? That money could be utilised within the ministry and they perform better.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, we support the report except that item. Why were they not doing the job properly? The commission or the department was not fully staffed. We have since fully recruited and posted these officers at the border posts.

Madam Chairperson, the Commissioner of Crop Protection could be doing this job with his staff. The earlier challenge was that we did not have enough staff to do the job because of multiple demands but we have since recruited and they are posted to all our entry points in the country. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, your question was valid and the minister has tried to answer it but I believe that even with those changes, nothing much has been achieved. The introduction of the authority, according to the chairman, hon. Kasamba, is to ensure that they do things differently. 

The traditional civil service is very complacent and will not do things to match the challenges of the time. That is why these innovations are usually a welcome venture. Therefore, unless the minister assures us that with those changes especially staffing, something will change in the delivery of service, it is difficult to be convinced that this will produce the changes that we desire. Therefore, we would adopt the introduction of the authority to ensure that we do things differently. Thank you very much.

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Looking at how Government gives priorities to other ministries, even when we scream here about the Ministry of Agriculture, their budget has always remained where it has been perennially, year in, year out.

I would go with the creation of an authority where money would be voted direct and they have their activities there. Otherwise these ministers here are going to usurp and make the department remain dormant.

I was here as shadow minister for Lands and by then, the department of urban planning did not even have a car. Hon. Urban Tibamanya, the minister, was moving in a pickup until I made the necessary noise and that was when that department started getting whatever little that it was given.

Even if you give this department under the current Minister of Agriculture, we will come back here and continue lamenting about the dismal performance. So I wholeheartedly cry for the autonomy of this department if it is to create and do anything meaningful. If it remains as a department under the Ministry of Agriculture, we will be here and we will come to audit ourselves.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have been creating a lot of authorities in this country and these authorities have cost implications. Of course, even if we created authorities, we need to deal with the implementation challenges.

I have been listening to the minister and he has been very clear. He said that they had a problem of staffing, which they have now sorted out. Also, the legal framework has been inadequate. If we now pass this legal framework, empower the ministry and make adequate appropriations to the ministry to step up the budget, I believe that as the department is created and the strengths made, it can solve the mischief. So creating an authority may not necessarily be the solution. I do agree with the minister that we give them a chance and the benefit of doubt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still want to know whether in the Ministry of Agriculture there was no one in charge of crops and if there was, why were they waiting for a law? I want an answer to that. 

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I can understand the proposal to have a National Plant Protection Authority created but we have a problem and I have always thought this is a bad way of solving problems.

When people do not have services, you create a district and vote money to go and pay salaries. Now it is becoming a practice that for every new law, there is a new authority.

The other day in the Committee on Defence, there was a proposal on registration of persons and we now create an authority to register people yet there is a department of immigration. 

This Parliament should not be taken for a ride. We cannot sit here and pass a vote of no confidence in Government departments except if Government has come here and said, “We have failed, so create an authority to run Government.” 

If you are talking of funding Ministry of Agriculture, this is not the only department in the Ministry of Agriculture. Hon. Ekwau has just talked about urban planning where there was a minister. You go to sports; there is a minister, one commissioner and maybe a driver. We should be addressing issues of funding and staffing but –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, in the management of issues, if you manage to reduce a cost and you pay salaries for those people - but the danger we are making in these laws is creating discrepancies between civil servants and people in authorities. When you look at the salaries of these people in authorities, there is an anomaly that demoralises civil servants from doing their work. These are people who are known in public service to be doing Government jobs.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, hon. Kakooza. Our committee is now looking at the facilitation of salaries to authorities and the point hon. Kakooza makes is a valid one. In all authorities, salaries are from Shs 25 million to Shs 30 million. In fact, if you ask the traditional civil servants, they would like all their departments to become authorities. This Parliament must find a solution to staffing, remuneration of civil servants and also the budgeting of various departments otherwise the frustration on the bureaucracy of the civil service cannot be solved by substitution of departments with authorities.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I do not think creating authorities is a panacea for the problems we have in the service delivery. We have examples of authorities created by this Parliament: NPA, NEEMA, even UNRA created by this Parliament and found to be wanting. Who in this country does not know the story of Mukono-Katosi-Nyenga Road, which was a product of an authority? Who in this country does not know that the National Environment Management Authority is failing to manage the environment across the country? Who in this country does not know that the National Forestry Authority has failed in its basic function of evicting encroachers? 

I feel that what we need to do is to strengthen departments. The justification the chairperson of the committee gave is that there is no capacity. Who should create the capacity if it is not Government? Where are the people going to occupy that authority coming from? I am sure you are not going to bring Kenyans, Rwandese or Tanzanians to work in that authority. It is the same Ugandans – (Member timed out.)
          
MS NSHAIJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am just going to make this statement and maybe recall where we have come from. Recently, we decided that we should not take money back to NAADS as the money, which was given to NAADS was just helping the workers but not the people we are supposed to serve. 

We have recently resolved that the money should go directly to our farmers and we have to recruit employees in the public service to fill that lacuna, and the money goes directly to our local peasants so that they can benefit and increase their production and we transform our country.

I am not supporting the creation of the authority because it is going to be very expensive for no reason. Most of the authorities that have been created in this country have not done anything good for our local people. We are singing about the transformation of this country yet we are not improving the production of agriculture, which is a backbone of our country. Therefore, I do not support the creation of an authority, which is going to be expensive for the few educated ones; those who are going to be earning millions of money yet they are not going to have results as far as production is concerned. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My understanding of the proposal by the committee is that we need to give bigger clout to these functions in the ministry and that is why they are proposing an authority. I want to agree with the committee. I am not persuaded by the argument by the minister that recently they have improved. We do not feel that improvement in terms of the recruitment you have done.

I think to argue that the other authorities have challenges like Katosi and so forth and therefore, we cannot create another authority - I would not buy that argument. Also to say that the salaries are too high; this Parliament has the powers to regularise payments for civil servants. It cannot be a reason that because officials in authorities are paid better, therefore you cannot create another authority. The question we should address is whether this function can be done – (Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, it is on record that all the authorities formed in this country are under the ministries and we find that the permanent secretaries get a lower pay than the people heading the authorities and yet they are supposed to be supervising them. That alone undermines performance. So Doctor, you should concede here and we go by what the minister is saying other than creating another authority. Other authorities have also failed us, so it is better to empower and strengthen the public service we have; the supervisors and those who are going to be working. 

The same people who are now working in the ministries are going to abandon those offices in the ministry and apply to that authority and you will get the same people who have been working in the ministry going for the authority and we will not be adding any value. We would rather strengthen the ministry.

MS BABIRYE: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The committee has not only recommended this authority but also recommended another authority called Fisheries Authority. The information, which I would like to get from the committee is, what happened to the Fisheries Authority, which they had recommended because it was also vital?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we are on clause 3; we are just starting the Bill. I do not know whether they are bringing the other one. Please close.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I had given a chance to a lady but my brother took over the chance. My point is that the salaries being paid to officers of authorities should not be a justification for us to evaluate whether a particular government function requires to be handled by a commission or an authority. The argument should be different and the question here is: is plant protection a very important function that we should lift it from a commissioner to an authority or not? Concerning issues of salaries, this Parliament has powers to regularise the pay of public officials so that should not be the reason. 

Given that agriculture is the bedrock of our economy and we are saying that we need to strengthen agricultural production and diseases are on the rise, for example, banana wilt, which has almost destroyed the banana industry in Western Uganda, I want to agree with the committee that lifting that function to be handled by an authority will give it sufficient clout for us to address the issue of protection of plants and also address the diseases, which are associated with our plants and food crops. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KASAMBA: Clause 4 has consequential amendments, which were accompanying the - so that is why I am bringing out the - because we need to pronounce ourselves so that we -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, since the mother has collapsed, the child cannot be born.

MR KASAMBA: Yes, there is a consequential consideration as far as the proposed amendments, which we had brought about -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have reverted to the original position of the Bill. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.


Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KASAMBA: We propose to redraft clause 14 (2) as follows: 

2) Any person who imports any plant or plant products, harmful organisms, beneficial organisms, soil, living cultures of genetically modified organism, any fungus, bacterium or any other microorganism or any other materials or substance specified under this Act shall immediately declare the item to the inspector. The justification is for clarity of purpose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable chairperson. You had a new sub-clause (1) and you have gone to clause 2. You had a proposal for a new sub-clause.

MR KASAMBA: Clause 14 is amended as follows: Insert a new sub-clause (c) immediately after sub-clause (b) to read as follows:

    1) Except as provided under this Act, the Seed and Plant Act and any other relevant law, no plant or plant products, harmful organisms, beneficial organisms, soil, living cultures of genetically modified organism, any fungus, bacterium, or any other microorganism or any other materials or substances specified under this Act, may be imported into Uganda except:
    a) In accordance with the terms and conditions of a prescribed permit issued under this Act;
    b) Through a point of entry declared under section 20;
    c) With a phytosanitary certificate.

The justification is: 
    a) To provide for a phytosanitary certificate as a requirement before the importation into Uganda of plants, plant products, harmful organism, beneficial organism or soil.
    b) To merge sub-clauses (1), (3) and (4) since they relate to the same subject matter. 

    2) Furthermore, redraft clause 14 as I had earlier mentioned.

    3) Insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: On receipt of the item in sub-section (1), the inspector shall:

    a) Inspect and examine the plant or plant products, harmful organisms, beneficial organisms, soil, living cultures of genetically modified organism, any fungus, bacterium, or any other microorganism or any other materials or substances specified under this Act as well as any other required accompanying documentation;

    b) If the presence of any pests, diseases, weeds or prohibited packaging is established or reasonably suspected, cause the same to be treated at the expense of the importer; and 

    c) If he or she considers that any measures taken or to be taken under paragraph (b) are or are likely to be ineffective and he or she considers the pest to have the potential to cause an unacceptable impact on the plant resources of Uganda, or if the imported articles are not accompanied by the required documentation, cause the imported articles to be re-exported or destroyed at the expense of the importer.

The justification is:

    a) To make the provision clearer.
    b) To prescribe subsequent action expected of an inspector upon the importation of restricted items.

    4) Delete clause 14(3); the justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

    5) Delete sub-clause 14(4) and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

    6) Insert a new sub-clause (9) immediately after sub-clause 8 to read as follows: “The minister may, by statutory instrument, prescribe procedures, fees and other matters pertaining to the application of grant of an import permit and phytosanitary certificate for the plant or plant products, harmful organisms, beneficial organisms, soil, living cultures of genetically modified organism, any fungus, bacterium, or any other microorganism or any other materials or substances specified under this Act.

The justification is to require the minister to prescribe, by statutory instrument, the procedures, fees and other matters to be adapted to the grant of a phytosanitary certificate and import permit. I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.
										
Clause 16

MR KASAMBA: Clause 16 is amended as follows: sub-clause 2 is amended by replacing the word “Commissioner” with the word “Inspector”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. This one collapses with the earlier decision taken.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR KASAMBA: Clause 17 is amended by the following: delete the word “Rice” appearing immediately before the word “husks”. The justification is to extend the application of the provision to all husks. 

Insert a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: 
2) Any person who contravenes this provision commits an offence and is liable on conviction:- 
(a) In case of a corporate body, to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points; or 
(b) In case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding fifty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both. 

The justification is to provide a penal sanction for contravening this provision. 

And then we insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: 
3) Any person who contravenes sub-section (1) shall, in addition to the penalties imposed under sub-section (2), be required to re-export or destroy the imported packages at their own cost.

The justification is to require the destruction or re-export of the imported packages at the expense of the importer. I submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to clause 17.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the amendment but with the penalties. This section containing packing materials and what you need to do with the harmful soil should be more deterrent and severe so that somebody cannot dare to tamper. Five hundred currency points or one year imprisonment is not a heavy punishment. I do not know what the chairperson can say about it because this section is about deterrent measures. I can do it deliberately. I would suggest that it is amended to Shs 1 million or two to three years imprisonment. I propose that instead of 500 currency points, it is 800 currency points and then this goes in tandem with two or three years.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, that could be the case but I was just looking at a situation that it could be you, hon. Kakooza, one day. I think the way the lawyers frame it and if the magistrate or the judge agrees, then he can have both. There is always that rider that money or imprisonment for one year or both. So that can cover that; they can have both. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, the money is little compared to the damage or the gravity of the matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what are you proposing?

MS KABASHARIRA: At least 800 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How much is 500 currency points? Shs 10 million? Shs 10 million is little? [MEMBERS: “No”.]

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, when you are talking of packing materials for a corporate body, what does this corporate body need to achieve? I can forego Shs 10 million and do what I want. A company may be trying to get involved in importing tons of husks. I can also do it; Shs 10 million is nothing for a corporate body. That is why I am proposing that when it goes to 800 currency points, it can go to almost Shs 15 million and then the punishment can be severe; two years imprisonment.
 
MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, Shs 10 million is okay because you are also given a punishment of re-exporting. I think that is enough burden. Maybe the other thing I would ask us to add is sawdust to be included so that it reads, “A person shall not introduce into Uganda a packaging material, any hay, straw, husks, feeds, chaff and then sawdust…” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you do not want to enhance the - okay, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR KASAMBA: In sub-section (3) of clause 18, insert immediately after the word “Act” the following phrase; “And shall be destroyed”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you abandoned sub-clause (1) to deal with sub-clause (3)?

MR KASAMBA: Yes, sub-clause (1) collapsed with the earlier decision. The justification is to require the destruction of the items removed without the authorisation of the inspector. 

We also wish to introduce a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: 

4) Any person who contravenes sub-sections (1) or (2) of this provision commits an offence and is liable on conviction:

    a) In the case of a corporate body, to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points; and

    b) In the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year. This is to provide for a penal sanction for contravening this provision. I submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable chairperson, you put the body corporate at Shs 10 million. Should the individual also be at Shs 10 million? 

MR KASAMBA: No, this is 50, the other one is 500. The corporate body is 500, individual is 50 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19 

MR KASAMBA: Clause 19 is amended as follows: redraft sub-clause (2) as follows: 
2) An inspector shall not destroy any material under sub-section (1) – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is dealing with the authority. 

MR KASAMBA: But it is very necessary. The inspector will be either in the authority or in the mainstream department and this is considering destruction without the approval of the departmental commissioner. It reverts back to the other because there is a risk that whenever there is destruction, the inspector confiscates and destroys without the authority in the original proposal.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: So we should remain with the provision in the original Bill. we go with the -

MR KASAMBA: The justification is to make the provision clearer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, if you look at -

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the original Bill says, “An inspector shall not destroy any material under sub-section (1) without the prior consent in writing of the commissioner” and that is what you wanted to address. Then we go with the original Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to

Clause 20

MR OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 20: declaration of points of entry quarantined stations and quarantined space.

    a) Declare any point of entry to be the only point where plant and plant products, harmful organisms -

I would like to request the honourable minister to shed more light on what these harmful organisms could be before we can pass this clause. I want to know, what are these harmful organisms that you are going to allow into the country?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will find it in the Interpretation Act. 

MR OKELLO: I have seen it. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR KASAMBA: Clause 22(2)(a) of the Bill is redrafted as follows: If the inspector is satisfied that the requirements for the issuance of a phytosanitary certificate have been met, he or she shall recommend for the issuance of phytosanitary certificate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So he does not have authority to issue but recommends to somebody else? 

MR KASAMBA: The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. The power to grant phytosanitary certificates is a preserve of the commissioner. This time round it will be the commissioner.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So the inspector has no authority to - 

MR KASAMBA: Yes, originally he had no authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are taking it away. 

MR KASAMBA: He shall recommend the issuance

THE CHAIRPERSON: Recommend to whom?

MR KASAMBA: To the commissioner. It is a checks and balance mechanism. With the collapse of the authority, now it is the departmental head who will offer the issuance. So the inspector will be giving a recommendation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still deleting it?

MR KASAMBA: I think it remains.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you introducing -  

MR KASAMBA: Yes, insert a new clause immediately - we should first deliberate on the original clause 30 and eventually this one will become clause 31.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

MR KASAMBA: Then insert a new clause immediately after clause 30 to read as follows: “Powers and duties of inspectors and pest identifiers –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to understand the difference between a pest identifier and an inspector. Is it necessary?

MR KASAMBA: Pest identifiers can be community members like farmers who identify and then the inspector is the one who has the expertise to follow it up. The details are going to be explained as I submit. Under the arrangement of early warning system –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, it sounds to me as if a pest identifier will be a person in the ministry according to what is in this report. So if it is going to be farmers, there is no reason why it should be part of the Bill. 

MR KASAMBA: Let me read through and you critique it as I read it. Listen in and if you are not comfortable, you can propose a new amendment: 

    1) An inspector or pest identifier may, for the purposes of this Act and at all reasonable times and on production, if required, of his or her identification documents:-
    a) Inspect areas and plant materials under cultivation, in storage or transit for purposes of detecting and reporting the existence, outbreak or spread of pests and make a report on them to the commissioner.
    b) Inspect consignments of plant materials moving in international traffic and where appropriate inspect consignments of other articles and commodities in internal traffic under conditions in which they may act incidentally as carriers of plant pests.
    c) Inspect and supervise storage and transport facilities of plants and plant products for international trade, particularly with the objective of preventing the dissemination of pests and diseases across national borders. 
    d) Ensure disinfection of consignments of plant and plant products moving in international traffic and their containers, packaging materials, storage places and conveyances. 
    e) Conduct pest surveillance and pest risk analysis for purposes of quarantine, documentation and provision of information.
    f) Develop and test quick phytosanitary pest and disease diagnostic procedures. 
    g) Participate in the evaluation and screening of newly introduced plant germplasm in post entry quarantine stations in accordance with the guidelines of the International Plant Protection Convention and the World Trade Agreement on sanitary and Phytosanitary measures.
    h) Cause the prosecution of offenders under this Act.
    i) Attend to such other matters as the commissioner may prescribe. 
    j) An inspector or pest identifier shall take all steps, as are reasonably practical, to afford the owner of any plant or plant products, harmful organisms, beneficial organisms, soil, premises, vehicles, vessels or aircrafts or the person in charge of it as the case may be, an opportunity to be present while carrying out functions under their Act. 

The justification is to provide for the duties and powers of the inspector and pest identifiers.

MS OSEGGE: I really do not see the difference because the chairman is just alternating these two different titles. When he presents the roles and responsibilities, it looks like it is a position in the ministry under the commission but when you look at it, there is no reason to have an identifier. An inspector can do all that and we are introducing it as a strange title at this point. I would propose that we delete it. Thank you.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, under operational arrangements like at border points, we may have people who identify people moving -

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, we cannot put that in a law. Let it be in the operationalisation by the ministry.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I see duplication in the responsibilities under the clause the chairperson is trying to introduce. Already, these processes and departments exist and when you look at clause 8; the functions and procedures of committees, the minister is going to set up these committees. At this time, you will find that they have even identified the functions that the committees are going to perfect when they are in the office. 

Besides this Act, the current experience at the border points, because I have worked at the border, is that these departments of quarantine and plant protection are there and they also have their surveillance systems even within the Police. So, these identifiers already exist in their own way of how they do their work. I have a feeling that even within the districts, these people are operating under the district farmers’ extension department.  So I feel that we should leave the Bill as it is and enforce the inspectors who will be already appointed by the minister.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to make this appeal to my chairman. Even when I look at the schedule, which defines officers, the issue of identifier is not there. It is true that at the committee level, when we tried to look at the two, we thought of a way of bringing any other person, maybe a farmer or a person just moving to come and say, “I have seen some problems somewhere and I want to inform you.” 

Let us separate it from the role of the inspector because the inspector is clearly defined in this Bill. I want to appeal to you, Mr Chairperson. It is for the interest and benefit of this Bill that we concede and withdraw that aspect. The inspector should remain but the pest identifier should not be mixed here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when I look at these proposals, the only difficulty I see is in 1(d) and 1(h) in relation to the pest identifier. This is because the identifier cannot ensure disinfection or cause prosecution but certainly in the villages, we do need someone to say, “I have seen something strange here” just like we have the village health teams. Yes, they report about outbreaks so we need the identifiers but we could separate their functions.

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, that is the point I wanted to bring out. When you look at page 5, under the interpretation clause, the meaning of an inspector is clearly defined but the meaning of the pest identifier is not identified. However, like the chairperson is saying, we could provide for it because we see there is need for such a person. We can provide for it under the interpretation clause and clearly define what it means and also come back here in this current clause and provide for the activities that could be carried out by the pest identifiers.
 
MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I submit that identifiers are needed and are very necessary and we need to protect them by law. If we leave them out, we run the risk – yes, they are whistle blowers and we run the risk of them not being taken seriously.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, we understand that it is necessary but it is not adequate or proper to put it in the law because famers themselves will be able to identify this and report to the responsible organ. Now, if I know it is a crime somewhere, should I be considered a worker of sorts? I think this is the same thing. You identify a situation, report to the responsible authorities and they take action. 

I really do not think we should put this as part of the law. Let us leave that responsibility to the farmers because it is also going to cause conflict between the inspector and the so called identifier.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, where is the inspector sitting? Is that inspector sitting in my village in Mbulamuti or sitting at the ministry? If it is at the ministry, I need someone in Balawuli to raise a flag and say, there is a problem here.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I grow citrus fruits and it can only be me or others involved in that farming to identify the pest and report. No other stranger can come and report. So it is in the interest of the farmers to report; so there is no need for us to mention them because we shall do that since it affects our produce and farms. So we will just do that without mentioning it here because we are the ones who are going to be affected.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also support my colleagues who are saying that we do not need these identifiers. When you look at the proposal in (a) which includes storage, if we keep this in the law and taking into consideration the nature of our storage systems in the villages - for example, the granaries, anybody will just begin opening people’s granaries and saying that they are identifying some of these problems. So we need not bring some of these things here.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, we are talking of agriculture, which is in the hands of ordinary people who have eyes for the pest. The inspectors, as the chairperson has said, are usually in offices. The person who brings it to the notice of the inspector is somebody who sees and who is on the ground. So the identifier of pests is a very important element in this law. 

I would propose that we define who that identifier is and in fact, the ordinary citizen is entitled to bring a case to court. When we say here that he may not have caused the prosecution of offenders under this Act, the citizen is entitled to cause, to report and to take a case for prosecution.  So I do not think it is impossible for an identifier to do that. 

I would propose therefore that - you know we tend to be elitist about this. Inspectors may actually not know what is going on in the areas where they inspect until they are informed of what to inspect. So I would rather suggest that we define the identifier in order to clearly give that person a role in the law rather than saying the inspector would know the pest.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The point here is, since the powers and duties of inspectors and pests identifiers are together - it says here powers and duties of inspectors and pest identifiers, which means all these are their duties. The point that must be clear is, are these pests identifiers going to be paid or are they only whistle blowers without payment? That is the point, which should come out clear. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My problem with the introduction of this new clause is that I get the feeling that there is confusion between the roles of the normal extension officers and so forth. When I read the purpose of this Bill, which we are looking at, at the very beginning, I see that the Bill seeks to consolidate and reform the law relating to the protection of plants against destructive diseases, pests and weeds and to prevent the introduction and spread of harmful organisms that may affect Uganda’s agriculture and so forth.

In addition, it is to regulate the exports and imports of plants and plant products. So the main focus of the Bill seems to be mainly at the point of either import or export, not out there on the farms. I feel that the issues that we are discussing of pest identifiers could possibly be dealt with elsewhere under maybe agricultural extension services. Currently, if you are a farmer and you identify that your crops are suffering from some problem –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, my brother, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, while informing my colleague, I wish to support his argument. The information I would like to give is contained in the interpretation clause under interpretation of the word “Inspection”. It talks about plant materials, plant products, conveyance and facilities. It is really the tone of this Bill. We are speaking at that level and not at the level of somebody seeing rotten cabbages and he runs and reports.

This is also strengthened by the fact that the interpretation of the word “inspector” means a person authorised by the purposes of this Act to carry on phytosanitary and plant quarantine inspection. It is limiting, it is really not the only farm issue that we are talking about and I think that as a House, we need to understand this in that context. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when the seeds are imported, do they remain at the airport? They have a destination and the destination is Karamoja or Bundibugyo. They are heading somewhere.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I was still holding the Floor. You are asking about when the seeds are imported. It is at that point of importation that the inspectors will check those seeds to see whether they may be harmful to the country not -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose the person is not entering through Malaba but through Rwakakaka or another post, which is not monitored? You assume everybody will come in officially.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, that is why the law is specifying that you are supposed to bring in those items only through certain specified points of entry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do people smuggle goods in this country?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I just want to bring out the issues within what we submitted. An inspector or a pest identifier may, for the purposes of this Act and at all reasonable times and on production, if required, of his or her identification documents, inspect areas and plant materials under cultivation. We are looking at a scenario where you are in the garden and there is a pest, which is ravaging - 

MR OKUPA: Do not be selective because it is not only cultivation. What you have stated here is beyond cultivation. so can you say all –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: That is why I am saying the different categories- because somebody is saying that it is as if it is only enforced in storage, transit for purpose of detecting and importing the existence of outbreaks or spread of pests and make a report on them to the commissioner. Other than that, I have another. Let me give you another issue on (e) -

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, you need to help us to interpret the memorandum of this Bill and to put us in order in as far as this is concerned. We are talking about importation and export of plant materials. Unless we want to expand the memorandum of this Bill to contain aspects that the chairperson is describing now, we will be bringing unnecessary provisions into this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the minister tell us, what was your area of coverage for this Bill?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the import of this expression here of an inspector - an inspector is technically employed person but an identifier is any concerned person who first spots the incidence and then reports to the inspector for technical verification. I would take it as stated here and not worry about it. What I am saying is if an inspector – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Honourable minister, can I help you out? These are whistle blowers. How have we treated them in other laws? These are informers. What Madam Chairperson was saying is true. It is very clear that inspectors stay in offices and some people in the field identify and say, “Banana wilt is in my farm” - I can go to the inspector and tell them. 

The complication is: are you going to put this person on a salary scale? If you are not going to, do not put it there because it is operational that if I am affected, I must run to the inspector and know what this type of pest is. It is my concern as a person if I have a plant, which is affected and I must go and report.

The moment you put it and identify it in the law, then it has a complication of being pegged with a salary scale and appearing as a job created in the law. That is the only complication.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Let me explain something here; in plant protection, in some instances, if I find that your coffee is infected with the coffee berry disease, for example, and I advise you to spray that coffee and you do not, I have the right to cut it down and you will pay for the labour of cutting that coffee.

MS MUTONYI: Madam Chairperson, I am really perturbed. We have had people inform us of outbreaks like foot and mouth disease, cassava mosaic, banana wilt, and so on; we did not need an identifier. As hon. Kakooza said, it looks like we are entrenching somebody we do not know - an identifier - into the law. That also means that we have to attach a salary, an allowance or some other form of payment, whether we like it or not. 

We should not play with that. Let us leave this to work like it has in other issues of disease outbreak. When a person has been raped, for example, she goes to the police and they will have to become witnesses, but we do not entrench that into the law. It is going to be very complicated. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I need the minister and the chairperson to help us on this one. Hon. Amuriat did raise the issue of the memorandum, and this is about the object of the Bill. 

When I read the policy and principles of the Bill, it says, “The Bill seeks to consolidate and reform the law relating to protection of plants against destructive diseases, pests and weeds, to prevent the introduction and spread of harmful organisms that may adversely affect Uganda’s agriculture, the natural environment and to regulate the export and import of plants and plant products and to regulate the introduction of new plants in accordance with the international commitments on plant protection so as to protect and enhance the international reputation of Ugandan agricultural imports and exports, to entrust all plant protection regulatory functions to the Government, and for other related matters.” Are we saying now that we are widening the scope beyond this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you all looked at the original clause 25, “Duty of the public to report imported plants, plant products etc.”?

MR OKUPA: That is why I want the minister to explain whether it has expanded, because that also - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, that’s the provision; it is in the draft Bill.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, it says, “...to prevent the introduction and spread of harmful organisms...” So, there is an element of importation, and spread within; so I do not think it is in conflict with the memorandum.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I have just a few examples of what hon. Okupa was trying to get a clarification on. I will give you an example of a certain strange weed - I call it so because it was imported into the country by World Food Programme during the war in northern Uganda. 

We were getting food through World Food Programme and this food would come as aid to the people. They came with certain seeds that we did not understand, and because people did not have information about the dangers of the seeds, they just sorted them out and would pour them anywhere. Whenever it rained, they germinated and now this weed has spread throughout Acholi sub-region. It has become so wild, very dangerous and poisonous. 

The spread of such within the country comes without the knowledge of the inspector. So, we need someone somewhere who would be -(Interjection) – No, you said it is beyond what is provided for in the object of the Bill. Madam Speaker, I need to be protected.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at clause 30 on page 26 of the report, it is about appointment of inspectors and pest identifiers. I am looking at the report of the committee as it was initially, and they were providing for the appointment of competent persons to be inspectors and pest identifiers on such terms and conditions -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we did not take that one.

MS OPENDI: Yes, it was not taken, but I am just trying to build my point. The initial arrangement, which the committee was taking into consideration, was because of the fact that they were going to have an authority and therefore, they would have inspectors and pest identifiers. Now that there is no authority due to little funding, I think there is need for us to have item 31 – (Interjection) - well, I do not have the Act, I hope it is clause 31 – so that we have powers and duties of the inspectors and stop there, without the pest identifiers. 

If we really want to simply talk about pest identifiers, then we must create a separate clause for the pest identifiers and indicate that these will be volunteers. Short of this, these people are going to expect money, and of course, that will also have financial implications that may not be worthwhile. 

We have been having so many people going to give information at the district offices whenever they see any pests that they are not familiar with, and whenever their crops are destroyed. So, I wonder why we should now have them here. Madam Chairperson, let me stop here, otherwise hon. Elijah Okupa may start putting words in my mouth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I want to draw your attention to the original clause 23 of the Bill, which was about the powers of the inspectors. It was provided for. Anyway, Minister, you are the owner of the Bill, so tell us what to do.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Chairperson, I want to propose that we remove the words “pest identifiers” from here and bring it later in the regulations, and then we retain the inspectors only.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, even if we do as the minister has proposed, you will still have to take whatever is in clause 31 and merge it with what is in the original clause 23 - powers of the inspector. 

The original clause 23, in a way, describes what an inspector is expected to do. So, if in clause 31 you are again going on to elaborate further what an inspector is expected to do, then you need to merge the two, clauses 23 and 31. If you think that is not necessary, then you can elaborate further in the regulations made by the minister and give more detailed powers to the inspectors. Otherwise, I do not see how you can have in one Bill two places where the duties of an inspector are described.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us go with what the minister has proposed - that we remove the pest identifiers and leave this clause to deal only with the inspectors. I was uncomfortable with (1) (d) and (1) (h) in relation to the pest identifiers. So, we can provide for the pest identifiers elsewhere.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: On that proposal, paragraph (i) on page 27 still has a provision for an authority. So, I wonder whether we still need it there as a role of the inspector. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we substitute it with “commissioner”, because the in-charge of the authority will be a commissioner; not so?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Yes; so I think we have to substitute that with the commissioner.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we should substitute “commissioner” for “authority”. Honourable members, I put the question –

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, we have not yet resolved how clauses 23 and 31 will work together. My proposal is that they be merged so that whatever is good in clause 31 that we want, we take it to clause 23. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I want to support hon. Kabajo’s proposal because clause 23 is about the power of inspectors. Now that we have not included the pest identifiers, then the title, more or less, remains the same. So we could merge the two and look at what appears in the submission of the chairperson; if not included in 23, then we put it there to appear under one section instead of having two areas which are about the same thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the original 23 did not have inspecting of areas under cultivation. That was missing from the original clause 23. There is also the point on goods in transit. I think this one was dealing with goods in transit. I think the plants in the gardens and the goods in transit are what this part (1) (a) and (1) (b) were addressing. Can we add them? – (Interjections) – Okay let us add this additional function to clause 23, although we have passed it – we shall recommit it. 

Is there anything else in clause 32?  Are there some new proposals? Chairman, these are your proposals. Are you still pursuing transfer of assets under a new clause 33? 

MR KASAMBA: No, I think that collapsed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we go back to the original Bill. Okay, I put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31

THE CHAIRPERSON: The numbering will be reorganised. I put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agree to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have not changed anything substantial.

Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.29
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes to adopt the report of the committee of the whole House. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee on Agriculture be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister you –

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Sorry, that the Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010 be read for the third time. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you are supposed to report on the clauses passed, clauses deferred and others, and which ones were passed with amendment and which ones remained as they were.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, I did not take note of all these - (Laughter) - but I think it has been noted by the clerk. So I assume that the clerks took note of all those amendments and I submit accordingly –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I beg to report that we recommit clause 23.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let me help the minister. His report should be that the Bill has been passed with a number of amendments and then he should ask us to adopt that report. 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Learning is a process, Madam Speaker. I wish to report that the whole House has considered the report, made some amendments and therefore may the report be adopted with the amendments made.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.31
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (MR Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Plant Variety Protection Bill 2010 be read for the third time.

6.32
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, while considering the report on the Bill, we came across clause 23 and clause 31 and there was a proposal to merge the two. I therefore propose that we recommit clause 23 in order to consider the proposed amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be recommitted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, while considering clause 31 of the Bill, we found it necessary to merge clause 31 with clause 23. Some of the provisions we need to merge are as follows:

    a) The inspector inspects areas and plant materials under cultivation, in storage or transit for purposes of detecting and reporting the existence, outbreak or spread of pests and make a report on them to the commissioner.
    b) To ensure inspection or disinfection of consignments of plant and products moving in international traffic and their containers, packaging materials, storage places and conveyances.

    c) Conduct pest surveillance and pest risk analysis for the purposes of quarantine, documentation and provision of information.

    d) Develop and test quick phytosanitary pest and disease diagnostic procedures.

    e) Participate in the evaluation and screening of newly introduced plant germplasm in post-entry quarantine stations in accordance with guidelines of the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and the World Trade Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measuresc (SPS).

Those are the items that we need to merge with clause 23, to make it commensurate with the duties and roles of the powers of the inspector. I beg to report, Madam Chair.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the chairman should now move that clause 23 should now have – Here we had (1)(a),(b),(c),(d),(e) so for this one you are proposing, the numbering should start from (e), and (e) would now be (a) in your report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, I will direct the clerk to ensure there is proper numbering.

MR OKUPA: Yes, so that we would now have (e),(f),(g),(h),(i),(j), if those are the only ones we are pulling from clause 31 to merge with clause 23. So, clause 23 should be amended to include these other sections. Thank you

MR WERIHKE: Madam Chairperson, following those proposed amendments, I think the sub heading or the heading of clause 23 should read, “Powers and duties of inspectors.” This is because we are not only limited to powers but we also actually have duties that we have given. I propose

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the marginal note be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.39
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and I propose that the powers and duties of the inspectors be as amended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you move for the resumption of the House

MR BUCYANAYANDI: I beg to move that the House do resume and consider the report of the whole House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.39
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House recommitted clause 23 and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.40
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2010

6.41
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that, “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010”, be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH ACT, 2014”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the title is settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, members, for passing this Bill expeditiously. We hope that it will improve the agricultural sector in terms of pest management, pest control, surveillance and making sure that we are more competitive. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done today. We still have the other Bills from the Minister of Internal Affairs, which we have to handle tomorrow at committee stage. So I do hope that the minister will be here so that we accomplish our mandate.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is important that members get to know that Parliament has changed the method of signing for attendance because there are many members who are here who have not signed the register. 

I would like to ask that you allow those who are in attendance to sign because if anything arises from their participation today, it will look as if they were not there. So, since some members were not aware, I am pleading with you, Madam Speaker, to allow the Sergeant-at-Arms to allow those who are here to sign as they get out; but, please, do not call your friends who are not here. (Laughter)  

From tomorrow, my colleague, the Government Chief Whip, and I will try our best to make sure the members are adequately informed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have not probably told you but from now on, the books will be withdrawn one hour after we commence. If you are not here within the expected time, that is, by 3.00 o’clock, you will be considered absent. Those are the circumstances under which the book was taken away. Those who are here, write your names with the clerk.

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the information. However, I would like also to inform you that there are various reasons for a member not to be here within the first one hour. Will there be an allowance for those who come after one hour to justify the delay as it could be important? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If members are to arrive late, they should inform the Speaker in advance, otherwise this is too open and members take advantage of it; they come and sign and fail to enter the Chamber. 

We must be disciplined as our work is here on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. If you are away with my leave, I will know that you are away with my permission.  You actually should sign in the Chamber so that you do not sign for those absent. Let the Sergeant-at-Arms bring the book over here for signing. The books are in my office.

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for coming up with this method. It is unfortunate that sometimes we sit in this House up to 6.00p.m. or 7.00p.m. and then you find people walking in at 7.00p.m. to sign the book yet they have not been in the House. One time I attacked a Member who was looking for a page with free space, and she actually wrote her name at a session that had taken place the previous week. I found that very unfortunate.

I have sometimes done what I am not supposed to do; when we are moving out and the books are still there, I cross out the blank space as a responsible citizen. It is out of order for Members to walk in and sign when the House has adjourned.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for that initiative. I think we need to keep time and be here by three o’clock, then take leave if you have other things to do. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think we must do all that it takes to ensure that Members attend sessions throughout. I even had a wild idea that Members should sign after the session has ended – (Interjections)- Why not? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Commission is considering that. We are working out ways for biometric registration, where you will clock in and out. Until we get that, the books will be withdrawn in the first one hour.

DR SAM LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also standing on the same point. The fact that we sign in the first one hour, someone can sign and then leave immediately. So, after signing in the first one hour, I think that you should quickly consider introducing a book for signing at the end. Otherwise, some honourable colleagues will come for one hour and leave and then others may come at 4.00p.m. and stay until the end. So, the ones who come late will be better off than the one who came on time and left. So for us to cure this kind of thing, we need to sign at the beginning and then at the end. This is very important for the good of this country. Thank you.

MR JACOB WANGOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also worried that the removal of our register after one hour is not going to address the problem we have. It is better to put the book there when we are about to end the session so that we can sign as we go out; that will work. 

Also, let this Parliament make it clear; if it is a weakness of the law, we can propose a method of giving Members of Parliament comfort to stay in Parliament and do their work. It is worse in our constituencies. People have stated campaigning and our supporters want us to be there as the campaigns go on. What does the law say about this? 

Why can’t Government come up to stop these people campaigning in our constituencies? It is making the Members lack concentration in the House during their term. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of attendance, I would propose that in this era of IT, we should introduce an electronic device like the one at the North Wing, so that people clock in and out, so as to determine the amount of time somebody has spent in the House. There is no need to continue using the book system.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I explained; we are working on that and we would like to have it quickly. We have to budget and plan for it but that is our aim ultimately. 

MS FLORENCE EKWAU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the benefit of Members, when I walked in here, the books had already been withdrawn and it was before 4.00p.m.; I think it was around 3.40p.m. I am bringing this up for illustration. 

I had another meeting elsewhere and I wrote to the Speaker saying that I walked in here, ready to sign the book and I did not find it there. Having got the explanation from her, I got contented. Being a former commissioner in this House, Members, you do not know how deplorable it is for the cameras out there showing the House virtually empty.

We have sought the attention of the commissioners so that we have an in-house meeting and discuss some of these things away from the cameras. I am very grateful that at least there is an initiative; we really need to be fair to this country. This is a very good idea. I am more hurt by the case where someone can sign and then walks out, yet I have to sit with Speaker here up to 10 in the night. 

Look at these faces, some of them are the usual diligent members; they sit with you here up to the end of the sitting. Assuming they had missed the first hour; see how painful it is? You remain here and then brave the traffic jam at around nine o’clock trying to go home, yet you did not even sign; your name is not reflected anywhere in the book! So, I am more interested in those who end the House than those who sign and walk away. However, thank you for the initiative and I pray that we hold the stamina and let this be the practice and rule. I thank you.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very good initiative, but I do not believe that it is going to cure the problem. Members will be timing and coming early to sign the book and then disappear or Members may decide to come late at the end to sign the book. 

We went to the Parliament of Tanzania in Dodoma and we were over whelmed with the attendance. What we discovered or established there was that their method of work was unique. If it is time for sessional committee meetings, the whole week is set aside purely for sessional committees. If it is standing committees, it will be standing committees and if it is plenary, it will be strictly that.

In our scenario here, we have sessional committees running at the same time with standing committees, workshops in some other places and yet you have to come for the debate here; it is all mixed up. I plead with you, Madam Speaker, that somehow, somewhere, we change our method of conducting parliamentary business.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how many times I have said this; Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons are for plenary. I have written to all of you and said that if you have workshops, let them be on Thursday evenings up to Monday. That is when you should do your workshops and fieldwork. 

The standing committees are always in abeyance during the budget and now that we finished the budget, they should work in the morning and not in the afternoon to compete with the plenary.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this should not be an excuse for Members not to be here. I have been appearing and even attending committee meetings and when you go to those meetings, you find only four members; they are not there. So, it is not true that it is because people are in the sessional committees. 

Ask the chairpersons here, they will tell you what happens in the committees, whether standing or sessional committees, except for a few. Out of interest, I have always attended the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I always find their meetings fully attended. But the rest, for example where I belong, you find two or three people who come in, they sign and disappear.

I think the clerks need to help us on the matter you are raising, to plan for these sessional committee meetings, because it is the clerk who should tell the members and the chairperson that you can only have a workshop from Thursday to Monday and not beyond that. I should not go to a field trip between Tuesday and Thursday; the clerk should be able to do that.

MR BERNARD ATIKU: Thank you very much. Hon. Okupa has mentioned the issue of committees. The issue of members not attending meetings spans from their committee work. If you check all the books, people actually sign books backwards; they begin opening pages from the date they never attended and begin appending their signatures.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I have been a member of the Committee of ICT and Committee on Government Assurances, and I am now a member of the Committee on National Economy; the same business continues as usual with these fellow Members of Parliament. Even while in the field, there are Members who sign, just report to the first destination and come back. I have seen this on several occasions. I do not want to mention names, but some Members sign for five days and yet they are in the field for only the first day. So, if we are to address this issue -(Interjection)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, we are all concerned about the poor attendance of members of this House and we do not want to be here and not do the right thing. However, is the Member in order to make allegations and accusations against Members that they sign for five days, open books and sign for meetings they did not attend, when he does not have any evidence? Taking into consideration the fact that this is a permanent record that goes on the Hansard, is the Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are things I do not want to say, but I have got a report that sometimes Members actually leave this Parliament in the Coaster, and then when someone reaches somewhere in Kawempe, they pretend on the phone – “Oh hello, she has died? Oh sorry” - (Laughter)- and then they jump out saying they have just lost somebody. I have got those reports. So, yes, it is true. 

Maybe your committee is ok, but these things have been happening and I get the reports. It is only that I do not want to publish who did that, but a number of them have done so. That includes travelling out of the country; they change flights and come back the following day. I do not want to report yet, but I know it has been happening –(Interjection)– I have reported without names.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The faster you crack the whip, the better. I think once we are in this august House, we must exhibit the dignity that it deserves. We take oath, we have Rules of Procedure, the Constitution and other laws to expedite our duties.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to add anymore to what you said in response to the Member; at least you have answered. Otherwise, I was ready to give you names of perennial absentees who board the bus and jump off immediately we reach the first stop.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you were here when I was communicating, I told you that we are going to arrest the personal assistants of Members who go on the bus claiming that they are going to benchmark on behalf of their Member.

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a sombre note because this session is a major commentary on our performance as legislators. It is on record now, we are talking about ourselves. A Member stood and pointed out that some Members come and sign for the previous days in order to justify his or her membership of this House; that is a major commentary on our performance as legislators.

I have also heard a Member asking why government does not stop people from going to campaign in their constituencies. It is as if to say that people leave the work assigned to them in this term of Parliament to go and work for 2016, which is so ahead of time.

Madam Speaker, I hesitatingly say the following: if laws stop sinners, the Ten Commandments would have stopped the sinners, because the fear of Hell would have been a dominant guide of behaviour. I am wondering, therefore, whether the withdrawal of these books from the door will help to create a new behavioural pattern and a new content in our behaviour. I am wondering whether we do not need to study more about how and why we are exhibiting this behaviour rather than being simply punitive. I think there is a bit more that we need to study about what is going on now.

Those of us who are not Members of Parliament by election do also know that everybody is engaging in campaigns now, spending monies which nobody earns, and which attracts so many other people in campaigns. If we go on like this for another whole year, we are going to halt the growth of our economy, spend more money than we have in our hands, and actually it is going to be a huge commentary on ourselves. Those who will lose will lose so heavily and nobody will lift them from the pit where they are pushing themselves. 

It is a pity, Madam Speaker. I commend your effort because you want this House to perform, but I also need to express my worry that we need to rethink what role we are playing by pushing politics more than responsibility. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Members, I think we will do what we can.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, on the aspirants, those people who are in our constituencies, I think we have a law, especially concerning public servants. But we are now seeing them, even ambassadors, in people’s constituencies before resigning. The law provides that if you are a public servant or civil servant, you must resign first before you engage in active politics. We have seen them in the constituencies; they have even printed t-shirts and posters. 

I think those ones, especially the civil servants and public servants, let alone the others who are not in that category, can be dealt with because they are also using government facilities. They are using government money. Some end up being corrupt because they realise how expensive it is. So when someone comes to the office, he comes back and starts looking for ways of getting money in the office in order to go back to campaign. I think for those, the law is there.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think it is up to the Members to take action because the laws are there; you report to the Electoral Commission and also the Public Service Commission.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Very serious comments have been made by colleagues about the behaviour of Members of Parliament and actually you, Madam Speaker, have confirmed this by reporting about what you have heard about Members who jump out of the buses. 

As Members of Parliament, we have the responsibility to maintain the decorum of this House. I have to confess that I have been in this House for some time now - this is my fourth consecutive term - but this is the first time to hear very strong comments of that nature. The effect of this, Madam Speaker, is that if you do not come up with those names in future, if such Members continue doing this, all of us are going to be implicated. People will think that all of us have jumped out of the buses. 

Madam Speaker, my request is that you strongly warn those fellow colleagues and if such things continue, they should be exposed. Otherwise, all of us will suffer; immediately you identify yourself as being a Member of the Ninth Parliament, it will be said that you have been a candidate for that type of behaviour. 

I have seen a lot of comments where this House has been criticised to the extent that sometimes even you fear to be known as a Member of Parliament because of this type of –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU:  Thank you very much, Dr Lyomoki, for giving way. Madam Speaker, painfully, this week a newspaper reported about Members of Parliament who gate-crashed a workshop in Entebbe, where they were not invited. It turned out to be a national embarrassment. So the list continues. Thank you very much.

DR LYOMOKI: Those comments have far reaching effects because for me, I have stopped attending any workshop. (Laughter) Being a Member of Parliament for workers, most of the people - NGOs and civil servants - who run these workshops are workers. So they continue commenting, “Your colleagues do not come without money.” So, for me, I do not want to be misunderstood as attending for the sake of money. I have deliberately stopped attending any workshops in hotels because they look at us as if we have come for money. 

These are serious issues, which are going to undermine the integrity of this House. Therefore, Madam Speaker, my request is that you take serious action and if possible, those Members should be exposed so that people can know that not all the Members of Parliament are doing that. Thank you very much.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I only want to give you another idea of how you can manage the attendance register. 

At the place where I worked before I joined politics, my boss used to put the register at the entrance but whenever he entered the office, he would cross out the remaining space and append his signature. He would note the time at which he has entered the office and then he would take back the book for the late comers to sign. 

Madam Speaker, I am not advocating for my colleagues but I think you should do the same as my boss. When you enter, the Sergeant-at-Arms should bring the book to your table, you draw a line somewhere down there and then the latecomers will sign below after your signature. When the House ends, you again close the book and then we shall see those who shall sign after the House closed. I think it will be better than hiding the book. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we take note of those proposals.

MS KABASHARIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we are talking about ourselves and these are serious comments and allegations that we are making about ourselves. However, we need to study this issue very deeply. 

I also get concerned about what happens, more so when we go to committee meetings or even to the field. However, at times, you also sympathise and think of what causes this. I was a member of the Sixth Parliament and I always tell people that what I see today is different from how we were working in the Sixth Parliament. The reasons are many; people have changed, even the people that we represent. 

Some of the Members do not come in time because of so many causes; we need to look at those root causes. Someone has mentioned that we are here in Parliament, but I want to tell you that there are some Members whose constituencies have been contested since we came, just after one year or even after few months. So, if they take long without going back to their constituencies, there are so many question marks. Everyone here is working towards coming back either for second term or third term or whatever, but it is also our duty to serve this country diligently. 

When I compare the Sixth Parliament with the Ninth Parliament, in the Ninth Parliament Members work as government - you give school fees, give money for burials and even attend them, construct roads and schools, and you do all sorts of things. The people no longer differentiate between a Member of Parliament and Government.

I think what brings about this is because people are looking money. Some people think that there is a lot of money in this Parliament and therefore they must fight hard to come here. In the process of this stiff competition, you abandon what brought you here. 

We need to strictly specify the role of a Member of Parliament. That is why I am saying it has to start - we need to look at the causes. The Sixth Parliament was not like this really, and yet we came on individual merit; we were not in parties. Today, things are quite different. The commercialisation of politics has changed many things. That is why it is becoming difficult for Members to attend sittings frequently and do their work diligently. 

We have to do more than signing the register. We are heading to more difficult times than these ones; you will bring the register and Members will create another way of dodging. Maybe we need a session where we can sit, without the microphones and recording, and we talk about these issues. 

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the backbench commissioners to organise a meeting so that we discuss that outside here.

MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I think this matter we are talking about is extremely disappointing, especially for Members like us who are newcomers. You realise that if you do not send mabugo, contribute to school fees, attend functions every Sunday then you are seen as a fool and someone who has done nothing for the constituents. If you tell them the roles of a Member of Parliament, they do not want to know; to them, if you are working for them, then you have to do all those things. 

Yesterday, I had to spend time in Mulago to arrange for a dead body to reach Kanungu. The people were saying, “You see, for her she is working”. I told them, “This is not my work; I am doing this but I am not supposed to be here, I am supposed to be in the House, but you have been complaining that I never come to Mulago to help you and that is why I am here.” So, you can imagine the things they think we should be doing. Because we want to come back here, we find ourselves burying and by the end of the month, all our money is finished, and they expect us to have too much money. So, it is a great challenge.

Maybe the Government should conduct civic education to teach our people; otherwise, our people do not understand our roles. They imagine that we should even be there campaigning because others are already on the ground, yet we have a lot of work in the House here. It is a great challenge. I think that is why members come late or even run away because they want to do the work in their constituencies, running here and there to fulfil those obligations people gave them. We really need great help in educating our voters.

MR DAVID BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This short debate we had on this matter is a reminder to all of us that we need to protect the integrity of this institution in whatever we are doing. 

Regarding the issue of the registration book, Madam Speaker, this is a very good initiative that you have started this afternoon. However, I think that now that Members have made some contributions on how this system can improve, it would be procedurally right that whatever decision that you come up with, you come back again to the House and inform us that this is how it is going to be working. Each one of us will then be able to know what the new rules are, if they are going to be effective and if we are going to be accountable –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to add to what hon. Bahati is proposing. Earlier on, you said that the backbench commissioners should organise a meeting. I think it should go beyond that, such that before you come up with a final position, from a discussion with members we could be able to come up with something because many heads are better than a few.

If we organise an in-house meeting soon, many of us will be able to come up with ideas because a number of us have different experiences. We have visited a number of Parliaments and learnt how we could possibly manage ourselves better. That is just what I want to add to what hon. Bahati was saying. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this book has been here; it has been our practice to register. However, I know some senior members who say, “No, this is not part of our Rules of Procedure; I will never register”, although actually, we do it as part of our practice. So if you bring back the proposal and the whole House is informed, no one will have any excuse not to adhere to the rules.

MR ASUPASA ISIKO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give some suggestions. As we go towards elections and especially the constitutional amendment, we have memories of the Seventh Parliament. At that time we needed to have some constitutional amendments and we needed quorum badly. Innovatively, you made sure that members were here, but the turnover of those who remained around and did not go back to their constituencies was so big. Many of us lost our constituencies because our constituents could not understand that we had to be here for months without going home. 

I am of the opinion that the whips of the parties come together with you and the commissioners and get an innovative way to tackle this.  As I talk now, my party, the NRM, is mobilising in the field and they might require me on a day like Tuesday or Wednesday to go back home to attend to a few issues. Imagine if I do not attend to party matters when the party is in my constituency and those who want to replace me are there. So, when you balance the two sides, you know which side of your bread is buttered and you act accordingly.

That is why I suggest that you talk to the whips, who organise our programmes. At the same time, the Ministry for Information and National Guidance should come out strongly to guide the population around this period. Funeral rites, funeral services and burials have become campaign grounds. We need to have more laws that can protect us so that we can be sure. That is why we run to bury everywhere, because they might announce your name when you are not there. They will say, “It is time for the area Member of Parliament to speak” and nobody has seen you around and then somebody will say, “Now, do you see, he cannot even come to bury.” 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we really need some real guidance at this time because a lot is threatening our being here. We love doing our work in Parliament but we cannot settle. Somebody should guide the population down there because it as if elections are just tomorrow. People are running around. I am really requesting that the Minister for Information and National Guidance comes out periodically to guide the population. The police should be guided on how they can use the Pubic Order Management Act to help us on some of these issues.

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is happening regarding member’s low attendance of the House is a very unfortunate development, which is a source of concern not only to you as our Speaker but I think to all of us. Whenever we come out to debate, the cameras are beaming, the TV screens are on and our constituents are busy trying to see whether their MP is not only contributing but also in the House.

The introduction of this new arrangement of the attendance register being withdrawn as soon as you enter caught me unawares today and quite a number of colleagues were caught up in a similar predicament. I think Members saw me moving between where I was to you because I was not too sure how I would communicate this to a minister who had been attending Cabinet. 

Sometime back, I had a similar problem; I had reported in this House and I think I was the first one to register in the book. This was in the days of the late Francis Ayume. It turned out that although quite a good number of us had signed, we were actually not in the House. I was meeting Uganda Manufactures Association as Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Industry in my office upstairs. The House was empty, but I had signed in the book and the late Ayume at that stage decided that a roll call be carried out. My name was the first one to be read out and I was the first one not to be seen in the House at that time. So, one of my constituents rang me and asked, “Where are you; your name has been mentioned and you are not in the House and yet you signed?” It was very embarrassing. 

The point I am trying to make here is that when you come to Parliament, you are attending to so many things - debate in the House, committee work and consultations, like the one I was having at that time. Now, the whole country happened to know that I had signed, but I was not attending Parliament, which is not a good habit to be associated with. 

The proposal made by Members that the matter needs more serious discussion so that we can be in a position to see how to handle it is the one I would support. I listened to hon. Kabasharira and I have listened to those who have spoken before me, even hon. Mpongo. I have even attended burials at his place; it is a big sin for him not to attend burials in his constituency -(Interjection)- Are you sure? I thought it was a problem peculiar to hon. Mpongo, but apparently it is a problem for all of us. 

It appears the issue we are having here is not only about the roles of Members of Parliament and making sure that the country gets to understand those roles. We should shape the minds of our people in the correct direction because that is very important. Our priorities are skewed. One takes the trivial issues to be the most important and the critical issues that we are supposed to be attending to as legislators are now not considered important. It is our duty to get the country thinking in the right direction and focusing on the right things that leaders are supposed be focusing on, and getting everybody to appreciate that that is what my leader is doing.

On this issue of burials, which is a problem to many of us right now, it is high time we outlawed burials during the week. Obviously, one will say, “Where shall we keep our dead bodies?” It is our duty as a Government to equip our health facilities with necessary equipment to preserve these bodies for a week, two weeks, one month or three months. 

I was reading the newspapers of Kenya and women were having a fight over their husband. One was saying that he should be buried in her home and the other one was saying he should not be buried there. This was a famous case and for three months, the body was kept until it was taken to western Kenya where the matter was sorted in the courts of law. 

Now, I think as we budget, let us try to make sure that the mortuaries in our hospitals are well refrigerated. Let us come here and pass a law outlawing burials during the week. If we do not do that, I see ourselves running into a lot of problems because those campaigning to take up our positions in the constituencies, many of whom do not have the kind of responsible positions that we have, will have all the time to go out to the constituency. 

Now the best measure of a good person in our constituencies is one who attends every burial, wedding and introduction. For you who has to represent the country even abroad as the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Speakers’ Association, you have a problem; these people will say, “This person cares about our problems” and yet you are taking care of the problems of everybody else and doing the thing that you were voted to do. 

I think we can save ourselves. First, let us hold a debate that will help to shape the direction of what we should be dealing with. Also, let us come up with the laws that will enable us at the end of the day to have the time to be Members of Parliament at the time when we should be Members of Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the minister is suggesting is working in Kenya. In Kenya, you do not bury every day; there are specific days for burial. You give notice and everybody gets ready. But here, sometimes I think of what to do; should I close Parliament and go to Kamuli?

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I raised this matter, I was only concerned about the legal implication of having Members contribute in Parliament and yet they are not recorded as having attended. I did not know that I was actually opening a Pandora’s box. 

However, it is a wonderful opportunity that we are auditing ourselves. What we have said today, even if we have taken one hour, is a big thing. It means that we have the intention to change. The persistent absence of Members from Parliament borders on integrity. I think if a Member is committed to be present in Parliament, he or she will try to be present. I also think that we have developed laxity and we need to improve on that.

Madam Speaker, I really sympathise with you because you try your best, together with your deputy and the entire parliamentary leadership, but the problem we have is that sometimes we also cause problems for ourselves. Whereas you want us to be in Parliament, there are committees which are meeting at the same time and we have said that it makes the life and work of the whip very difficult. You want Members to attend the plenary but at the same time they are needed in the committee, and the same Member is supposed to be attending an NGO conference or workshop somewhere. This has become unruly. We cannot manage ourselves and as whips now, we cannot manage our members. You call a Member and he says, “I am in a meeting” and indeed he is in a meeting.

Madam Speaker, I can see how you feel because I was deliberately looking at the camera today and I looked at the clock and it was coming to 3.00 p.m. and there were only two Members in the House. I came out and asked, “Are Members on strike?” This is what I asked because I was doing too many things and I did not know whether to come in and sit or to wait until Members change their minds to come to the House. To me, that is a sign of laxity and I think we need to improve on that. Members are around, they can come, but they choose to come when they see the Speaker has walked in; that is when they start running in. So, I think what you have done will help to improve the situation and it is a step in the right direction.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to also say that we can borrow from the practices which you have identified. In the Pan-African Parliament, at every session they give you an audit of how your members have performed. If you remember, when I was leading your delegation, they would say something like, “out of 100 meetings in a session, your members attended 50 or 60”, and they give you marks - 60 or 80 per cent. That is why Ugandans, under my leadership, scored very highly because I made sure that Uganda was noted as attending the meetings from the very first day to the very last day.

Many members would come at the beginning and they would not be there at the end. But for me, I would insist my members are there with me from the start to the end because we would be audited and the report definitely, came to you. If you looked at your file, the performance of our members is there recorded. I think we need to do that. 

I have initiated that on the Opposition side, although we have not yet started dialoguing on it, so that we know how many members attend the plenary and committees. We have to start doing that so that you can call a member and say, “Look, in this session, out of 50 meetings, you only attended five times; why?” Those are the things we need to do so that we can strengthen ourselves. 

Members, also encourage some other young Members. You know, all Members need mentoring. You realise that there are some people who have come from school straight to Parliament and they would not know really what to do; we need to guide them. So those of you who need to mentor - we need mentor. It is important, Madam Speaker, we do not assume that a Member comes from the class and can perform as a Member of Parliament; no. We need to mentor Members so that we can at least show that we are responsible in whatever we are trying to do.

Madam Speaker, in summary, I want to congratulate you for the initiative you have come up with today. I want to say that we will support you. I am urging Members to support this cause so that at least we can whitewash our image. It is you and I being condemned out there; Parliament is just an institution but people are saying, “Look at them, they are only looking for money”. 

Let us not only talk about the plenary; when we go out - I want to quote one incidence; there are many people who attend the World Bank conference on public finance accountability. Uganda records almost half of the total membership of that international conference – sometimes 80 or 70 Members - which other countries cannot afford. On the very first day, they are all there, the second day you will not see anybody, maybe three, four or five. I told my chairman of the Budget Committee, “If this is what it means, I would rather not be part of this”. I may attend the meeting, but because people are absent, the public will not know whether Ogwal was actually part of the absentees or part of those who were there.

So, I think we should enforce this not only here in Parliament but also when we get out there. It is even worse when we get out of the country because people judge your country by the way you behave. That is why some of us try to behave even better when we are outside because I am carrying Uganda. Even if I hate my country when I am here, but when I am outside there, I must be seen to be a great lover of my country and I must be judged by the way I behave. So, really, I think that is what we need to do. 

We need to ensure that when we are out of the country, we perform better. At least we can afford to mess up here and criticise each other, but when we are outside - Madam Speaker, there are many things which have happened, many things you have heard about, many things some of us have seen, but we do not want to talk about them here. We can only say, let us do better than we have done in the past. May God bless all of us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning members abroad, I think it is the work of the leader of the delegation to ensure that the people you have gone with are there. Those who go with me know that I do not tolerate nonsense. That is why there is a member I threw out of my delegation. For one year, she was in the news complaining about how I threw her out, because as soon as we arrived, she disappeared. We looked for her and we could not find her. So I threw her out.

MS AMELIA KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the action you have taken, but I pray that consideration should be given to some Members of Parliament who have multiple roles. I would like to cite myself as an example. 

I do have multiple roles - I am a national treasurer and I have to hold meetings with the finance committee. I have a ministry which has three sectors, but all of them are broad because we need all of them; if there are cooperatives, I need to go; if there are regional conferences, I have to go. Sometimes they insist that they want the full minister. We have been sending directors but sometimes they say, “No, we need the minister to attend”. We are three ministers and our sectors are broad and you find that all of us have to travel sometimes. I pray that there should be an exception to the rule. 

Another area is the perception of our constituents. Being an MP in Africa is very difficult. The expectations of our people are different because sometimes they quarrel and say, “We only see you on TV; you do not come back to see us”, and I try because my area is not very far.

Madam Speaker, I feel we should come up with some initiatives to hold talk shows on radios and try to explain to our people the role of a Member of Parliament. It is very important because of those assumptions. I rest my case.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I have just been listening to this discourse we have been having now and I have been thinking about it. We were even getting to crossroads; it has turned into a time of attacking and defending ourselves. Those who are outside the arena would like to displace those who are inside and it is a terrible game out there.

We all came at different times to this place. There are those who are saying about those of us who have stayed here for a bit long, “Those ones have stayed for a long time…” - like the Rt Hon. Speaker – “…is she or he the only one?” Then there are those who came yesterday, they are saying about them, “These ones are just like us and they went there, so we can remove them quickly.”

Then we have also got what we call polarisation. You go to a district and you tell us, “Tell those people not to be corrupt”. When you go there as a Member of Parliament and say, “I have heard there is shoddy work being done on this road”, they will say, “This one is looking at us; if there is a way in which all of us could put our resources together and remove this person who is looking at us, so much the better.” So, there is a lot of heat out there and it takes Members from here to go and defend themselves. 

We do not even have a set timetable to allow everybody to get set at the same time - get on your marks, get set, go. Now everybody chooses when to get on their marks. At the moment, there are people in every constituency; civil servants are addressing rallies! Then you say to yourself, “I sit here, a civil servant is there talking…” He might have even diverted some of the money from a contract for some project. I heard one saying, “I am worth 20 MPs”, and yet it is said in this country that the MPs are the ones earning a lot of money. But some civil servant says, “I am worth 20 of you”. What does that mean?  So, the commercialisation of politics has become so bad. 

Even the recipients, if you do not give, they will say this one is not working. So, the mind-set is completely distorted. Even if they see projects that Government is bringing, they still prefer the one who does not bring projects as long as he has the money. That is what is out there. 

Madam Speaker, people are now defending themselves from the attackers. Maybe we should set some standards so that we tell people that this is not the time to campaign; even for civil servants, once found campaigning at a wrong time, we should be able to question them, so that these people are left to work. I see they debate effectively, but their minds are not settled. A person is sitting here but he is thinking of the village and what is happening there. 

So, we must sit down, as you wisely suggested, and design ways in which those places can be kept quiet for the time being; not preventing anybody, but at least they should not be disturbed, so that you maximally exploit the minds of these intelligent people in Parliament to shape the way for the country. So, I think sometime, away from these microphones, we should sit down and plan for our country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think we have listened. Perhaps, I will invite the Prime Minister and we have some discussion with the whips so that we can design a strategy. Really, we still have more than a year to go and we have a lot of work to do; we cannot afford to have Members unsettled, jumping back and forth. So, I think we shall advise you in the next one week or so about how we are going to move so that we can lay down some strategies to help Members. 

Honourable members, thank you very much for your attendance. House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.46 and adjourned until Thursday, 13 November 2014 at 2.00p.m.) 

