Tuesday, 4 November 2014

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of Opposition and Members of Parliament, we welcome you to the commencement of the second meeting of the first session. This meeting will run from today until the 18th December 2014.  Therefore, I want to urge the Government, in case they have Bills to present to do so between now and the close of the second meeting. I also want to commiserate with Members who lost their dear ones during recess. We pray that their souls rest in eternal peace. 

I also want to inform you that on the African continent we have lost a President, the President of Zambia. He died while we were on recess; we pray for the people of Zambia to go through this difficult period especially since this is the second time a sitting President of Zambia is dying while in office. We want to pray for them and hope that they will remain united as a country. Let me invite Members to observe a moment of silence in remembrance of President Sata.

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want also to bring to the attention of the committees that there are a number of pending Bills and you are still required to adhere to the 45 day rule. By the time we completed the budget, we had dealt with eight Bills but I want to notify the committees about the following Bills that are pending and must be completed at the shortest time possible; Trade Licensing (Amendment) Bill, 2012; National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012;Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013; Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011; Tobacco Control Bill, 2014; Narcotic Drugs and PsychotropicSubstances Control Bill, 2007; the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013; Uganda Wild Life and Training Institute Bill, 2013; Uganda Wild Centre Bill, 2013; Immunisation Bill, 2014;The Rotaries and Gaming Bill, 2013; Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014; Persons With Disabilities Bill, 2014; Registration of Persons Bill, 2014; Public Finance Bill, which is on the Order Paper; the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009.

I am giving notice to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that next week the Bill on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances will be on the Order Paper with or without the committee’s report.

I am giving notice that the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill will be on the Order Paper and I am calling on the Committee on Finance to complete the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, which has been pending.

After those Bills, we shall find space for Public Accounts Committee, Local Governments Accounts and COSASE to present their reports for consideration.

I want to remind Members that where a committee has failed to complete its work, you are required to come here, report to the House and get permission to extend the time.

I also want to inform Members that South Wing ground level car park is now ready and you will be advised on how to use it. In a few days, everybody will be able to parkso that we can decongest the North Wing and the other areas where you have been parking.

The Clerk will issue forms to assist you to register because personal details of the Members will be required as it will be put in the database so that it can support us in the security arrangements for this House.

The EAC sports tournament is due next month in Arusha and I want to call upon the Parliamentary Sports team to practice so that we are not embarrassed while there.

I also want say something about our relations with the Government of South Africa. It has come to our notice that a number of Ugandans are not treated well in their bid to get visas to go to South Africa. Ugandans have to line up at 3 O’clock in the morning; many times, they do not even get the visas; what is even worse is that in order to transit through South Africa without leaving the airport,you are also required to get a visa. If you are going to Swaziland, Botswana you are required to get a visa. 

We think that all these are unnecessarily onerous for the people of Uganda taking into account that the South Africans get their visas here on entry or from our mission in Pretoria.

So, we would like to know why there is no reciprocal arrangement from our Government because our people are suffering.(Applause)We think that the contribution of Uganda to the liberation struggle of South Africa should be acknowledged and also the fact that many businesses from South Africa are here doing good business, making profits but the same treatment is not available to our people.

So, we shall want to know from the government how it proposes to help the people of Uganda to be able to travel with ease between the two countries. 

I also wanted to remind the ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs, some months ago, I wrote to them concerning the cost of the use of the VIP facilities in the European Airports where for one or two hours, we are required to pay over £1000 but here we continue to give free services to all the missions.All people use our VIP for free but for any Ugandan to use theirs you must pay £1000.So we want to know why a poor country like us is donating free space when the rich countries are forcing the smaller countries to pay. So, we shall want to hear on that.

The other matter is on question time; we want to make some amendments so that we get more researched answers.Members will be required to send in their questions early enough.They will be given to the Prime Minister so that he can prepare and give intelligent answers – Yes, honourablemembers, I do not know whether you are always satisfied with the answers you get. What we are trying to do is to make sure that you get proper responses to what you want and I am not inventing this because it is under Rule 39.

2.55
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. We have both - there is where we write our questions and send them in time but this is question time.We also want to get the Prime Minister off guard because he is supposed to be performing.

These ministers are 79 in number; they are here to defend. We have abrupt questions because of the situations that are taking place. For example, I can ask about anything that has been taking place and the Prime Minister has ministers there.

I would suggest that we go by the rules; we can write those questions and still remain with our questions on Thursday where we need direct answers. We always give him chance to go back and find out and report next week. Only that – 

THE SPEAKER:Honourablemembers, I am not interfering with question time of Thursday - that is still available. I am talking about Prime Minister’s question time of Wednesday. So, I am saying, let us get better answers by sending the question so that you will answer on Wednesday but prepared.  - Can I read Rule 39 for you, these are our rules, I am just re-emphasising the rules. It is not going to interfere with your right to ask questions only that give him time so that he can answer intelligently.

2.57
MR ABDUKATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, MadamSpeaker. we have had a problem in this House that many questions have been raised, submitted to the office of the Clerk and it has taken the front bench months, sometimes half a year before they come up with answers. In some instances, they have not answered, they have either failed or deliberately refused to answer question.
So, I may not have objections to have the Prime Minister ready but can he undertake to this House to make sure that all questions should be answered latest within 14 days, those which have been submitted to him in writing. I want that undertaking other than them sitting on the questions for half year, sometimes, endlessly without answers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I am looking at is that when we are going to have question time on Wednesday, submit them by Friday so that he answers them on Wednesday. The other one of 14 days is on Thursday. For instance, now, we already have three questions.

2.59
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South Constituency, Rubaga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The questions directed to the Prime Minister are globally unique; they partially test his capacity to answer.(Laughter) Those questions are supposed to be raised instantly and answered instantly. So, there is no way of making any reservations. If he is to remain Prime Minister, he must answer there and then. (Applause)

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that you have raised this very point. When Members of Parliament raise issues on behalf of their constituencies in the country, they should proper, effective and authoritative answers from Government. It should not be just personal views or speculation and that is why we have government machinery.So if you raise an issue, the government machinery should be put in motion; correct answers should be raised and then communicated.

Yes, I do agree that there has been a problem about the time of answering questions. The fault is not just with the ministers; quite often the ministers may not be aware that certain questions have been raised. So, Madam Speaker, my view is that there should be better or more open channels of communication so that ministers can have questions well in advance, consider them and give responses.

Sometimes, these questions come and they are blocked at the bureaucratic level and then, later on, ministers are informed when it is already late.

I believe that we need to look at the systems that we have been using to receive questions, send them to ministers -

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.We are not objecting to having well researched or articulated responses to our questions but in light of the fact that honourablemembers raise many questions, others do not need to be deferred for further research.

Couldn’t it be prudent that the Prime Minister answers those which he can respond to and then others, he can defer and come back with them later? Even this one will work on the backlog that you have so that not everything is left for you to go and research further. You may have an instant response for some, wouldn’t that be a better way forward?

3.04
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (MP, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I want to invite you and Members to look critically at Rule 34(2) of our rules juxtaposed to Rule 35(2)(3) and (4) of our rules.

A clear interpretation of those rules shows that whereas questions to ministers must be in writing and must be submitted to the Clerk, the interpretation of Rule 34 on the Prime Minister’s Question Time does not seem to indicate or suggest that any question to be put in writing.

That is why the rule clearly says that questions may be put to the Prime Minister not to minister and a minister can only interfere in the Prime Minister’s Question Time if the Prime Minister is absent but for questions to ministers, yes, they should be put in writing.

For the questions to the Prime Minister, if we interpret Rule 34 and 35, the Prime Minister has no reason as to why he should not be answering oral questions on the spot.

THE SPEAKER: Can I draw your attention to Rule 39 and I want to read; “Aquestion shall not be asked without notice unless it is of an urgent nature relating to either a matter of public importance or the arrangement of business.” - Yes Honourable Members, let me just be clear - urgent questions and emergencies, those will still be handled. But to get good answers from the Prime Minister, we are proposing that you submit on Friday and he answers on Wednesday. - Yes, why don’t we try it?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Why not?

STATEMENT BY GOVERNMENT ON THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the minister comes in, I would like to introduce members of staff from the Kenyan National Assembly from the Department of Printing. You are welcome. They are here for a benchmarking visit. I also want to introduce Guild Council members from the UCC Vocational Training Institute represented by hon.Kyanjo and hon.Naggayi, Kampala. You are welcome.(Applause)

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhukana Rugunda: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true Government was asked to make a statement on the Standard Gauge Railway. Government has given serious attention to this matter; actually, Cabinet has discussed this matter a few times and Cabinet is due to take a final position on this subject on Wednesday. Government is therefore requesting that the statement be made on Thursday after Cabinet has given appropriate and due consideration to this important subject. 

3.07
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are at variance; the Leader of Government Business is talking of a response to Parliament on Thursday as if it was a question put, yet, this was a substantive motion. It is not a question to require a response; it is a substantive motion that was debated in this House and then Government was given a week. It turned into two weeks and it is now two months. 

We all remember the motion was lodged on 3rd September and it is now 4th November. So,we are uncomfortable with that and two and most important, whereas Parliament is awaiting a response as the Prime Minister has put it, there are activities going on.The aim is meant to render the motion nugatory, the aim is meant to render this Parliament useless. Right now, there are teams at the Ministry of Works who are working day and night to ensure that a contract is signed and by the time a contract is signed, whether we debate much here, whether we take good resolutions, it would be very difficult to undo the damage that will have been done.

Madam Speaker, it is not fair for Government to take for granted this institution of Parliament; they are not honest with Parliament. They are not saying that they are sitting to find answers but they are involved in arm twisting. They are arm twisting officials and some officials have even resigned over that project. This is what is going on. And by the time they appear on Thursday they want the deal already done. So, what is the use of Parliament? Why did you have this institution called Parliament and you claim to be democrats and yet, you do not want to go by the rules of democracy. 

What is happening is to hoodwink this Parliament but underneath, they are moving very first to sign this deal, the deal that originally was at $8.5 billion as the minister was here denying has now shot up to 11.3 billion and now, it is still at that. By the time we get to it; by the time they come on Thursday –(Mr Kajara rose_)- and I would not want the over-enthusiasmof hon. Kajara on this matter. The facts are, as a country, we are about to suffer and we shall suffer under that burden. That is why we had this motion to be debated. Madam Speaker, I pray that you allow this Parliament to proceed on the motion and pronounce itself on the matter. I beg to move. 

3.10
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker and Honourable Members, this country is about to commit itself to a contract worth over $ 8 billion. In the history of this country, there has never been any contract or any project worth that magnitude. This money, we do not haveit;we are going to enter into borrowing to raise this money. By the time Government comes to Parliament to debate loans and credit finance, it will have entered into contractual obligation.

Rt Honourable Prime Minister, you were not in this Parliament then but I remember the Honourable Minister for Works, hon. Byandala begged this House, “Before you take a decision, give us two days such that we come with a response and then we decide whether we can put this matter before a select committee or before the ordinary Committee of Parliament on Physical infrastructure” and that was the debate. When time came, Madam Speaker, you may remember, the entire bench were not in the House. We were told they had gone for a retreat in Munyonyo and we adjourned this matter.

It started appearing on the Order Paper but somehow we could not conclude the business because Government was not ready. The information we had then - we still have it now - is that Cabinet had not even discussed this matter;there were only few ministers who were in the know of this transaction but the entire Cabinet were not aware and some of the ministers were complaining, “where did you get those documents?”. The Rt Honourable Gen. Moses Ali came on this microphone and said, “Wedo not know where these people even got those documents which some of us do not have” as then he was the Leader of Government Business. 

So, we are looking at a deal being done not confidentially, but secretly committing this country to billions of dollars. We need the project and we needed it yesterday, but we need a worthy project; we need value for money. Nobody is contesting the Standard Gauge Railway, but we are saying you flouted all rules of procurement. Ministers are the ones engaged in procurement; civil servants who are supposed under the law to engage in procurement are resigning.

Rt Honourable Prime Minister, some of us have given you a benefit of doubt because of your history. I want to request you, do not drag us onto a road that will start doubting you. Do not because you have the good faith of this House; you have the good faith of this Parliament. You are starting on a wrong note. Do not make us regret the absence of your predecessor. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, my view is, this matter is a very serious matter and let Government and Rt Hon. Rugunda not handle it casually. Our colleagues facing us on the front bench may not be able to tell you but they are even talking to us. You have not discussed this matter in Cabinet. (Interjections) you have not, I do not have to be a member of Cabinet to know what goes on there. You have been quoting Jesus, you did not see him yet you quote him every day. (Laughter) So, I am requesting that this matter be concluded in one way or the other; we give the people of Uganda an opportunity to look into this transaction because as I said, there is something very irregular about it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.16
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I think you have done your best by granting Government an opportunity. Ordinarily, under different Parliamentary practice, once a motion is moved and the question is put, the Speaker implements the decision but you have been very kind just as you have been kind to some of us in difficult times. You have been kind to Government but Government has not appreciated your good will. Our motion was that a committee be setup. 

As a Shadow Minister of Finance, I have been engaged with my partners in the region and they are wondering whether the team of good will- alliance of the President of Uganda, Rwanda and Kenya, that coalition of the willing is a serious coalition. They are asking me, because being a border Member of Parliament, that the Standard Gauge Railway team from Mombasa will reach Malaba sooner than later and yet, Uganda seems not to be ready.

Madam Speaker, about 2 weeks ago, a committee-(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya.The information I would like to give you is that actually, in Kenya the whole project has been stopped by court because the costs have been described as shaping up to the biggest scandal that country has ever seen. The kilometre from Mombasa to Nairobi, which is about 400km something, the cost is about Shs 3.3 billion, yet, in Ethiopia over 700km the cost is Shs 3.6 billion and in Uganda, it started with Shs 8 billion for about 250km; now, it is Shs 11 billion. So, the information I wanted to give you is that actually in Kenya court has stopped the project because Kenyans think this is robbery.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, about two weeks ago, the Committee onNational Economy travelled to Malaba and the level of traffic congestion, non-tariff barrier, is unbearable to this country and yet Government seems not to be ready to come up with an infrastructural project in a transparent manner. 

And, therefore, without wasting much time, I want to request you that Government seems not to be ready to come out transparently, that you set up a committee and we investigate this project in detail so that the people of this country can have value for money-(Applause)-because whether the Prime Minister comes to respond or not, some of us believe that the cost of this project is high. 

We have been doing research around the world, we have met so many investors because colleagues - some of you may not know - this is going to be concrete rail. Even if you look at building a concrete tarmac road from Karamoja to Kisoro and you look at the money the Ministry of Works has been spending all these years, we have never reached more than $10 billion. 

Therefore, whether the Government is coming on Wednesday or Thursday, Parliament needs to save this country.A committee needs to be setup to investigate this matter, because this cost is public information, so that we do our work. Because what I know, President Museveni is very smart sometimes, he will say,“you know, I wanted to put a Standard Gauge Railway but Parliament delayed.” Now, it is him delaying us by not giving us a response. I beg to move. 

3.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2001, hon. Ekanya, hon. Lukyamuzi, hon. Salamu Musumba and I told Government of Uganda that AES is a briefcase company and if you tell it to come and drill power here, it would be a problem. Indeed, within a few months it went burst but the President said we stopped power.We have asked him a question, “Where is AES up to now?”We do not know where it is. Now, this one, colleagues have raised. 

Madam Speaker, I would seek and plead with you, as Parliament, we should do our work. I have been listening in since this issue rose up in Parliament.Eng. Byandala, who was also the engineer for KCC at that time; we know his record; on Katosi road he told us, “give us just a week, we shall make it.” A week ended, he said two weeks. Now we are talking about two months and the Prime Minister who is new wants to really dangle in this dirty thing which we are about to clear and he will get himself dirty for nothing because Mwiri boys are found of telling the truth, not hiding anything and they do not want to protect anything and he is about to enter there. 

So, the money we are talking about is $8 billion. Hon. Ssemujju has mentioned - is it $11 billion. But let us take $ 8 billion for simplicity;$8 billion times 2720 is Shs 22 trillion. The collection of URA is Shs 8 trillion. It means it will take URA collection three years without doing anything to pay for the railway gauge and the people who will go to the bank laughing are Eng.Byandala and the team while the people of Uganda are crying.

Now, Madam Speaker, let the new Prime Minister go and bring his report on Thursday; let Parliament do its work. We want the railway yesterday. I have watched Parliament very well since 2001. Ministry of Finance or Government when it wants money urgently, it waits when its remaining one day or three days then says,“if you do not approve, we are in problems” so that Parliament is blamed. 

We have been crying for the railway for many years; we are ready to tolerate another one year but not thelossof Shs 22 trillion by a few individuals. In fact, Mr Katuntu said, “do not make us to miss the other Prime Minister.” We are about to miss him immediately. You have seen this one wants written questions; the other one was easily coming here and answering.(Laughter)He wants written ones to go and read.

Madam Speaker, in that context, Uganda belongs to all of us, not the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. I would plead with you- I am aware, my colleagues on this front bench, there is a pendingreshuffle and all of you are very worried. All these are a worried group of people. (Laughter)And anything makes them worried. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to say we are all worried of the pending reshuffle when he has not substantiated and given evidence? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, can yousubstantiate whether you have taken their temperatures and which one? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for the opportunity. President Museveni came to power in 1986. Until recently, I have never seen ministers lining for him from the airport up to Kampala, waiting to welcome him.(Laughter) I have never.

And you know what happened. At that time, he had just put aside the Prime Minister and appointed in a new one.  The papers were saying there is a pending reshuffle as soon as he comes. So, people had to demonstrate that there are not there; there are with him andthat is why they were on the line from morning. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, in that context, I can tell you more that they are worried and I can assure you even my sister who got up to put me on order; she is more worried.(Laughter)

Therefore, inconclusion, we cannot work with worried people. I am sure Members of Parliament are the ones who are sober in this context. I believe they will be the best people to talk about the standard gauge railway. But for these ones, they will not say anything, anything which comes; they say pass and the people of Uganda are the ones to suffer. 

Madam Speaker, we implore you to choose from your competent Members of Parliament from this side; we would prefer this side, in fact, to lead this investigation of the standard gauge railway.I thank you.

3.29
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.In handling this matter,I invite you to consider Rule 54 of our rules. Consideration of Rule 54 of our rules envisages a debate by Members. It does not envisage a situation where Government holds and takes Parliament at a ransom that for it to participate in a debate; it must have an adjournment of 10 or so many times. 

If we are to invoke Rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure, which is applicable in this particular motion, I will invite you that yes, debate continues if any member of the Executive has any information to give; he or she will give it and this matter comes to an end.

Madam Speaker, I am saying so because subsequent to the gallant efforts by some of the technocrats to refuse to adhere to the whims of the Executive, Government is now planning to conclude this particular contract either today or tomorrow under the guise of a bilateral agreement. In actual fact, they are relying on minutes of a meeting attended to by our President, the President of China and South Africa; a copy of which we have and will lay at the end, to conclude that there is a bilateral agreement.

So, to forestall rendering our motion, a nullity; to forestall what is going to befall this country because theamount of money involved will be paid for by generations and generations.

Recently, I read an article by hon. Ssemujju-if our GDP is $21 billion and here we are committing $11.3 billion and this $11.3 billion we are yet to factor in the costs of the operator who willcome at the stage when it is complete and say, “I also want so much to do ABCD.” You are not putting in the other costs of compensation on the line. This is a project and of course, when you look at the agreement, the negotiation contract that has been signed which we have, they are using the indices of price fluctuations of Shanghai not UBOS. 

So, you find this particular project, by the time it is concluded, it hasskyrocketedto more than $20 billion. Who will pay for it? Of course, individuals will have pocketed their share; they can go and pocket but our Ugandans today, tomorrow and a hundred years to come will suffer this public debt.


Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg that you allow debate to continue and we put a question and resolve this matter. If the Executive wants to sign, let it go and sign. After all, they have disobeyed Court; they can still disobey Parliament. Let them sign but our children and grandchildren will say, “Where were you when this illegality was being committed?” Let us not follow the Executive. 



3.32
MR FOX ODOI (FDC, West Budama County North, Tororo):Thank you, Madam Speaker.There are two positions here. The first position is that we have a substantive motion urging Parliament to set up a Select Committee to investigate the Standard Gauge Railway.

The second position is the position of Government that they have a process in Cabinet that is discussing this matter. I am of the opinion that these two processes are not mutually exclusive. The process of Parliament is a simple one; we are only saying that we are uncomfortable with this particular procurement because we are uncomfortable with the cost; we uncomfortable with whether or not the entire process is transparent. 

Parliament is only asking that we do what we ought to do- investigate. An investigation by itself is not condemnation. We only need to look at the evidence that the Executive has in respect to this procurement. An investigation by Parliament does not stop your hands from carrying your independent parallel processes. 

We are not saying that you must stop meeting as Cabinet; we have no powers to stop you and we are not even saying that you should stop your procurement process.We are only saying that you permit us to do what the people of Uganda asked us to do; exercise our oversight function, including the function to investigate when we think there are problems. And ultimately, this investigation may absolveyou of any blame and we move on.

Madam Speaker, what I am saying is this, it is still perfectly fine for us to give the Prime Minister as much time as he needs to come to the House and respond, even if he needs one year to hold a number of Cabinet meetings, we can give it to himbut that should not stop the Parliament from carrying out its independent and parallel processes.

Secondly, at Law School, I was told that equity only helps the vigilant and if you choose to go into slumber, equity will not help you. My understanding was that you permitted them to come to the House to state their position before we take a decision on this matter simply because you wanted them to exercise their right to a fair hearing. That right was granted to them two months ago; they sat on it. They cannot again come back and claim that they were denied a right to be heard. I propose, Madam Speaker, that you find it appropriate to manage this debate and we take a resolution on it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter first came here in September. The motion was moved and seconded. Then, the question arose, do we require a select committee or do we give this matter to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure? We also agreed that perhaps if we hear from the government, there may be areas of convergence that do not require a select committee. At that time, we gave the government, I think first, a few days, then a week, then they disappeared. 

Honourable members, it is now two months; we have been waiting for your response on this matter so that we can move. I donot think we can justify further postponement of this matter. (Laughter) This matter has been in the public domain for almost three months. The government has not come up to say anything. The people of Uganda are anxious about the cost of the project. I do not knowwhat else you want us to do. I think the government can give their answer to the committee, if they desire. Let us conclude this debate and go and do other work. (Laughter)

3.38
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I am glad the Speaker is coming to where we should be moving. But I would also wish that this investigation should also include this ping pong road to Katosi so that it is also seen - what is happening. Now, the IGG has stopped the contract, Ugandans will pay three times more money because this contract which is stopped, these people  will go to court and they will claim money;and, the other group which will come on will also be paid. 

So, my view, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, there might have been some sort of flouting. Why don’t you also investigate, using the same select committee, the Katosi Road? That is my proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that one will require a separate motion. This motion was moved in respect of the standard gauge railway and it was seconded in that form.

3.40
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, the time I have been a member of the oversight committees of Parliament, one of the challenges we have encountered is Parliament performing post-mortems of serious matters. At this stage, it is nipping the problem in the bud by moving to investigate through, particularly, a select committee, because this will draw the attention of Parliament – different skills and abilities – to make sure that we getto the bottom of the problem. 

Just like Members have observed, my sense is that the Executive is reluctant to open up this matter. And, apparently, it looks like it is a matter of a few people, yet, like we have observed elsewhere in the region, we cannot mortgage the country for three financial years almost of local revenue collection and the Parliament simply glosses over this matter because the Executive needs time. 

Madam Speaker, this should be perhaps the Christmas gift; you are good at giving Christmas gifts to Ugandansbecause we badly need this money to take up other infrastructure in this country. We need the railway but the cost is scary. 

Ugandans have information about this project and if we come up with such a committee, I am opposed to the Committee on Infrastructure. I would rather suggest that we have a select committee to go into the depth of this matter. Like you have advised, Cabinet will be given time to come and give their own views on why they have moved that way on this project. 
I thank you.

3.42
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The story of Uganda Railways is actually bigger than the new project. The Rift Valley Company that came here from wherever, claiming to be coming from South Africa, first borrowed $100 million with Government guarantee claiming they were going to repair the railway line. And, as soon as they got the money from African Development Bank, they packed their bags and left and sold their interest to Egyptians. The Egyptians, now I have learnt, have also contracted another loan and sold their interest to another party. That is what is obtaining in Uganda Railways. Various interests will come here, in fact, the day the South Africans arrived here, they shipped all the new vehicles here and all that they could lay their hands on to Nairobi; that was the first problem. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ssemujju, you are not speaking to the motion. You are speaking about a new issue.


MR SSEMUJJU: I was laying a background, Madam Speaker. My proposal would be to have a select committee. I chair a Committee on Commissions; it is very difficult to handle businesses of this nature with traditional business of committees. Sometimes, you have parallel investigations investigating this and that - (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, I know some people are salivating but we are continuously eroding the powers of our committees. If the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is incompetent, say it now rather than saying it is difficult; it is too busy. If you have an assignment to give this committee, let us give it to this committee. If somebody else has another interest, please, tell us here and now. 

The honourable Member of Parliament and those who have suggested so, that it should not be the infrastructure committee, are out of the norm-(Laughter)-Is Hon. Ssemujju in order to impute that this committee cannot do competent work?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course, you should not disparage the competence of the committees. They have been doing our work; they do our budget and Bills. Do you have a special reason why this committee should not handle this matter? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, my colleague chairs a committee. I was speaking from my personal experience as a chairperson of another committee. Maybe, he was not paying attention. I have been a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; even petitions referred to that committee more than a year ago, there are no reports;they are still investigating. Committees have work that is traditional. For them to juggle between work that is allocated to them and this new assignment is not a simple thing and that is the point I was raising. 

My proposal would be to have a select committee to investigate this matter with a deadline because this is a very urgent matter. The gravity of this matter has been highlighted by the new Prime Minister if Parliament paid attention.We had press reports that the President has actually sanctioned this contract of $8 billion. The Prime Minister is now telling Parliament that Cabinet is actually discussing it. 

I want to know what they are discussing. I want to thank hon. Rugunda. I have known him to be a very honest person. He is also telling Parliament they are discussing the matter after Parliament prompted them. The earlier we set up a select committee to investigate this matter, it will also -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:We need to finish this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, just some information. Our committees have 30 members. I have tried to attend these committees; the maximum number you find isa tenth. The work we are talking about is serious and urgent. I even want to apologise to my chairperson of the Committee on Finance. She knows how many we are and she knows how many members attend meetings. 

These committees have a lot of work. They must go and check Karamoja roads and Katosi Road. They have a lot; in fact, they are overwhelmed. Due to that, the information I will give my colleague, is that you are raising an important thing; we need a few people who will drop everything and dedicate their time on this matter and not the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

3.47
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise also to support the motion and to propose that the matter be referred to a Parliamentary sessional committee and the matters I want to interest Members in with are the following:

One, whereas we are talking about the cost which is indeed worth a job, I wish to also bring to the attention of honourable members that this contract involves issues to deal with skills, technology, and industrial development as well.

MS NAGGAYI:  The honourable Member of Parliament is talking about the details of the contract and ascertaining the justification of the exorbitant price. Is it in order, when Parliament has not been updated with all the details, for the honourable member to come and start talking about the details and justifying the concerns and the worries that MPs have over this contract? Is it in order for him to come and pre-empt the quest for knowledge that this House has over this matter? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter has been in the public domain for some time. He has been doing his research. Please, conclude.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. Indeed, like the honourable member has just said, the details surrounding the Standard Gauge Railway are in the best interest of Ugandans. 

If we are to promote and take pride in our own institution, there is no reason as to why we should appoint a select committee to handle this nature of work yet the institution of Parliament has a frame work of committees with competent Members of Parliament who can address these issues. 

I would wish to urge honourable members of Parliament that it is within the interest of Ugandans that if the matter is referred to sessional committees, we are not only going to go with a bias of cost but it will go with a whole package of unlocking the full potential, that the Standard Gauge Railway is going to bring. Let me give you a case in this point, as young people, we are interested in knowing the multiple-

THE SPEAKER: Order members.

MR NAKABAALE: Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the honourable Member for the Youth to Speak.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, we are interested in knowing the direct and indirect jobs accruing from this contract, and who is behind the subsidiary support that is to come along with this contract. 

I would not wish to associate myself to a select committee, reason being the select committee has already shown a bias as-(Interruption)-No, let me inform you. The honourable member proposing -(Interjection) I will take the information.

MR CHEMASWET: I would like to thank my friend, hon. Nakabale, for giving me this opportunity to give him some information. The word “select committee” is entrenched within the Rules of Procedure. By having a select committee, we would be on the right track, despite the fact that we have our sessional and standing committees which can equally do the same work. We will be extending some old leaves to our brothers and sisters within Parliament to have experience in terms of deliberations of Parliamentary matters. Because by having a select committee, it gives you some leeway and the opportunity to handle heavy workloads within Parliament. There will be a chairperson to handle such events and there will be no bias at all because we do not know who is going to be a member of that select committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are taking too much time on this matter. I put the question that this House do establish a select committee to investigate that contract.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I will be advising you during the week about the composition and the terms of reference. Honourable members, we have guests from Ngora represented by hon. Jacqueline Amongin and hon. Francis Epetait. You are welcome. (Applause)




MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY THE ORPHANS OF THE VICTIMS OF KANUNGU CHURCH INFERNOS

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I present this report, I request that I lay on Table a copy of the minutes of the various meetings that handled the petition. I beg to lay. I also beg to lay a copy of the report that I am going to present. 

Madam Speaker, On Tuesday, 4 September 2012, a petition premised on Rule 29 of the Rules Of Procedure was presented before this House by Dr Chris Baryomunsi, NRM, Kinkinzi County East on behalf of the orphans of the victims of the infamous inferno at the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments in Kanungu of 17 March 2000.

This petition was duly referred to the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for consideration and the Committee here by reports.Allow me to give you a background to this.

On March 17 2000, a tragic fire broke out at the premises of the Church of the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God at Nyabugoto in Kanungu District claiming an estimated 600 people. This church is said to have been led by a one, Joseph Kibwetere.

Further investigations prompted by this inferno unearthed hundreds of other cases of cult-related deaths exemplified by graves in Bushenyi and Kampala District bringing the cumulative death toll to about 1000 people.

Seven months later on 2 December 2000, the Government of Uganda instituted a seven-member Judicial Commission of Inquiry led by Justice Augustus Kania to investigate the 17 March 2000 inferno.The other members of the commission included: Dr Emilio B.L. Ovuga, Prof. Peter Matovu and Rev. Canon Mugarura Mutana, the then, Chaplain of St Francis Chapel of Makerere University; Rev. Fr Dr Lawrence Lugolobi Ssemusu, the then Chaplain of Uganda Matyrs University Nkozi, Dr Margaret Mungherera, the then Chairperson Uganda Medical Association, Christopher Ndozireho, a lawyer and one Sarfiyano Bigirwenkya.

At the pronouncement of the Commission of Inquiry, Gen. Moses Ali, the then, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs informed the public that the objectives of this inquest were: to identify a cult so as to establish what happened at Kanungu and review the perpetrators of the murders and also to establish if there was any laxity on the part of any Government department that could have led to the tragedy and recommend ways of avoiding future recurrences; to ascertain if there were similar groups still operating in the country and recommend ways of dealing with them.

The Judicial Commission of Inquiry was to submit its findings to its appointing authority within six months. However, to date the public awaits the outcome of this Judicial Commission of Inquiry with a speculation rife that this commission of inquiry never attained its set objectives as hitherto enumerated.  

As will later be discussed in this report, the committee did not find any evidence of any work by the said Judicial Commission of Inquiry. Available information indicates that those who joined the membership of this ill-fated Church, many of whom perished in the fore mentioned inferno were either influenced by the Church authorities to sell off their personal property and hand over the proceeds to the church leadership allegedly in preparation to the end of the world or voluntarily did so. 

Having perished in the inferno, the said church followers are said to have left behind no property at all for their surviving family members. The petitioners claim to be part of the surviving family members of some of the victims of the inferno.

Having allegedly attempted to seek help, albeit in vain from various public offices including Kanungu District Local Government, the former ministers of Internal Affairs and the one of Disaster Preparedness as well as from H.E the President, the petitioners opted to petition Parliament, hence this petition.

Prayers of the petitioners:

    1) Parliament directs the Minister of Internal Affairs to present the report of the death that occurred on or about 17 March 2000 from the Church of the Movement for the Restoration of Ten Commandments of God at Nyabugoto in Kanungu District and other associated camps of the church led by Joseph Kibwetere
    2) Parliament directs Government to resettle your petitioners who were left homeless by the victims who died in the Kanungu inferno on or about 17 March 2000 in the Church of the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God.
    3) Parliament urges Government to develop a policy to entitle and enable victims who have suffered from the losses attributed to negligent act or omissions on the part of Government or its officials in respect of the death of the Church of the movement for the restoration of the Ten Commandments of God to recover some benefit or compensation from Government.
    4) Parliament directs Government to secure funds to be extended to your petitioners as a form of start-up capital to enable them start a settled and productive life.

Madam Speaker and members, we used the following methodology in consideration of the petition. We held meetings – 

THE SPEAKER: Those ones Members can read. 

MS NAMUGWANYA:Madam Speaker, we came up with the following findings:

The Presence of the Cult and the Cultic Nature of the Church for the Movement of Restoration of the Ten Commandments.

There is a big volume of available information on the operations of the Church of the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God. Most of this information was compiled after the 17 March 2000 inferno. An analysis of this information points to some salient features of this ill-fated Church, most of which are akin to cult.

A cult can be construed as a system of religious veneration and devotion directed towards a particular figure or object. It is also noteworthy that besides just cults, there are doomsday cults too. Doomsday cult is an expression used to describe groups who believe in Apocalypticism and Millenarianism and can refer both to groups that prophesy catastrophe and destruction and to those that attempt to bring it about. 

To draw parallel between the CMRTC and dooms cult, it is imperative to divulge into the very nature of SMRTC, Prophecy of the catastrophic end. The CMRTC right from inception was premised on the calculated belief that the end of the world was eminent hence the need to prepare for this Apocalyptic end.

Perhaps the most elaborate historical perspective of the CMRTC was provided to the Committee by hon. Muruli Mukasa, the Minister of Security who traced the evolution of this Church to 1980 with alleged inception of a vision from the Virgin Mary by a one Bulandina Buzigye at Nyabugoto Rock in Rwanyabingi Hills, Nyakisenyi, Rubabo, Rukungiri District and the subsequent emergence of the Nyabugoto sisters who later metermophosised into the CMRTCs. The vision was about the end of the world by the year 2000.

Available literature indicates that the early founders of the movement included: Angelina Mugisha, Cledonia Mwerinde, Gaudensia Kamuswa Fulumera, Robert Mugisha, Gaudensia Rutandekire and Ursula Kyomuhangi.

Between 1989 and 1995, the movement attracted more recruits including: Joseph Kibwetere, Fr Dominic Kataribabo, Fr Joseph Mary Kasapurari and John Kamagara and witnessed tremendous growth by establishment of branches in neighbouring areas of Rutooma, Rugazi, Kyaka, Rubirizi, to mention but a few.

Whereas doomsday was initially declared for 31 Dec 1999 and that the church was akin to Noah’s Ark, that prophecy proved futile prompting deferral to the period 16th to 18th March 2000 and indeed, 17 March 2000 became the date for the now infamous Kanungu inferno.

Unwavering Commitment and belief in its Leader’s Belief System, ideology and practices as the Truth

From the preceding narrative, the dogmatic belief in the prophecy about the apocalyptic end of the world is symptomatic of the apocalyptic orientation in the CMRTC,the discouragement and punishment of questioning, doubt and descent. 

It is worth to note that in the aftermath of the inferno, several mass graves were discovered in various premises of the cult leaders. The Police report for instance reveals that: a) one hundred and fifty five bodies were exhumed from the residence of Rev Fr Dominic Kataribabo in Bushenyi District. One hundred fifty three bodies were exhumed at Buhunga cult Church in Rukungiri; eighty one bodies were exhumed at Rushwoja cult church in Bushenyi; Fifty five bodies were exhumed in a residence in Buziga in Kampala.

It has been argued that the fatality of the initial prophecy of the end of the world of 31 December 1999, precipitated various questions and doubts among some followers, and it is believed that such doubters were brutally murdered to stop any possible dissident. 

We were informed that in the aftermath of the futility of initial prophecy, some doubters demanded for a refund of the proceeds of the sale of their property. 

One of the Church leaders Keredonia Mwerinde initiated the recording of the names of those who were demanding for such refund. It is highly possible, that some of such record were used to systematically identify and eliminate dissenters. The reliance on mind-altering practices such as strict rule of silence, meditation, chanting, speaking tongues, enunciation, and devastating work routine, impoverishment of followers, were used to suppress doubts about the group and its leaders. 

Available information shows the CMRTC instituted a strict rule of silence among its members, and this is believed to have been a strategy to curtail any questions or propagation of any potential questionable ideas amongst the members.

Other salient features of cult that suit within the nature of CMRTC include, the enlisting nature of its leadership that often predetermined how the rest of the members should think as exemplified by highly educated leaders such as Joseph Kibwetere, Dominic Kataribabo, who were accomplished and highly learned people. The committee is of the view that the CMRTC was indeed cultic, and therefore, its activities should be construed as such; 

Freedom of Worship in Uganda and Attendant Obligations and Responsibilities of Citizens and the State.

It is worth noting that Uganda is a secular state for which the national constitution prescribes no state religion.Article (7) of the 1995 Constitution states that; “Uganda shall not adopt a state religion.Every Ugandan is free to subscribe to whatever faith or religion they want. 

Article (29) provides that,“Every person shall have the right to-a)freedom to practice any religion and manifest such practice which shall include the right to belong to and participate in the practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent with this Constitution”. As such, there is generally no interference by Government in affairs of worship and religion. Freedom and worship is the manifestation of the belief that human beings have the ability to decide their faith and belief system in consonant with their conscience. It is therefore an individual’s choice when it comes to decisions related to when, how and who they want to worship. 

The committee found no evidence that the members of the CMRCT were coerced into joining that particular belief system, whether or not they were aware of the church’s apocalyptic orientation, may be debatable, but that does not in any way relieve the victims of the infernal, save for the child victim, from the responsibility of using their discretion to either exit the membership of the church, or alert law enforcement authorities. 

The committee believes that the relationship between the state and its citizens brings with it responsibilities and obligations of either party. While the state has the responsibilities and obligations to secure security, service delivery, protection of rights and general welfare of the citizens, it would be foolhardy if citizens throw caution to the wind by sacrificing their discretion in making choices for matters innately personal, such as religion and hope that the state is omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent to remotely foretell the possible negative ramification of reckless and often impulsive individual decision, except the children. 

It has for instance been argued that the CMRCT was registered as an NGO in the mid 1990’s and therefore, the NGO board has the responsibility to effectively monitor and regulate the activities of the church. But the committee notes that in the case of this church, it overtly exuded signs of being law abiding and its proximity to some people in positions of authority aided its registration as an NGO.

The report of the Human Rights Commission entitled,“The Kanungu Massacre” states that originally the state did not approve of Kibwetere cult activities as back as 1994; YorokamuKamakyerere refused to support the cult’s registration as an NGO. He had also closed its school, but when the he was transferred to Kasese, within two months of his departure, the cult’s leadership had already convinced his successor, KitakaGahwera, into supporting it and laying a foundation stone on one of their buildings at the cult’s headquarters. 

The leaders and followers appeared to be law abiding citizens, yet with inherent deception. They participated in various community and civic activities including voting during elections. 

The cult was registered as an NGO in 1997, and later incorporated as company in 1998. It appears that the relationship between the cult and Mutazindwa Amoti, was mutually beneficial. 
It is common knowledge in Kanungu that the cult had assigned two nuns to do domestic work at the assistant RDC’s residence permanently. It is also true that on the fateful day, that is 17 march 2000, Mutazindwa had travelled to Kanungu from Lyantonde his new station to attend a farewell party organised for him by the cult leadership. 

The cult leaders were known for their generosity. Former RDC Kamacerere informed the team that after closing their school and refusing to support their application for registration as an NGO, Kibwetere, Mwerinde and Kataribabo tried to bribe him. They went to his office and offered him a big envelope, which he rejected. Presumably, this was extended to other leaders or authorities in Kanungu and Rukungiri. After registration as an NGO, the cult was free to legally operate in different parts of the country like Rutoma, Buhunga, Nyakishojwa, Lugazi and Buziga in Kampala. These centers were used for retreats and seminars to indoctrinate the followers of the shrine. But it was also in these places that people were killed and buried secretly. What is astonishing is that the cult carried out its murderous activities without state detection and people’s slightest suspicion. 

In the circumstances, it was therefore incumbent on the individual members of the cult, except the children to notify law enforcement authorities of the down-side of this ill-fated church to enable timely state intervention. 

The committee further notes that the relative ignorance and low literacy levels of most of the members of this church, as compared to its highly elitist leaders created a dogmatic environment where the followers hardly questioned the values the church was imparting onto them. 

This coupled with the fact that the members were under instructions not to communicate verbally, rendered any viable form of information collected by the agencies tasked with monitoring the NGO futile. 

However, the committee also notes the need of stronger monitoring of the work of such groups that may use the banner of faith to mate catastrophic danger onto unsuspecting members of the public. 
The CMRCT presented itself as a service delivery and a faith-based Organisation, while the service delivery component projected it as good organization; the faith-based dimension was shrouded in secrecy. 

The committee notes that even when the officials from the national NGO board visited one of the sites of the CMRTC, prior to the inferno, the followers could not communicate verbally. 

Monitoring of NGOs

The committee notes that the national NGO board at that time was so weak and remains weak to-date with limited staffing and inadequate budget and the absence of definitive monitoring tools for the plethora of NGOs, the National NGO board urgently needs strengthening so as to bolster its efficiency and effectiveness.

The committee further notes that prior to the 2006 amendment of the NGO Registration Act, the national NGO board majorly played the role of registering NGOs. While the 2006 amendment brought in the addition responsibility of monitoring, there is limited capacity to enable it to effectively play the watchdog role. 

While an impeding amendment to the NGO Registration Act has been muted by the Minister of Internal Affairs, the committee recommends that such an amendment should also review the calibre and competences of those who will be members of the board and expand avenues for coordination in monitoring.
In order to effectively forestall the reoccurrence of such catastrophes, it is imperative to strengthen monitoring, surveillance and greater civic awareness.

Consideration of the specific prayers of the petitioner:
Prayer one: Demand for the report into the cult death

The petitioners first prayer was that Parliament directs the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a report of the death that occurred on or about 17 March 2000 from the Church of the Movement for the Restorations of the Ten Commandments of God at Nyabugoto in Kanungu District and other associated camps of the Church led by Joseph Kibwetere. In this prayer, the committee notes that there was more than just one inquiry by the Government of Uganda by into the inferno. 

Besides the Judicial Commission of Inquiry earlier alluded to, there was also Police investigation. However, during interfaces between the committee and the petitioners, it emerged that the report of the petitioner’s interest was that of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry. 

Though the committee set out to unearth both reports, the committee learnt that besides the Judicial Commission of Inquiry earlier mentioned in this report, there was also a Police investigation which remains inconclusive to date. 
Appearing before the committee the IGP informed the committee that inquiries into the inferno are still pending and any useful information to enable its logically conclusion were welcome.

This essentially implies that there cannot be a full report on an investigation that is still incomplete. This leaves the only other option of a report on the inferno as that of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry.   

Appearing before the committee on 1 April 2014, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda Nyakarima; the State Minister for Internal Affairs, Ambassador James Baba and the PS Internal Affairs, Dr Stephen Kagoda stated that there were neither aware of the appointment of the said Judicial Commission of Inquiry nor its activities later alone its report. For the case of the police investigation, the committee established that it was carried out after the 17 March 2000 inferno.

The committee notes that the finding of the Police is in tandem with other witnesses’ accounts of the pre-inferno narratives detailing of who the leaders were; the areas where the cult operated; the modus operandi of the cult and the number of bodies discovered in various locations. 

It is important to note that on 6 April 2000, international warrants were issued against all the six suspects but to date they have not been arrested.These are: Joseph Kibwetere, Rev. Fr Dominic Kataribabo, Rev.SrCledoniaMwerinde, Rev. Fr Joseph Mary Kasapurari, Mr John Kamagara and Rev. Sr UrsulaKomuhangi.

The committee also notes that prior to the inferno in January 2000 a complaint by a one Mr Conrad Baryamwishaki to the then Senior Assistant Commissioner of Police John B Okumu, the Private Secretary to the President responsible for CID affairs that there was an illegal existence of a cult known as Nabugoti religion and that the sect was operating within Kanungu, Bugongi and Kashwerwaheru. 

He alleged that the sect headed by a one Kibwetere was kidnapping and retaining young children against their will as well as those of their parents. He stated that the children who passed away were buried in a mass grave. 

In his letter dated 25 January 2000, SACP JB Okumu directed the DPC Rukungiri to find out about the activities of the ring leaders of the cult and to ascertain whether the sect is registered or not. 

The then DPC ASP Patrick Mugiibi in his letter dated 5 February 2000 to the Private Secretary to the President responsible for CID affairs, copied to the RDC and LCV Chairman Rukungiri stated that the sect was not illegal and was registered as an NGO. 

He also stated that there were cases of the children joining the organisation voluntarily without the consent of their parents and that it was not true that the children were killed and buried in mass graves.

However, not long after the DPC’s report, there was an inferno on 17 March 2000. Consequently, inquiries were instituted into the allegation that the DPC Rukungiri had not carried out thorough investigations into the activities of the cult. The case file was submitted to DPP for perusal and legal advice. 

In his opinion dated 2 October 2000, the DPP stated that there was no evidence to support allegations of neglect of duty against the DPC and therefore, advised no criminal prosecution. 
Regarding the inconclusive investigations of the Police, the committee notes a need for greater momentum in these investigations for us to fore stall the subsisting anxiety.

Prayer Two: Resettlement of petitioners

The petitioners’ second prayer was that Parliament redirects Government to resettle them because they were left homeless by the victims who died in the Kanungu inferno on or about 17 March 2000 in the Church of the Movement of the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God.

The committee notes that the adult victims of the inferno were not forcefully conscripted into the Church but rather voluntarily joined and for those who sold off their property including land and later remitted the proceeds of such sales to the church did so voluntarily. This, therefore, raises the issue of the role of Government in resettling the dependants or relatives of people who voluntarily sold off their land.

In this case the petitioners cannot be resettled as an entitlement because their benefactors made voluntary decisions on the disposal of property that was their own. The decision of resettlement, therefore, lies on the discretion of Government and can only be on compassionate ground. The rationale for compassionate assistance is that some of the victims of the inferno included minors and others who had been driven into poverty by the treachery of the cult leaders. 

If the Executive can establish the general survivors of the inferno, then the consideration for resettlement on compassionate ground may come in handy. The committee is of the view that any such resettlement on compassionate ground if deemed fit, should be within the ancestral areas of the eligible beneficiaries.

The committee also notes that the petitioners narrowed themselves to orphans and yet, there may be other relatives of the victims of the inferno who may have been adversely affected by the cult deaths. 

Going forward, there is need to broaden the scope of the potential beneficiaries of any such compassionate assistance. 

In addition, information available to the committee indicates that most of the victims of the inferno moved to the premises of the CMRTC together with most, if not all, of their immediate families. This, therefore, implies that the petitioners may be relatives of some of the victims of the inferno but whether or not they were indeed direct dependants of those victims of the inferno remains a subject of investigation. 

Furthermore, considering that there is no evidence that DNA test were carried out on all the victims of the inferno, it will not be practically possible to scientifically determine the legibility of the possible beneficiaries of any relocation and resettlement plan.

The committee notes that by the time of the inferno in 2000, Uganda had not yet acquired DNA testing capacities implying that if it had to be done, then the samples had to be flown to other more advanced jurisdiction implying a huge cost implication. In fact, during the course of the inquiry, Scramblesemerged among the petitioners over who indeed lost relatives in the inferno, an indicator of possible opportunism. 

It is against this background that the committee recommends that the petitioners be accorded compassionate assistance upon rigorous and successful verification of eligibility.

Prayer three: The development of a policy to entitle and enable victims who have suffered from the losses attributed to negligent acts or omission on the part of Government or its officials in respect of the death of the Church for the Movement of the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God to recover some benefit or compensation from Government. 

The crucial question here is whether indeed the death at the inferno was the negligence on the part of Government and if indeed the Government bears responsibility for the voluntary worship pattern of citizens.

The determination of responsibility or negligence is dependent on a fully fledged investigation where again the results of the commission of inquiry would be key.

As earlier noted, there were investigations into this ill-fated church and its attendant activities by state agencies prior to the inferno. (Refer to Paragraph 6). This absolves the Government of any possible accusation of inaction or ineptness.

On the issue of developing a policy, the committee notes that far from what many think of Government policy as some written piece of literature, Government policy is basically the inactions and actions of Government and can be written or unwritten.

The Government has historically compensated individuals and groups of individuals for various losses occasioned as a result of the actions of Government, for instance, the Acholi and Lango War Debt Claimants. Therefore, the part of this prayer that seeks for the formulation of a policy of compensation is redundant. The Government, therefore, cannot start awarding compensation.

Parliament to direct the Government to secure funds to be extended to your petitioners as a form of start-up capital to enable them to start a settled and productive life. This too, raises ethical questions given that the Government already delivers non-discriminatory services to its citizens, including interventions such as ‘Boona baggagawale’ and the youth venture capital fund.

The committee notes that this prayer is akin to Prayer No. 2 above and in addition to the earlier recommendation; the committee implores the executive to prioritise civic education and inculcate in the citizenry the values of hard work and progress. This prayer smacks of the envelope mentality where citizens wait for handouts from the government instead of working to transform their lives. 

Providing for a separate fund for such categories of people will imply the proliferation of funds and thereby jeopardizing national planning and the development process and its inherent objectives. 

Other general recommendations

    1. Strengthening the National NGO Board. The committee notes that since the National NGO Board is mandated to register the operations of NGOs, there is need to strengthen it so as to bolster its efficiency and effectiveness. 

    2. From the committee’s interface with the representatives of the National NGO Board, it was clear that the National NGO Board is grossly under staffed and lowly resourced and grossly inhibiting its efficiency and effectiveness. This is coupled with the establishment of functional synergies between the National NGO Board and other state institutions both at the centre and local government so as to bolster the monitoring of the activities and non-state sectors.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that this report be adopted. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.       


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair and the members for finally bringing this matter to a close. It will save me from frequent visits from the citizens of Kanungu who are always in my corridors. So, let us start with hon. Kakoba. Three minutes. 

4.30
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I do share the sentiments that have been expressed in the report and it is unfortunate that we lost that number of people in that inferno.

The one thing that we must learn from this is that we should be careful when giving permission to organisations whose backgrounds are not very much known.  

The other thing is that I do agree with the committee on the issue of compassionate resettlement because as we may recall, this is an incident that happened and those that were left behind were part of the family of those people who perished and incidentally, they never had a hand in it.

Having said that, my view is that the committee should have done much more than they did. For instance, when I googled somewhere looking at the Kanungu inferno and I discovered that there was one person who was arrested – the Reverend who is referred to there – Rev. Richard Mutazindwa and I thought that the committee should have talked to him because contrary to what was quoted in The Daily Monitor in which he was interviewed, he claimed that he was not part of that and I thought that the committee should have talked to him to find out.

Secondly, we are told that there is a commission that was put into place and I thought that the committee probably needed to talk to the members of the commission because when I was reading here, the members of the commission actually said that they never sat even once. I will just quote something here. There is Rev. Canon Benon Mugarura who said, “I received a phone call from the minister and that was it. I was never called for a meeting. I never received a letter of appointment and I think that you should ask Gen. Moses Ali who was the internal affairs minister. The meeting never took place.” 

Secondly, another member of the commission, Dr Margaret Mungherera also said, “I was appointed a member of that commission. The letters were signed by Gen. Moses Ali but we never met and I do not know why we never met.” So, the commission actually never sat even once.

It defeats my understanding that if 1,000 people can die, a committee is set in place and then the committee does not even sit once. These are things that the committee should have looked much into and talk to these members of the commission to find out where the problem really was. 

If they did that and the report came out more clearly, it would help us to make sure that we in future halt such incidences. But it is very unfortunate that a commission was put into place and the commission never worked. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I proceed, I want to welcome citizens from Bukwo District whom are seated here. They are represented by hon. EverlineTete. You are welcome. 

4.32
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the committee for the report but also want to complain as the person who moved the petition that it has taken awhile for this report to come on the Floor. I did present the petition on behalf of these orphans on 4 September 2012. Today is a number of years since then and like those petitioners have been frequenting your office, Madam Speaker, they have also been frequenting not only my office but also my home here in Kampala and Kanungu and pursuing me everywhere trying to look for answers to this petition. But I am happy that finally the committee has completed its work and report.

Let me also on the onset, say that I am not an orphan or survivor of this fire but I just did present the petition on their behalf because they had issues that they were raising. 

Also to say that most of the people who died in this fire are not actually only from Kanungu but also from Tooro, Ankole, Rwanda and Buganda. There were few who were actually from Kanungu although the incident took place in Kanungu. 

First of all, this was a millennium cult that took a number of years and we the people in Kanungu know a lot about this cult. I am happy that this committee has tried to dig out a number of facts but also, there is a lot of useful information which probably you should have included. 

It began as an innocent movement but later ion, there were many criminal manifestations in their conduct and I do not entirely agree with the committee that we should not blame Government that there were signs that showed that the leaders and membership of this cult were actually indulging in criminal acts. 

For instance, they refused to allow immunisation and other medical practices in their camp. Actually, towards the end of the 90s, very many children died and they were buried in a mass grave and when the RDC then and the LCV Chairperson visited, they found very many fresh graves of children and there are also very many reports, some of which I have read which were submitted by the security and intelligence officers based in Kanungu. 

There is one Mr Godfrey Karabenda who submitted very many security reports showing that there were very many criminal activities being done but the problem was that the Assistant Resident District Commissioner, the Rev.Mutazindwa had actually become part of the cult and he could not take action on what he was being briefed on. It is true they had also compromised a number of leaders and therefore, there was negligence on the side of Government. If Government officials had been alert, they should have closed this cult much before many people died. 

On prayer No.1, I see the committee is not taking it very casual but I want to insist that Government must produce a report and explains to Ugandans what exactly happened. Police cannot claim that there are files open; this is 14 years down the road; they should complete that report. 

It is true Government announced a commission of inquiry and named the members but like hon. Kakoba said, that commission of inquiry never sat for even one day. Government did not release the facilitation for this committee to function and the question is why?

It is becoming a habit of Government even just recently, during the death of Nebanda, which took a lot of debate here, Government announced a Judge to head an inquest and it ended there. We want to insist, speaking for the people of Kanungu where this happened, that Government must produce a report and tell us exactly what happened so that we get satisfied because losing this big numbers of people is not a-(Member timed out.)

4.36
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee so much for this good work done.We have really waited for this report and thank God today it is out because these people who are victims have really suffered and they had expected so much from the Government which had failed to come out because the committee that was instituted then, did not do much and so they had hoped that may be when it is brought to this House, something good would come out. 

Therefore, I am happy for the report and I want to thank the whole committee for the recommendations and indeed, it is right because these people need to be settled; they need to be supported; they need to be compensated so that they can go on. Most of them never went to school because of the effect of that incident.And so, I believe if, like we are going to pass this report, something comes out and they are given something, maybe those who are still young can re-organise themselves and also have a future.

I have found out that many of these churches, for instance, whenever they are going to register they register as NGOs but at the end of the day start forming churches and I believe that is the way Kibwetere also came. 

Recently, when they were carrying out census I saw in some of the districts, these churches, which actually I tried to go deep and dig about one of them. I found out that they had registered as an NGO but during that census, it was a church.They were refusing them to be counted because their faith does not allow them but in registration, they registered and got a certificate as an NGO. So, it is really important if this NGO board also is given capacity to carry out its job so that we avoid all these future problems to safeguard our people and our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.39
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the committee for a very good report. At last the report has come out and it is also on us mostly people from Bushenyi. 

Madam Speaker, this inferno affected some of our villages in Bushenyi in one of the Gombolola called Bumbaire and the children have really been suffering.

I would like to thank the committee once again but also raise a red flag on the part of Government. This is a movement that was in existence for quite some time. This cult restricted people from moving, from going for immunisation or any sort of treatment and Government was aware; they could allow people to go to their homes, sell their property in broad day light and they would tell their relatives, their friends that they were selling this property taking the proceeds to a certain church in Kanungu because the world is coming to an end. 

This RDC they are talking about, Yoram Kamakyerere comes from Bushenyi; he made all the necessary reports to Government. Government did not take action. I was actually happy when they started reading this report and hon. Moses Ali was here. I expected hon. Moses Ali to come up and tell Government and the whole public of what exactly happened; when all this was being reported to Government, there was no action. 

The people we are talking about are children who have not gone to school; they are depending on hand-outs.They have been disturbing us as leaders to assist them to be able to do ABCD for them. 
On the part of the committee, when the committee comes up and says in their recommendations that they should not be compensated, that Government is carrying out various interventions on BonnaBagaggawale, the Youth Development Fund all these Government interventions call for security. We are talking of people who do not have any thing; they do not have land; they do not have homes; they do not have anything. How will they access these Government interventions? 

So, surely, if you see the role of Government in this, having paid a deaf ear to this, Government should come up and assist our people; almost one of our villages in Bushenyi perished - the parents - in fact, these children we are talking about who survived are those who went there, came back to sell the properties and feared to go back. One girl who is alive went with the mother but because the distance was so long, she delayed to reach there before they closed the gate. She reached at 8.30 and found they closed at 8.00; she was locked outside and that is the very night the inferno took place. That is how she survived. Had she gone with the mother, in that very night, she would be history.

Government cannot really claim that these people just wilfully sold their property to go to the cult; the Government should take responsibility, go and compensate these people and resettle them. Government has on several occasions compensated ex-gratia, the President has always come in to assist his people whether they entered into something they knew or they did not.

Madam Speaker, I would suggest that something be done to our people. I thank you very much.

4.44
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of the members to thank the members of the Committee for this report and we all know what happened we are concerned as church members for this very unfortunate act which befell our country. 

First of all, I was observing this prayer about the Commissions of inquiry and the petitioners were demanding a report from Government. It is true many times Government has set up commissions of inquiry but we have always wondered what happens on the way. Why reports are being either hidden somewhere in people’s homes or wherever we do not understand up to now we are also demanding the report on Kasubi tombs that has not come out. So, the petitioners need to be supported and we need this report from the commission of inquiry and from police so that we actually get to know what really happened. We have all the government machineries and I think such reports have to come out expeditiously instead of leaving members to begin doubting and thinking in many ways.

Secondly, as church leaders in this country, we are still concerned because Government has not come out strongly to stop these kinds of acts. We see many mushrooming churches in every village all over the country. In the past, we used to have the traditional places of worship and you knew there was a mosque at one point and Catholic and Protestant places of worship at other points. 

However, now in one village, you find 20 churches, each with its order. These ones are saying, “Do not go for this” while others are saying, “Support Government programmes.” Then there are those, which are going straight to State House saying, “We have come to pray for the President and members of Parliament to win the next election.” In the long run, we get compromised and lose focus. 

That is why when Rev. Mutazindwa, the RDC and the rest of the people who were concerned got envelops, they were somehow convinced that they could not do the work. I think that as Government, we need to come out strongly to save the face of the church otherwise many cults are coming up. We always read in papers and watch on Agataliiko nfuufu various cults still continuing to come. You might find that a new Kanungu church has actually emerged in a different form elsewhere because I have heard that these people are still practicing. 

Therefore, Government needs to be very cautious and not be concerned only about voting and politics. We need to save these Ugandans and we need to compensate these people where possible - (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I happen to belong to the Anglican Church from which Mr Bakaluba was excommunicated. I have been listening attentively to him and he is referring to himself as one of the leaders of the Anglican Church. Is it in order for somebody who was excommunicated to come to the Floor of Parliament and claim that he is my leader as a leader of the Anglican Church to which I belong? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker has not received any information about that excommunication so I assume he is still a reverend.

REV. MUKASA BAKALUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. At times, as Members of Parliament, we do not want to be considered as mad people. This is very sad because I am a practicing member of the Anglican Church and part of the leadership but my colleague has continued attacking me in that form -(Member timed out.)

4:49
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for at least calming the tension and the anxiety that has been in this country for the last 14 years over the Kanungu inferno. Cults manifest in different ways but lack of community vigilance and security can actually exacerbate the growth of cults across this nation. 

I want to thank the committee and also urge the security operatives and the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs to expedite the reinforcement of security in communities. When we look at security across the country, rebels are easily apprehended but people who commit atrocities like murder and rape are rarely apprehended. So I do not know if there are discriminatory tendencies in security towards citizens in this country, especially when life is at risk.

Kampala and Buziga in particular was mentioned and was also a centre in the Kanungu saga. I want to tell fellow members of Parliament that Kampala is still a dangerous area, especially where security is concerned. In Kampala, neighbours do not know each other. LCs do not know their residents and residents do not know their LC I chairpersons. This saga occurred when the LC system was still very active. Right now, we could see more dangerous cults thriving, especially in urban centres, because of lack of a community system especially the local councils.

Madam Speaker, we came to this House and talked about the election of LC I chairmen and their executives. In Kampala, young girls are now being taken during the day, raped and dumped at various sites. This crime is on the increase and this could be a cult that is mushrooming. 

So I would want us, as a House, to pronounce ourselves on security, especially regarding the absence of the local councils because our lives are in danger. Our children are at risk and we cannot continue with this laxity of lack of security for citizens’ life and property.  I thank the committee but I want the government to pick up on vigilance and security in our localities. Thank you so much.

4.51
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join those who have already expressed their appreciation to the committee for a job wonderfully done. I have only three issues. The committee made a finding that there was voluntary sale of property and remission of the proceeds to the cult leaders. This finding is not backed by evidence gathered by the committee and it isalso not supported by other findings of the committee and I want to elaborate on that.

Number one, the committee specifically states that there was misrepresentation by the leaders of the cult that the world was coming to an end. It was on the basis of that misrepresentation that gullible citizens hoping to go to heaven, which I am told is a wonderful thing, sold their property and remitted the funds to the leadership. 

That kind of transaction can never be construed to be voluntary. The person who knows better has made a misrepresentation and basically told you a lie and you hope that by passing over your wealth to him, you will attain a much higher and better life when you go to heaven.

Secondly, the committee also finds that there was actually coercion. Those who questioned the position of the leadership of the cult were murdered. In circumstances where questioning the authority of the leadership of the cult attracted murder, you cannot make a finding that any sale of property was voluntary. 

Thirdly, this fact was well known to Government. JB Okumu the Senior Assistant Commissioner of Police in charge of CID brought it to the attention of the district police commander who only confirmed that there was nothing wrong going on in that place. So what you find is a systematic failure of government organs to deal with crime over a long period of time. Therefore, I think it is safe to conclude that there is systematic failure by the government to protect the lives and property of its citizens. 

In that circumstance and I am pleading with the chairperson of the committee, it would only be morally and politically right to urge Government to compensate the victims of this crime if not for anything, for the fact that they failed to protect them. I submit, Madam Speaker.

4:55
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for at least reporting because it looks like the government has failed to report anything to do with fires for the last 10 years. 

We are all believers here, including some of us who believe in the divine world while others could believe in something else. The government may not be the best one to tell Ugandans the right faith but it has the obligation to sense danger surrounding some cults and to save the unsuspecting Ugandans from fake cults.

Today, as we speak, we have cults preaching against school education, scientific treatment of diseases and sex by married people. Such teachings are clearly against the objectives of this nation.

I think it was in Mubende where a cult was preaching against all the above and the government was just looking on until this cult came up to preach against registration for the national identity cards. That is when the government came up to deal with it. That is why I disagree with the saying that Government can only compensate on compassionate grounds. 

It is this government that gave out the license to the NGO. By giving out the license, it roused the confidence of unsuspecting Ugandans. It subjected the Ugandans to a fake NGO and it, therefore, has the responsibility to compensate for whatever was lost. 

Think of a Ugandan in Nakulabye whose Government is NRM. Government gives out a license to an NGO and it has every mechanism to find out about the applicant of the licence. Now, after giving out a license to a fake NGO, you tell the Ugandan in Nakulabye that you deal with the NGO at your own risk.

Madam Speaker, the government is responsible for all that happened in Kanungu. There was no other government in Uganda. The government is also becoming responsible for all other fires by not giving reports in time. We do not know why Buddo and Kasubi were burnt and therefore, we cannot guard ourselves from any other fires until a very comprehensive report comes out. It is then that Ugandans will be ready to guard themselves against fires. We are now exposed because we do not know the reasons for the previous fires. Thank you very much.

5.00
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The parliamentary Committee on Defence has finally opened up to this country on what exactly has been going on, not only in Kanungu, but also regarding other infernos that have taken place in this country. Amongst the victims were people from my constituency. 

Madam Speaker, the committee attempts to give information but also goes ahead to exonerate Government from its responsibility. I think this is not proper. It is the obligation of Government to protect the people of this country. As my colleague said, Government registered this NGO and there are government authorities and mechanisms to monitor the operations of these NGOs. Why then did Government fail tobring this information and then halt the inferno from taking place?

Madam Speaker, the report has indicated that they instituted a commission that never took place. I am actually disturbed because the central person amongst the officials referred to; the Prime Minister has been here and at this moment, he should be available to give us information. This is because the report says that the Minister of Security and the permanent secretary of the ministry were not aware that the commission was ever instituted. This is besides other investigations whose reports have not come out. 

In the report, we also see that police investigations are not concluded 10 years down the road. The essence of investigation is to deter future occurrence of similar situations but if conclusions are not made, then such things are bound to happen again. There are many cults disguising themselves as churches and extorting a lot of money from their followers. 

People are poor, they are not employed, they are failing to provide their personal needs and they are resorting to churches where money is extorted from them and then Government is not coming up to regulate and control these cults –(Member timed out­.)

5.03
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report but now that we have hon. Moses Ali in this House holding that docket, I think this House can still be noble enough to request him to make a statement on what happened. This is because you cannot hold a portfolio even at this moment and not be helpful regarding something that has remained unresolved on the table for decades. So, Madam Speaker, I think this House would not be demanding for too much by asking Rt Hon. Moses Ali to give a statement to this House. 

Two, it is a very big shame that this government at this time has still failed to protect the lives of its people. This is the responsibility of Government and it cannot run away from it. We have enough security operatives in this country to handle any threat within our territorial boundaries and outside.

It is also a very big issue that orphans had to come up to follow up the death of their parents. It is a very big shame. This is being very unserious. Assuming these children never came up, would we have folded our arms and pretended that nothing of this magnitude happened in this country and can still be a threat and reoccur another time? 

So for this failure of Government to protect and provide for these children, I request that Government educates all the surviving children of these families; the orphans that are still of school going age. Forget about this UPE or USE. It should be decent education. The other thing is providing for the survivors materially, financially and socially and maybe covering up for what these families lost. 

Lastly, Government is not good at helping the needy. When you see how many families of departed soldiers are suffering, you cannot believe that they rendered diligent services above self to this country. We have very many widows and orphans crying, we have very many people who really struggled to help this country but when their own die, Government completely forgets about them. The onus is on this Government. There is a lot of wastage and corruption but if you came up and helped these families, I think you would have earned yourself whatever little you could have redeemed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, chairperson of the committee. I also want to appreciate the report that you have submitted. At least the country has received a report, although it may not answer all the questions that we have on this horrific occurrence that befell this country. 

Madam Speaker, my concern on this subject is: did Uganda learn any lessons from this occurrence? If we did take a lesson from this, do we think we have utilised what happened to deter further occurrences in future? Are we confident that we do not have these cults in this country today? I believe that we have these cults in this country. It might be too hard for Government, for instance, to completely expel these cults from this country but I believe Government can do something to deter an occurrence like what happened in Kanungu.

Madam Speaker, as a way of suggesting what can be done for us not to have this occur again, I want to call upon Ugandans that we need to be very careful, especially in this country where we have free worship. People are likely to fall for those who are taking them for a ride and even end up losing their lives. There are some symptoms somebody can use to know whether a church is a true church or not. 

For instance, there is no true church where somebody is not allowed to ask a question. If you are not allowed to ask your leader questions where you worship from, then know that you are in a wrong place. If whenever you ask, you find that you are offending somebody, it is important for you to get out of that place before you get into problems. 

It is also important for our people to know that there is no preaching, which says that once you are fellowshipping somewhere, you should desert your homes and go and stay in the church. Such a thing should actually be reason for somebody to suspect foul play in these places of worship. If people had not migrated from their homes to go and stay in those places, they would have saved their lives, even if they would have lost their properties. So this kind of preaching where somebody is told to shift from their home and come and live in the church is something that Ugandans need to view as highly suspicious. 

Also people should read the Bible because many times, followers just follow without knowing what they are following. Without a follower reading the Bible, you are even going to follow the enemy. The Bible actually says that Satan has transformed himself into an angel of light and his ministers also pretend to be ministers of righteousness. 

Finally, I want to say that no date is given for the end of the world, only signs are given. If somebody sets a date that by 31st of this month, the world is going to end, those should be signs to show someone that you are in a very wrong place and the earlier you leave that place, the better. I thank the chairperson for bringing this report. I also thank you very much, Professor, for being very happy with this submission.

5.10
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this report. I also want to thank the committee for the report. However, I am not very comfortable with the recommendation that states that resettlement should be done on compassionate groundsespecially for the children. 

We are all aware that Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda talks about the rights of children and sub-section 1 says that, “Subject to laws enacted in their best interest, children shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or those entitled by law to bring them up.” Sub-section 7 of that same Article states that, “The law shall accord special protection to orphans and other vulnerable children.”

So, as Parliament, we cannot say that these orphans should be resettled or compensated on compassionate grounds. It is a must. Let Government look at these orphans, resettle and even compensate them because it is the duty of Government to do so. These children have lost their parents and are looking at Government to care for them. So let Government not run away from their responsibility but let them do the needful. Thank you very much.

5:13
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Although members are appreciating the report, I find that the report did not touch much. It is good that the committee has opened this so that discussions can be taken and people are bringing up their views. However, I would appreciate that at the end, Parliament goes ahead to recommend priorities for Government on this matter. 

Indeed, in 2000 when this inferno took place, the whole country and the whole world were shocked with people seeing what happened in Uganda. How could the intelligence and security operatives be beaten to that level such that thousands of people are killed? It is as if we are taking life in a casual way; it is as if life is not something that is important. 

I remember a bishop in Acholi sub-region mentioned that it would be good for the government to take an initiative such that if anybody in Uganda dies, that name is mentioned atnational level so that Ugandans know that everybody who has passed on will be listed. 

I wonder if we have rural sociology. There are many people who die as a result of earthquakes and other disasters. The name of everybody who has died has to be listed. It is very unfortunate that nobody, including the academicians, takes a step to follow up these people one by one. It is good the honourable was saying some came from Ankole, Rwanda, Toro and Buganda. How can we not trace and find out who these people are so that we list their names instead of ignoring this? It is really very sad. 

I also want to propose that the government should not run away from its responsibility. We have mentioned in the report about the Acholi and Lango war debt claimants. Even when we see the government trying to do something, it is not so deep. Those leaders -(Interjections)- hold on a bit. Those leaders who are standing to represent the people who have suffered due to those kinds of problems are eating the money. They are very corrupt. Where is the government? Where is the Executive? What are they doing? I think we should go an extra inch and not just leave something hanging.We call it “Faa”. It does not help. (Laughter)Give me the information please.

MR OKUPA: Let me not give you information “Faa”. Thank you, honourable. The information I want to give you is that if you just talk, Government will not address those issues. Regarding the cases you are quoting about the Acholi war veterans, they had to go to court. The Langi have just won a case where Government is supposed to compensate them for the negligence, which was meted when they lost their cows and animals to the tune of Shs 2.9 trillion. That is what the court has awarded.

I am also leading a team of Teso claimants. We tried discussing the issue of the people of Mukura with Government but nothing is coming so it may necessitate you to take Government to court for negligence on this matter if you do not see them taking action to compensate the people who suffered. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, finish please. I think you are talking “Faa” that is why -(Laughter)

5.17
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues who have thanked the committee for a job well done. It is really a pity on the part of Government that since 2000, when such a big killing of people happened in our country; a massacre actually, 12 years down the road, no report has been concluded. 

It leaves the whole House and the entire world wondering why the government has not done so. I think in our concluding remarks and as a resolution, we really have to urge Government to conclude those findings because up to now, I am not sure whether there were only 1,000 people. You cannot give me that guarantee; they could be less or more. 

Secondly, it leaves us with a big suspicion, especially when it comes to the fact that the people who were killed in Kanungu were not all from Kanungu. In fact, there were a few from Kanungu. Who were the others? We really need to find this out. There could have been many Banyoro; I do not know. 

The other issue in my mind is for a leader to move from Ntungamo, start a church in Kanungu and collect all those people within a short period of time. I think Government must come out very clearly and wash their hands over this matter otherwise it leaves a lot of question marks. 

The report quotes the then Deputy RDC and the RDC as not having done much. I happened to have been part of such an office and I know what the challenges are. If the RDC was here, perhaps he could have defended himself. You may write areport to the system but nothing takes place. For example, the RDC will write a report but what about the DISO? Every region and district has got a DISO who reports differently from what the RDC has written. There is a RISO, there are many -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, we will use two minutes each. Honourable members, we have another Bill.Really, you do not want to handle the Bill today? Okay, due to public demand, we will go back to the three minutes.

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have a very big challenge regarding the issue of compensation. I support the issue of Government supporting the victims but my worry is on the issue of identification. How shall we identify who the victims are? We still do not know who they are. 

Finally, the NGO board needs to be strengthened. The current situation is such that politics seems to be a game, which is very difficult to manage. Many of these church leaders intimidate even leaders - (Member timed out_)

5.22
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is really hurting. I have seen some Members thanking the committee for the good work done but I am sorry for this and I am hurt now that I have to discredit the work done by the committee. 

Madam Speaker, in 2000, I was among the people who were recruited by Rev. Fr Dominic Kataribeho when I was in Senior Four at St Michael High School in Lugazi, Rubirizi District. This goes back to the government providing security to its people. When Rev. Fr Dominic started killing people just near us because we were part of those people who were recruited, fortunately, we were helped by our headmaster. By that time, he was in conflict with the Catholic Church, most especially Lugazi Parish where he was a priest. Although, we were helped by a priest who was there, we lost a lot of people. Up to now, the students we had in schools are still orphans because they lost their parents. 

Rev. Fr Dominic recruited very many people, especially peasants who did not know anything and they left behind orphans who do not have any help. We are saying it was the responsibility of the government to provide security for these people. We have seen ISOs everywhere. We have seen GISOs in each sub-county. Surely, where were they? This was the work of the GISO and the government should take the blame for what happened in 2000. 

When I saw the committee recommending that Government should give compassionate assistance yet it was the work of the government to investigate and get information before this incident happened, really we say –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for allowing my information. The information I want to give is that on the day these believers and their relatives were killed, invitation letters had been sent to leaders to come and participate. It is only that most of the leaders arrived late - (Laughter)- yes, including the former Woman Member of Parliament for Kanungu who was an assistant CAO of Kanungu. She and many others arrived late.

So the leadership view was that there was going to be a huge event and believers were gathered in a church. They even hired a carpenter to come and nail up all the openings of the church including the nails, which were hit from outside meaning that somebody hit the nails and left. There was a gentleman who was found dead and had fire proof dressings on him, meaning that he wanted to escape. So the leaders then were negligent and they never took action.

On 2 April 2000, there was a joint service and Her Excellency Specioza Kazibwe came and represented Government. She made commitments that Government was going to help the survivors. Therefore, even as this petition comes, there is an assurance from Government, which was delivered by the then Vice President of the country that they would be assisted. We are still waiting. For us who were there, she was putting on a dark suit and dark goggles. Government must deliver on that assurance, which was given to the people during that service. That is the information I wanted to give my brother.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, hon. Baryomunsi, for the information. Madam Speaker, again as I have said, it hurts. It was a weakness of the government and Government must concede and take the blame. 

When I look at these recommendations, I cannot support any of them. We should do a lot more to help our brothers and sisters; the orphans. Government can do much more to make sure that it helps these people by giving them capital. It is true that these people sold their land and properties. They were misled but the government never noticed this. They do not know where the money went and we are taking this issue casually. 

So Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the recommendations of the committee and I would come up with a proposal that these recommendations should not be adopted but we should follow the prayers of the petitioners. Thank you.

5.30
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work although I may add to some of their recommendations.

The first issue I would like to raise is that much as we are saying that we want to compensate these people, do we have a comprehensive list of all the people who were affected? This is because even people from Kisoro were among those who were affected in this inferno.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you have heard rightly that most of these churches were registered as NGOs. Is it possible for this committee to help us and come out with a list of all NGOs that are working in our districts so that we know what they are doing and so that we do not face the same problems tomorrow? 

In part of their recommendations, they are saying that Government is willing and it gives facilities like the youth development venture but I would like to inform you that this youth livelihood fund is not in every district. In addition, where it is found, they only select one village in a parish, which is then funded for this project. I think most of these people are scattered all over the country and I do not know how they will come together to form a group for Government to support them.

In addition, I would like to request Government to produce a report. Much as we are discussing this, we should know where these people are. Are they still alive? Are they dead? That is something that the whole country and the world should know.

Finally, Government should come up and be strong regarding their structures especially the security structures because there are very many cults that are coming up in our districts. At times, it is hard to know that this is a cult because they are preaching the word of God and they will call you to be the guest of honour. One day, you will find one of us has disappeared because we want those votes. So, it is very important that our structures should come up so that we know what is happening in these churches. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the committee because the work that has taken Government 15 years through a commission of inquiry, which was never instituted, the committee was able to do within two years and bring something to this House. So I think they have done something worthy of thanks.

Madam Speaker, there is a trend that Government should desist from. Usually, when there is a situation of this nature or a tragedy, Government says they have set up a commission of inquiry to find out the details and let the nation know. I think this is normally done to console people and later, nothing is done. If the minister could do this and stop at that and nothing is ever constituted, I think Government should wake up and stop that. 

If there is need to get details, they must be got so that it helps in planning and stopping such things from happening again in the future. As you can see, after 15 years, the committee had to go and try to dig up all details that had not come and yet this could have been done by the commission at that time. So I think this is a situation that Government should take seriously.

Secondly, it is true that under Article 7 of the Constitution, we do not have a State religion and we cannot blame any religious denomination as long as they are working within the law. Also looking at Article 21 of the Constitution, we are not supposed to discriminate against anybody basing on religion and so on. However, when it comes to matters of national security and safety of the people, I think the State should move an extra mile. You do not have to say that because this is a church; you do not make thorough investigations to find out what other things they are doing besides prayers and worship -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for him to conclude.

MR AYOO: We need a squad in Police to take keen interest in the operations of some of these churches. There are a lot of overnight prayers that are going on without being monitored. So I think police should now take interest because terrorists are in place and they may use the church or mosque and one day, we will again be surprised that people have been burnt in a similar situation.

We also need to create awareness among the citizenry for them to take keen interest as they go to these churches because if they do not take interest in what is happening, such situations can reoccur. 

On compensation, they should be compensated. Let the list be availed and those people supported because at the time of the inferno, they were young and now they have nothing to survive - (Member timed out.)

5.35
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good work done within the limited time that they had. 

Government has spent taxpayers’ money on commissions of inquiry but the reports are never published. Ugandans have a right to know and most especially, the people who are concerned have a right to know. It is indeed proper that people exercise their right to sell property and they sold willingly but as colleagues have said, Government cannot run away from responsibility because it is a constitutional obligation on Government to protect the lives and property of Ugandans. Government failed in this duty and so Government should indeed compensate the victims of the Kanungu inferno. 

However, people should learn. Yes, they sold and it was their right to sell but people should learn that you do not sell your property anyhow and then claim that you were duped. People should be responsible regarding how they sell their property. I think this should be a big lesson for us. Why do you sell your property and hand it over to another Ugandan or individual? 

Government also needs mechanisms in place so that when such incidents happen, there are quick investigations, results come out and there is a quick mechanism of compensating those who are concerned. Twelve years on, those who were kids and lost their parents have their lives shattered. They can no longer go back to school but if there was a quick mechanism, the children would have continued with their education. 

As hon. Sarah said, we still need a thorough investigation for us to know who exactly perished in this fire; who the survivors are; to what extent they lost their property and what the extent of the need is, so that people can be compensated. 

Finally, I would like to say that Government should squarely take up the responsibility of compensating the victims of this inferno and indeed other victims like those of the Kichwamba incident and those in northern Uganda. People in northern Uganda are still waiting for compensation from Government. We know that there is a mechanism being developed but this mechanism should be expedited. 

Finally, Government should also expedite the process of working with the communities because this issue would have come out much earlier and aided us in having a safer community with community policing. Thank you. 

5.38  
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with members who have said that there was lack of security provided to these people who died in this inferno. 

There were indicators that there was a problem with this cult. One, the DPC gave a false report that this was a well-established and registered NGO that should be allowed to operate. When did he submit the report? In February? And when were these people burnt? In March, just one month after his investigation. That means that he did not do a good job. 

Secondly, these people declared the day of doom and they made the declaration on the 31 December 1999. On 17th March, people were burnt in this church. Some one cannot declare a day of doom in a society or a community and we do not know. These are members who originated from within the society. That means when they were moving out there claiming the end of the world, those who did not believe in this cult would have heard them say this. 

The third point is that they were selling land. You know in our society when you are selling land, there are witnesses. When they were selling this land, they were telling people that they were selling because the end of the world was coming. So there were clear indicators that this group was not a good group but our own security went on and said, “This is a good NGO, which is registered.” 

The way we register NGOs in this country is that someone comes up with a three-page document, walks to the NGO forum and that very day, a certificate of operation is given to them. People come from outside this country and they are given certificates to operate but the same cannot be said of Ugandans wishing to have their own NGOs in other countries. 

Lastly, there are so many “Kibweteres” with us. They are not killing people inside the church but we have cults. For example, we have a common cult called The Gospel Church. These are people who are not immunizing children and who are stopping HIV positive people from taking drugs. Children are dying from malaria and measles. But we only wait until we are carrying out a census, then we chase them. 

When we are carrying out mass immunisation, we look for them and forcefully immunise them. This is a cult that has been reported to Government, security agencies are aware and the RDCs were chasing them during the census period. I do not know for how long we are going to wait for these people to continue slowly murdering Ugandans. This is a clear indicator that this group is a cult. 

Therefore, may I call upon Government to take action on these Gospel Church members who are all over the country and are murdering Ugandans slowly? I thank you.

5.44
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want thank the committee for the job well done although they lacked expertise to handle such a high profile case. 

It is in Uganda that we have people who settle issues using fire. We have seen fires everywhere; in Kichwamba where students were burnt, in Kanungu, Owino market and elsewhere. The issue of fires will continue and people are going to die in big numbers because it is written in the Bible that “Come to me those who are tired, burdened and heavy-laden and have no hope.” Today where do they go? They go to churches and mosques where they hope to find shepherds but today, the shepherds who are there have turned against them and burnt the sheep. 

Madam Speaker, I stay in Mutungo where there is a church, which used to be Kibwetere’s church. Up to now, that church is still operating. They pray day and night but nobody is coming to stop them or check on what they are doing there. It is not true that the government doesn’t know what is going on; the Government very well knows because we -(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I want to thank the committee for at least producing the report but to fault them for producing an inadequate report particularly concerning the prayers raised by the petitioners and the recommendations which they have highlighted on page 16 that Government is not liable. There is overwhelming evidence to find Government liable in this matter. On page 12, your own report says that the NGO board is weak. Whose responsibility is that? You should by that evidence find Government liable.

Secondly, you said on page 8 that 236 bodies were discovered in two sites in Bushenyi - 150 in Rukungiri and 55 at Buziga; can all those people be buried when Government is not aware of the cause of death of at least one group of people? Those are too many; you cannot come here with your committee - at least with your four glasses, you should have been able to -(Laughter)- she has four lenses; the two in glasses and the other –(Interruption) 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I understand the colleague is discussing a very important matter and he is really concerned but by referring to me as having four eyes and actually referring to my disability and making a joke out of it; he is not sensitive to people with disability. Madam Speaker, is he in order to refer to somebody’s disability with ease and laughter as if the person who is disabled applied to be so?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should desist from saying things that will appear discriminatory and disparaging. Please withdraw the issue about the eyes.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I was trying to emphasise the point -

THE SPEAKER: Withdraw.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Of course having four eyes is not a disability but nevertheless for our submission to proceed, I will withdraw that and emphasise that there was overwhelming evidence to hold Government liable. For instance, when you look at the conduct of Government; you set up a commission and you don’t follow up -(Interjections)- hold on, I will give you the time.

The fifth point is the alarm that was raised by the Catholic Church. They said they had excommunicated this priest and he went ahead to form another church and no one knew where he is taking the people; and you ignored that as Government. 

Lastly, they were selling property and you were collecting taxes from them. Do you want to say you could not investigate and find out where they were taking this money? So, I squarely say, the recommendation of not finding Government liable should be expunged from the report and find this Government solely liable at least by omission on this matter.

Another point, Madam Speaker, is that they did not investigate who currently owns these properties of the cult. Who currently owns them? The other issue -(Member timed out.)

5.53
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municiplaity, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May I, belatedly on behalf of the people of Mbale, convey our sincere condolences to those children who lost their parents in this terrible inferno? The Constitution is very clear and it gives the responsibility of keeping the security of the people of Uganda in the hands of Government. We have had so many infernos where we have lost lives and the Government keeps quiet. It never even comes up with a report saying it has set up a committee. 

What comes to my mind vividly is that young girl called Namaganda at Buddo; this young girl gave her life trying to save others. I feel they should have put up a monument in remembrance of this girl. But it is the responsibility of Government, they have got security operatives everywhere in this country - RISOs, DISOs, ISO mention it - but instead of looking at these fellows, they keep running after the Wamai’s of this world, the Opposition and these guys commit crime. And you can imagine they could not notice how many bodies, even here in Bunga and all over. What was this Government doing? That was negligence of Government. 

The people of Mukura are on our minds; people were burnt in train wagons. It is the responsibility of Government to own up and compensate these unfortunate children; give them education and come up with reports that Ugandans may know the role of Government. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson of this committee for the report that they have presented to this House. But I want to say a few things in regards to this report. 

It was quite challenging and very disturbing when the incident of Kibwetere happened. Actually, by then, I was in senior four and we are discussing it today when I am also a Member of Parliament in 2014. It is very challenging and disturbing because most of the people who perished in that inferno were not only from Kanungu or Kigezi; some were coming from as far as eastern Uganda because most of these were students at the same time. I remember I was in Mbarara and our school was invited also to go there but unfortunately the bus did not come and everything was disorganised; so we were not able to make it. 

Madam Speaker, it is the role of the government to protect its people. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible for accrediting the Non-Governmental Organisations in Uganda, the Faith-Based organisations including registering and deregistering. I am wondering whether there is monitoring in this country. Today, we are talking about the Kibwetere incident that happened over 10 years ago. But as hon. Sarah Kayagi mentioned, when we were on a field trip to Bugisu last year in December, there was a big group of people who were saying that their god does not allow them to do registration, immunisation, schooling or anything. So, are those people real and yet they are living with us here in Uganda? 

As a matter of urgency, we need to come up with strong resolutions so that we do not only look at that report the way it is but come up with a concrete report because to me, Government should have already come up with a comprehensive report in regards to that incident. It should not have been an issue of debate now but an issue of implementation and ensuring that more Ugandans are protected from such incidences.

So, it is very challenging and as Parliament, I think that we have to open our eyes and start looking at how Government can look at these Faith-Based Organisations. Most of them are good. If it is not for the better of Uganda or the people, then I think that it is not really desirable in Uganda.

The Minister for Internal Affairs is here and I think that he is listening. How many NGOs are making accountability to the Ministry of Internal Affairs about the different activities that they are doing and yet most of them are involved in child trafficking? Most of them are doing different activities that are very challenging and the public is aware.

 The government, I think, is aware because really we have security operatives in every place in this country. Even in church, we have DISOs, parish intelligence officers. For heaven’s sake, when these things are happening in a place like Kanungu, where are all these systems? Where are all these structures? 

Madam Speaker, we should not take this thing as a matter of a game because it can only hurt you when it is one of your own who has –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also join my colleagues to thank the committee for the work well done. When the report was presented, I thought that the committee would also add the clan where Kibwetere came from or the top leader of the church because that group, clan or the tribe was meant to be met so as to get more information about this man called Kibwetere.

Secondly, we got information that Kibwetere was a Catholic and hon. Kafuda clearly stated that he was expelled from the Catholic Church. But what caused this? If we wanted to get information, the Catholic Church should have been one of the groups met so as to get information on why he was expelled from the Catholic Church.

Also, when you add up the number, you come to 444. That means that all the 564 were from the Kanungu area. We also needed a report to give us evidence of those complaining about their relatives that got lost especially those that were mentioned to have come from Rwanda and here in Buganda. Where did these people who were burnt come from? 

We should also take these matters very seriously as Government. This church that they are talking about around Mt Elgon is a very serious issue. They have over 4,000 followers and across the country –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute. 

MR WANGOLO: Thank you. When we met these people, they told us that God sent them and that they do not use money, computers and phones and do not vote but support all leaders in whatever they do. We asked ourselves that if they are against government programmes, why can’t we educate these people? Much as they follow God and we all follow God, should we follow the same line and if not so, let Government put there security to monitor these people because something may happen anytime and we shall continue in the same way. I thank you.



6.00
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for bringing this report to the House. But this report, to be debated, has really taken very long and should have come much earlier because this incident that we are debating took place in the year 2000 and the solutions should have come forward much earlier.

Now, if we do not make useful conclusions about this, we are sending the wrong message to the community as more of these cults are going to come forward and already, they exist because we have these overnight prayers, child trafficking and so many others. If we do not really conclusively come up with good recommendations about this, we are bound to see more of these things that happened in Kanungu.

I hold the Government responsible because the commission that they put forward has not actually concluded its business. Two, the incident that took place in Kanungu involved a very big gathering and I expected the Government to have provided security. So, when I add those two things and the fact that the commission has not come up with a report, I think that the nation or the people may be right to conclude that possibly, the government has a hand in this massacre that took place in Kanungu. Why are they quiet? Why is the report not coming forward?

Lastly, those people - the petitioners - who were affected in Kanungu and indeed the Ugandans – actually, we are all sick because when you imagine what took place in that Kanungu–(Member timed out.)

6.04
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work done. However, I have pain in my heart because the way the whole thing unfolded is quite tragic and it was very significant that something wrong was going on but nothing was done. 

According to the report, originally the State refused to approve Kibwetere’s activities in 1994 and the then RDC, Yorokamu Kamacherere refused to approve of their registration but unfortunately, when he was transferred to Kasese, his successor accepted. Even when Kamacherere had been bribed, he refused. Now if this was a church, should they really bribe to be put in place? This was the first sign to show that these people were not really upright but unfortunately as leaders, nothing was done. 

To show that there was a lapse or laxity in our security, there was some kind of connivance because the RDC then who took over from the one who had refused, just after two months they were approved and they were an NGO. People who began as an NGO in 1997 were later incorporated into a company. Now what kind of church is that? This one was a sign to show that there was something wrong and they could have been apprehended there and then. 

Therefore, there is really need for -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 26 members have contributed to this report but what is clear is that the country still wants know what really happened and we have been living under the illusion that a commission of inquiry had taken off but apparently it was never even appointed because the announcements are supposed to be followed by an instrument of appointment. I am sorry, hon. Baba, can you answer this question? What happened?

6.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want the minister to take up some of the things. A month ago, a friend of mine was out of the country; she called and told me, “My cousin has disappeared, I gave him money to go and pay school fees; he is supposed to be in senior five but instead he has sent a message that he has left and gone to Somalia.” I reported this matter to the police but you can’t believe, honourable Minister that up to today, nothing has taken place. This is a person who knows Kampala very well. This could be a lead on how people are leaving the country to get trained and come back to bomb us here tomorrow.

Can you and your team take keen interest in such matters when they are reported because tomorrow we may be blown up here because of such things yet information has been given? I have given this information to the director at Kireka but nothing has taken place. I later linked him up with the uncle; the uncle says when he calls, they do not pick his calls after all this information. These are some of the things that when handled negligently can lead to the suffering like the one we saw in Kanungu. I will give you more information possibly after here.

6.08
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, the Kanungu District local government had wanted to develop this site as a tourism site but Government insisted that a report should first come out so that Government can assist the local government to develop this site. 

This is a contradiction yet it is the same Government which has failed to produce the report and since then, two grandchildren of the original owner of the land have claimed the estate and they were granted and they have sold the land to an individual. But we still want the local government of Kanungu to partner with this individual to develop the site into a tourism site. We insist the report must come out so that we know what exactly happened. 

Madam Speaker, as a way of information also, this cult was telling the believers that on 31 December 1999, the world would come to an end and the day came and passed. Now many people who had sold their property started questioning and whoever would question would be killed; that is why you see the numbers of dead people found in different mass graves.

On 15 January 2000, the cult leaders wrote to the NGO board bidding it farewell saying, “The world was coming to an end; we have done our part and this is farewell to you” and they delivered the later to the NGO board. A few days to the fire, the leaders of the cult handed over the land title and most of the properties to the police. So, there were all signs for Government to know that something wrong was happening but the government kept quiet.

So, we really need Government to investigate this matter and come up with a report to tell us exactly what happened. If Government had an interest, then it should also say so but as people of Kanungu, we insist that the report must come out so that this matter is fully understood.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to provide is that it was between February 2000 to April 2000 when so many prisoners disappeared from Luzira especially those who were arrested during the war in northern Uganda and when that incident happened in Kanungu, there were rumours that some people who died included some prisoners who were in Luzira. That is why we are emphasising that Government should come out and tell us who were those people who died and the children who petitioned - who are those children and how many were they? I really feel we need clear information on this matter.

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, let me thank the chairperson of the committee for the very comprehensive report and the recommendations the committee made for the House to consider.

Let me begin with hon. Okupa; it is unfortunate that the information you gave was not taken up and it sometimes happens that you pass on information and the responsible officer does not take his responsibility seriously. But we can try again. So after here, maybe you can pass on to me that information.

The biggest challenge we have right now is that the police under the Ministry of Internal Affairs started these investigations in earnest. Where they have reached now the only challenge is to get where the key culprits are and that is Kibwetere, Mwerinde, Kataribabo, Rev. Kasapuli, Komuhangi. Warrants of arrest have been issued internationally, we can’t find these people to conclude this report and investigations and these were the key drivers of this inferno.

 So what do we do? Do we conclude the report without these people and of what benefit would it be especially if we want to know what caused this. [MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: “Information”] - do you know where these people are? Anybody who can give me information where Kibwetere and Mwerinde are will help me conclude this.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: The clarification I want is: This was an inferno and people died and from what happened at that time, it is believed that the key culprits could have died. If arrest warrants are going to be issued, to whom are they going to be issued? Is it to the people who have died? I think what the Government may need to do is to look for other means of investigating instead of relying on what we call key witnesses of people who are already dead. It may not help much.

MR JAMES BABA: We are still working under the suspicion that after these people collected these people’s monies, since people sold their properties and brought money there, these leaders must have used that money to go outside the country. But that is purely speculation. But the warrants of arrest are out there through Interpol and through the regions but we have not got any leads up to now. So what do we do? Does the House now tell us to bring a report even if we have not got these people? Yes, we can come with that report -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister, that could have been option one; option two would be to do the DNA on these bodies; you would be able to detect whether we have the Kibweteres among them or not. You could do the DNA on the bodies unless you have no capacity.


MR JAMES BABA: At that time in 2000, there was no facility for DNA. Now that is another possibility that could be looked into but at that time, it did not exist. Certainly, even for those who are advocating for compassionate compensation, we need to verify who these people are. You cannot compensate anybody; you need to verify one by one especially considering that these people who sold their properties and came to the church with the expectation of going to heaven all came with their families. So, who remained behind to come and claim now that they are the relatives of these people because they all believed they were going to heaven and that the world was coming to come to an end and that is how they came -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, allow the minister to conclude. 

MS AOL: Mr Minister, you know at that time, it was also said for the bodies which were found in different places other than in the inferno, that there were no claimants. People were not there to claim those bodies. That means that if somebody disappears from my home, then I should be there to say so and so disappeared from my home. That leaves us really puzzled. Has your Ministry tried very much to find out the relatives of these people - the bodies which were found either at the altar, in the compound? Have you people really tried to find the relatives of these people so that even then, if maybe a monument is going to be made or if they are going to construct a museum, then you include all the names of those people who have died? But you can only find the names if the relatives come out to claim the people who got lost during that time. Otherwise, we can say our people also died in it because our people were there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Mawanda said a whole village in Bushenyi expired. Surely, can’t you know that the whole village or LC III or LC I, people are dead? If a whole village has disappeared - really that one cannot be, honourable minister.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to give information to the honourable minister that it is true there are families which perished in their entirety and members of the community know. But also it is true there are families where a man would go into the cult but the wife and children refused or the parents go to the cult and children refused. A case in point is Kibwetere’s family itself. When Kibwetere joined with Credonia Mwerinde, they first prayed from Kibwetere’s family in Kajara and Kibwetere’s wife and children chased them. 

They refused and that is how they ended up in Kanungu where Credonia Mwerinde came from and the children and Kibwetere’s wife up to date still insist that cult was wrong. So, there are families where children and spouses survived but Government never took a deliberate effort to establish the families and individuals that perished. So, we are saying it is not late; if Government is interested, it can still do this kind of assessment and know those who died and those who survived.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond. 

MR JAMES BABA: At the time the graves were discovered, there were no claimants until the petitioners came. That is how we came to know that there were people coming forward on behalf of the relatives through Parliament.

But anyhow, Madam Speaker, the second issue is about the responsibility of Government. These people were exercising their rights under the Constitution under the freedom of worship -(Interjections)– yes, the Constitution allows them and they were registered. The NGO Board at the time registered them to be a lawful NGO. Okay, they were rejected the first time but were cleared the second time. 

The CID, the Assistant Commissioner of Police who was also the Private Secretary to the President instituted investigations. The DPC reported and gave the group a clean bill of health but like things would go wrong, all of a sudden everything went wrong and this inferno happened. But between that time until when the inferno happened, they were getting clean reports. What do we do? So how do you make Government liable in that situation when checks were made, the DPC inquired and investigated and gave a report, and the DPP cleared them of any culpability? How do you get Government liable? 

But on the issue of compassionate compensation, I think that can be looked into but we need to verify the bona fide people who are related to these people and this exercise can be undertaken. But I also want to call on the obligations of ourselves as members of the community under Article 17 - the rights and duties of a citizen especially those around there; why were you not able to detect something was going wrong? Your relatives, your friends were selling property and going; why didn’t you take notice? Why come now when the petition has been made? (Laughter) I am not referring to hon. Baryomunsi, but I am talking to the communities there. So, let us take our responsibilities seriously under the Constitution.

On the NGO board, Madam Speaker, right now we have a paper in Cabinet to strengthen the operations of the NGO board and we are going to come with a Bill here to amend the NGO Act to get the NGOs the country deserves. Cabinet has cleared the principles of the amendment; they are now before the First Parliamentary Counsel and very soon, we shall bring the Bill here and we seek your support on this. 

Those largely were the major issues that were raised. We will try to re-enforce our security like hon. Nabila Ssempala and others have said. The way we are moving now is into community policing; we want to move into community policing so that the police and the security agents work in consonance with members of the community. The local council system, the elders and religious leaders - we should move together to secure our community. We think that is well brought. Thank you very much indeed.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, you have not answered the fundamental question. Are you going to complete the inquiry?

MR JAMES BABA: I will complete the inquiry minus the warrant of arrest; I can give that undertaking because what the police are waiting for is whether the people and outsiders in the region can help us trace these people as well. Internally, we have failed.

THE SPEAKER: Would you consider the Commission of Inquiry actually starting? I do not know. Are you prepared to have the Commission of Inquiry appointed because your investigation is looking for the criminals, but people want to know who is in that grave and where their people are?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, Justice Augustus Kamya who was appointed to be chairperson of that inquiry has since then retired from public service. So, there is no commission actually, unless they are going to reconstitute a new one. Many of those people are no longer in those positions to which they had been appointed, but what is surprising, which I thought the minister would really inform this House about, is who died in that inferno. I think that can define what you are going to do if you know who died. But as of now, who died and how many?

MR JAMES BABA: That is why I am saying, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that this is now a criminal investigation. Allow the police to conclude its work with the data and information they have. I am going to instruct them to conclude the report and come up with the names they have and we will bring it to this House. Establishing a commission of inquiry will not help; let it be professional criminal investigation. That is what I plead for with the House.

6.25
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee and all those who have contributed, including the remarks by the minister. Kataribabo was a Catholic priest; he is the one who wedded me on 2 May 1970 in Nyamitanga. - (Laughter)- If the laughter is any cathartic thing about this, fine; Kibwetere was with me hiding in Bishop Barnabas Habirimana’s home in Kabale when I ran away from being mishandled by my brother Rwakasisi in the 1980 elections. John Kamagara was my teacher in primary three. So, these are human beings who had a history, who are known and so on and so forth. 

What happened is what all of us should be interested in doing because a man like Kibwetere is one of those who started the first school in Kajara; he even wrote a book. So, there are a number of things that we know: That Kataribabo had a Masters degree from America. He was a graduate of Makerere and he almost became the Chaplain of St Augustine Chapel Makerere. So, the issue of cult formation is more than what Government can be responsible for. 

When you check on the histories of cults including Lakwena, Kony and many others like Rev. John in America, these are some of the people who start something and end in zero - in darkness; that is why they are called messianic and have hardly any trace. That is why from what we have been told, these people brought petrol and they were housing these inmates who thought that this was a blessing and when they lit the fire, they were all burnt. 

It is probable that Kataribabo and Kibwetere got burnt in there because I think as the minister has said, with Interpol and with all the investigations, probably all these people could have been traced if they had survived. It is true that evidence should be sought. I know some of the people other than those I have mentioned; some from Bushenyi as said by hon. Mawanda from Igara East including one of a wife to my nephew whose father actually died in the inferno; he was one of the leaders. Now the challenge that you have and the minister here I think is honest enough to say; anybody who has evidence should be able to help us, including Dr Baryomunsi because even those -(Interjections)- yes, even me in terms of giving those names - I know Kataribabo. Actually, I went to his house where bodies were found subsequently in Bunyaruguru because I had gone there to say, “Please you are leading people nowhere” and as it turned out, the very house I entered - because I found him in the room - apparently people never crossed from the sitting room to his room because there was a hole there and people used to fall in there and get killed. So, when I came out and later on I got to know that bodies were found in that hole and around, then I knew I had survived by -(Interjection)- to me, therefore, we are dealing with a more complex issue than the responsibility of Government.

Secondly, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, I want to ask this question and this is not for academic argument; who is Government if hon. Wamanga-Wamai is not part of Government? Because when we say Government, I think we need to reflect on this and find out when individual citizens don’t give evidence or information, how can Government work? So, I think this is an occasion when we appeal to the citizens of Uganda that in order to avoid re-occurrence of this event and its causes, we should know as much information as possible of who was involved and so on. It is very clear that these people never amassed wealth although properties were sold. You cannot say that Kataribabo left a house bought in Mbarara or anywhere. All these were coming to an end just like you remember when there was a belief that as we enter the new Century, leaving 1900, that there would be an end and many people almost believed it. 

Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, I agree with you  - where was Government and I joked with him through a note I sent him, that certainly when people die when they are circumcised in the Imbalu, Government should not be responsible because matters of faith become a problem -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please conclude.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: If all the powers we are attributing to Government - if Government had the powers as we think - in this particular incidence, it should have,-the same Members of Parliament would be worried because Government would enter every hole, it would be everywhere and I don’t think members of this Parliament will want Government to have that capacity because today people who are converting to these religions are going on and when hon. Wamanga-Wamai goes to church, he never asks in the middle of the preaching -[MR WAMANGA WAMAI: “Clarification.”]- yes,because you are so important that you should be mentioned. So, please let us all bear in mind that the conditions which produce cults must be avoided in our society. 

And above all, let everybody who has evidence, who has information on anything that is going wrong be it rape, kidnap and so on make sure that this information is availed. I thank hon. Okupa for that information that he gave which has not been followed up. We must follow up all information to enable us live in a decent society. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we conclude by urging Government to complete the investigations as quickly as possible. Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned. Tomorrow we have one major business and I was informed that you wanted to organise your heads for the Public Finance Bill. So, that is the main business for tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock.  

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 November 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)










