
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 22 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will begin by amending the Order Paper to permit hon. Odria, the MP for Aringa County South, to give a personal explanation to the House.

Secondly, I would like to say that our proceedings were not covered last week. However, the Parliamentary Commission is preparing to procure both radio and television services for Parliament. In the meantime, we have agreed with Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) to provide live coverage, starting today until we are able to do that on our own. For now, we shall be covered. I wanted to inform you that this arrangement has now been made.

Last week, the Prime Minister had informed the country that the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill would be returned. I want to confirm that on Friday, 18 November 2016, eight assented copies were returned to Parliament. It is, therefore, law and stakeholders can make use of it. Thank you. (Applause)

2.40
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In Lake Kyoga, a situation has arisen where there is increasing insecurity in the late hours of almost every day. The insecurity is being caused majorly by people who anchor suds. Suds are floating islands and they are of different sizes. There are people who ferry sand and sticks and use these materials to keep the suds in one position. They protect these suds as their fishing zones and nobody else is supposed to carry out fishing in those areas. 

The consequence, Madam Speaker, is that there is a lot of illegality taking place and the lake is getting silted. Most importantly, these people are using decomposing human flesh as a method of attracting fish. This is because fish gets attracted to something that is decomposing. As a result, we have over 10 people that have been confirmed dead through this method of fishing.

Madam Speaker, we have raised this matter before but we are not seeing any steps that the Government is taking to bring sanity on the lake. Therefore, I have raised it again to find out from Government what plans they have to bring sanity to my people. As I speak, over 10 people have been killed under mysterious circumstances and most of them have been found dead and hanged on suds in Lake Kyoga. I would like a response, Madam Speaker.

2.42
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the exploitation of the youth and women who are receiving the money which was allocated for the youth and women funds.

Madam Speaker, as we sit here to talk about national issues and even allocate funds for people in our areas, people down there – in this case the Community Development Officers (CDOs) – are exploiting people. They are using their positions to get bribes from those groups that are actually very desperate to get the money. They charge from Shs 100,000 to Shs 200,000 if a group is to have a chance to pass through to the district level for verification. 

Madam Speaker, they have ignored the people who were trained to work as group promoters. At the moment, the groups get through to the district level without the knowledge of the group promoters. 

We have also discovered that those Community Development Officers are getting groups which are not there – ghost groups. Ghost groups are the ones who get the money, leaving the youth and women who are supposed to get the money waiting, and yet the money has already been distributed.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that: 

    a) The Government investigates the situation in which that money is being distributed, especially looking at the ghost groups which are being created.

    b) The Government does more sensitisation so that our people can know their rights as they get that money for their own businesses.

I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

2.45
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which is also an emergency. 

As we talk, citizens from the districts of Bududa, Manafwa, Mbale, Sironko, Bulambuli and some from Sebei sub-region have demonstrated. They are gathered in huge numbers at the Uganda Coffee Development Authority demanding not only for their arrears, but also because of the coffee seedlings that they supplied recently, after they were contracted by Operation Wealth Creation.

Madam Speaker, for your information and that of the Members, it is very unfortunate that payment has been made but in a lopsided manner. It has been made selectively. While in some regions those suppliers were paid, our particular sub-region was marginalised. As we talk, these people are demonstrating and others are threatening to strip naked. 

You know what happens with the Bamasaba when they threaten to go naked. They are used to doing it because they have done it during circumcision, so they are not scared of taking off their clothes. Therefore, I pray that this House takes up this issue and compels the relevant office to have these payments made– (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. When the Operation Wealth Creation and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries started the process of supplying coffee seedlings to farmers, some youth took loans, and these loans were for a particular period. 

Madam Speaker, in Kasese, most of the nursery operators who borrowed money are now being harassed by banks. Some of them are being compelled to sell their pieces of land and other properties so that they can pay the bank loans. It is not only happening in a few regions, but it is also in some districts of those regions where payments were made and some districts were selected and others were left out.  In the whole country, only a few spots were addressed and the majority are suffering. 

It would be fair for this Parliament to compel Operation Wealth Creation and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to look into this matter. If possible, they should be compelled to service the loans which people took as they were establishing their nursery beds. Why should someone’s payments be put on halt for three or five years? This is very unfortunate. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, you have now taken over -

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Mr Mulindwa rose_)- If you could make it very brief –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. It should also be noted that as Operation Wealth Creation carries out these activities, it should be mandatory that Members of Parliament are involved, other than Members coming in later when things have been mismanaged. I so pray.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have written notes to your good office, informing you of the motion which is coming before this House to discuss the subject of Operation Wealth Creation. We are in advanced stages of bringing that motion here any time from tomorrow. Please, give us the opportunity to finish up with the motion and we bring it here so that we can have a substantive debate on the whole subject of Operation Wealth Creation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as soon as it lands on my desk, it will come on the Order Paper. It is up to you to move quickly. That means we shall defer discussion on this until we have that fully-fledged motion. Bring it and we shall put it on the Order Paper tomorrow or Thursday. 

2.50
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter relating to the prices of cement from Hima Cement Factory.

Madam Speaker, as you know, Hima Cement Factory is located in Kasese District. However, the people of Kasese buy a bag of cement between Shs 32,500 and Shs 34,000 and yet in Kampala it costs between Shs 29,000 and Shs 30,000, even after being transported from Kasese to Kampala. As I speak, the contractors in Kasese have resorted to coming to Kampala to buy cement that is produced in Hima for purposes of construction. Across the border in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the same bag of cement goes for Shs 25,000 to Shs 26,000. 

Madam Speaker, I do not understand the rationale of this price difference. In Kampala, it is cheaper even when transport has been factored in from Kasese to Kampala. Cement from Dubai is also cheaper for Ugandans. I would like to understand that kind of economics. I think Hima Cement Factory should find a mechanism of regulating its prices. This is not good for infrastructure development in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.52
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, we have boundary clashes between Budaka and Butaleja. My prayer and request is that the two line ministries - Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - intervene so that our people can get back to their major source of livelihood, which is farming. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in regard to what hon. Kamugo has said, in the Ninth Parliament the Prime Minister would ask Government to deal with all the border disputes - those in West Nile and Acholi, among others. However, we have not yet got a reply and she has now inherited the problem. I hope that you can tell us when we shall get the reports we requested for during that time. 

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that our colleague, hon. Anthony Akol, member for Kilak North, has lost his mother, Mrs Anna Achomo. She died yesterday. Burial will be in Paboo on Saturday, 26 November 2016. Members who are able to should go and give support to our colleague.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue raised by hon. Anthony Okello is that people are dying under strange circumstances on the lakes. It reminded me that we still do not have a political head in the fisheries sector. Please remind the President that a minister for fisheries has not been appointed. Maybe the senior Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will say something about this matter. I also wanted to hear what honourable –(Interjections)- They are ready? Tell the President that I have many candidates in this House. Prime Minister, maybe you can respond to the issues they have raised.

2.54
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am just going to respond to a few matters raised here. 

One is on the issue of when the minister in charge of fisheries will be appointed. That one is beyond me, probably. I cannot even guess. It is also very unusual to go and inquire because I have never done it; you just hear that people have been appointed. Therefore, I am requesting the Members who raised the matter to be patient. The appointing authority is aware that he still has something to do and I think he will do it. 

On the issue of coffee seedlings, Members were saying that some people are being paid and some are not. I would like to say that Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) is responsible for distributing coffee seedlings to where they are required. National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and Uganda Coffee Development Authority are all under Operation Wealth Creation. 

I need to be given more time to perhaps inquire more from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because all those entities are under the ministry. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to request you to allow hon. Bagiire Aggrey to speak on this because he has a lot of knowledge on the issues of coffee seedlings. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In relation to the issue of the lakes, the senior Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come up and say something on this. He might be overseeing the other sector where there is nobody. He should come here on the issue of fisheries.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter on fisheries. Much as I am interested in fisheries in all the lakes in this country, I would like to say fishing on Lake Albert has become a crisis. The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is very strict and has stopped all illegal fishing on her waters and everybody has come to Uganda. It has become piracy; we have lost people and canoes are being taken. 

Last week, I spoke with the leadership of the police to find out if they still have the mandate to man our lakes. They said the presidential diective to stop enforcement on the lake still stands. I thought the mandate of the police is to keep law and order and the fisheries enforcement officials are to run the lakes. 

The mandate of the Beach Management Units (BMUs), which were established by the law, was not rescinded when the Nankabirwa and Prof Nyiira enforcement team was stopped. Can we know from the Prime Minister if the lake has been left to anarchy and piracy because the President, during campaigns, stopped the fisheries enforcement officials from doing their work? It is now a big problem on Lake Albert. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall direct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and answer that question. However, hon. Bagiire, I understand you are knowledgeable on the matter of seeds and payments.

MR AGGREY BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As requested by the Prime Minister, I will say something about the coffee seedlings. The truth is that, giving out of coffee seedlings is under Uganda Coffee Development Authority. The National Agricultural Advisory Services gives out the other inputs. 

Madam Speaker, before the mandate of giving out the seedlings was given to UCDA, it was under NAADS. However, NAADS ceded it to UCDA after an understanding with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

One of the challenges met by UCDA was that they put in place a system where they wanted, as an organisation, to get the names of the beneficiaries on the documents that are submitted for payment. Originally, the suppliers or farmers were taking the seedlings to the districts and at times up to the subcounties and then the people on the ground would give them to the farmers; they were not capturing the direct beneficiaries. 

Uganda Coffee Development Authority put its foot down and said whether it takes a year or so, they must make sure they get the people who received the seedlings before they are paid. During the time that is being made reference to, - two or three years - the money was coming from NAADS and UCDA was the implementer. 

This became a very big problem because UCDA refused and said they wanted the lists of the people who benefitted so that they go down and verify them. The suppliers or farmers who managed to get the lists of the people who benefitted have been paid. 

Madam Speaker, I have also known- (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my constituency, the lists of the beneficiaries were submitted in 2014 and 2015. Up to today, they have never been paid. Therefore, the honourable member is misinforming and misleading the House by saying those suppliers who submitted the lists have been paid. 

His information is directed somewhere and it should be withdrawn from this Parliament because it is not true. Is the honourable member in order to mislead this House that people who submitted lists have been paid and yet they are still crying foul and banks are on their necks?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to direct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come here to specifically answer the issue of the pending payments in Manjiya, Bududa and Mbale, and probably for the whole country because it might be a problem everywhere. Thank you, honourable minister. Let us get the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to deal with these issues specifically.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the issue on Lake Albert is specifically a security problem because it involves a neighbouring country. Therefore, I would like to refer this matter to the Minister of Internal Affairs who is the chairman of national security. They hold meetings every day with people responsible for security. Whatever is to be raised on the previous directives will be sorted out by them and I will come back to the House after consultation -(Mr Fungaroo rose_) - I have finished; you inform somebody else. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Wait for the minister to come up. Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming Ms Susan Akuma, the Clerk of the Council of Oyam District Local Government. She has come to see the proceedings. You are welcome.

Honourable members, the Inspector General of Government has invited the Public Accounts Committee, the Committee on Local Government Accounts and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) for a meeting on Friday at 8.30 in the morning at Kabira Country Club. Please, ensure you are there on time. She wants to see how to co-operate with you on the issue of accountability.

3.05
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I am rising on an issue that has grossly impacted on the economy of West Nile and has thus diminished the role they play in the national economy. It is the issue of non-payment of tobacco farmers by a company licensed by the Government of Uganda, under the Ministry of Trade and Industry. 

For about two years now, our tobacco farmers have not been paid and the amount due to them is Shs 1.3 billion. I want to know if the Government thinks that this is within their mandate to have it resolved.

Secondly, I would like to know what action they are going to take to make sure these tobacco farmers get paid as soon as possible. Many of them are no longer sending their children to school and a number of them have died due to lack of medical attention. This has completely devastated their families. Some have had their families separated because the men could no longer sustain the needs of the women. Therefore, I thought we should be able to do something. 

The company is Continental Tobacco. It took tobacco from famers without paying them and the amount due to them is about Shs 1.3 billion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We direct the Minister of Trade and Industry to come and respond to the issue of the West Nile tobacco farmers and also the issue of the cost of cement in the country, with specific reference to the price in Kasese. 

For the rest of the issues, the Minister of Agriculture will come and answer. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will answer the issue of the funds. I do not know whether it is an issue of corruption or management. We will ask the Minister of Gender to come and respond to hon. Timuzigu’s issue.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE HUMAN RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT) BILL, 2015

3.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I rise in accordance with rule 147(b) of our Rules of Procedure to lay on the Table the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is before the committee but the purpose of laying it on the Table is to enable the new Members to get their copies of the Bill so that the work can proceed.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

3.09
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker – (Interjections)– I would like - 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. 

MS AMODING: I am suspicious - the men are smiling because of my improved shape. -(Laughter)- I would like to note that as the chairperson of UWOPA, I have responded to their call because the Members have been complaining that we are not using the day-care centre. So, I want to be exemplary in showing the need for that day-care centre. That is why they are smiling –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give a supplementary comment to what hon. Amoding is saying regarding the day-care centre. You know that you stood with us, the ladies of this Parliament, to have that facility installed. However, we were complaining because I was the only Member of Parliament who had a child in that place. Therefore, I am very glad to see hon. Amoding in the process of coming to help me. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I encourage the men who have young children to also go and take their children there. (Laughter) 

MS AMODING: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We thank you very much as women for working hard to get that place for the women in Parliament. However, we are again coming with another request for the women of the general public because they have been complaining as women workers. At an appropriate time, we will be coming with a formal request.

Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 147 to lay before this House a private Member’s Bill, which was moved in the last Parliament - the Sexual Offences Bill. There are some unique circumstances in this Bill that I would like to inform the House about. As I lay this on the Table, I do not have a certificate of financial implications. However, that is why we did- 

THE SPEAKER: It is not necessary; just lay it on the Table. Honourable members, that Bill is again brought so that Members who did not receive it in the Ninth Parliament have their own copies; otherwise, it is before the committee and we ask the committee to continue with the process. Thank you.

For the record, I received a letter from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development in which she was instructing all Government agencies to ensure that there are day-care centres in their places of employment. Maybe she will speak to it herself, but she wrote to me about two months ago that she was instructing all Government agencies – (Interjections) – Yes, we are the leaders.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.13
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am the Commissioner designated by Members of the Opposition and I am surprised that the Clerk does not seem to be aware of that change of my status. I represent the Opposition in the Parliamentary Commission; therefore, my papers should be on this side. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Those papers are for the Speaker and not for the –

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I realise that, but I should present them from this side according to your rules. 

For the interest of Members who have not seen me in the last two weeks, I have been working for Parliament as well. You sent me to represent Parliament at the climate change conference in Morocco in a town called Marrakesh. I just came back and everybody is happy. Ugandans have come up with some agreement but as I have always said, I hope that this time the sector minister will present their position to Parliament so that we also give our input.

Madam Speaker, for this afternoon, I beg to lay on the Table a couple of reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the following:

i) 	Audit of statement of recoverable costs in respect of exploration area 2 operated by Tullow Uganda Operations Limited for the 12-month period ending 31 December 2010. 

Madam Speaker, the documents are not in order, so I do not know. Can the clerk please help? The documents are not put in order.

THE SPEAKER: Just go by the Order Paper.

MS OGWAL: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the purpose of the future, I would beg that the clerk places them in the order that they are in on the Order Paper.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the following:

i) 	The financial statements of the Africa Institute for Strategic Animal Resource Services and Development (AFRISA) for the financial year ended 30 June 2013.

ii) 	The Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project – Malaria Component Round 4 in the Ministry of Health for financial year ended 31 December 2013.

iii)	The Northern Uganda Development of Enhanced Local Government Infrastructure and Livelihoods (NUDEIL) Programme financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014.

iv)	Financial statements of Global Fund Alliance for Vaccine Initiative (GAVI) funding to the Ministry of Health for ISS, HSS and VIG Programmes for the period ended 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015.

v)	Makerere University – Norwegian Programme for Capacity Development in Higher Education and Research for Development (NORHED) funded projects financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015.

vi) 	The Makerere University – Africa Institute for Strategic Animal Resource Services and Development (AFRISA) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015.

vii) 	Makerere University – support to research activities funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015.

viii)	Makerere University financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015.

ix) 	Financial statements of the Microfinance Support Centre Limited for the thirteen month period ended 31 July 2015.

x)	Ministry of Public Service financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015.

xi)	Financial statements of the Support to Higher Education Science and Technology (Education V) Project (ADB loan No. 2100150028093) in the Ministry Of Education, Science, Technology and Sports for the seventeen month period from 1 February 2014 to 30 June 2015.

xii)	Makerere University – Support to research activities funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) Phase III, Programme No. 75007369 for the closure period 1 July 2015 to 3 November 2015.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports and opinions of the Auditor-General.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back. I amended the Order Paper to invite hon. Odria to come and give his explanation.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

3.21
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this urgent and very important opportunity. This is a personal explanation under Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I rise to give a personal explanation after a story that appeared in today’s Daily Monitor newspaper on the front page entitled, “PAC expels MP over extortion”. (Laughter) The article states that I used my position as a Member of Parliament on the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) to solicit for a bribe from an accounting officer who appeared to respond to queries in an audit report.

It is not true that I have been suspended from the Public Accounts Committee. To the contrary, I have been participating in PAC meetings including today. There is no allegation against me or a hearing against me over bribery allegations.

In the several committee interactions with the accounting officers during PAC hearings, I have persistently demanded for strong action against accounting officers who have mismanaged public funds. This can be found in the records of the PAC proceedings. My job is a public duty that I undertook to carry out without fear or favour in fulfilment of my constitutional duties. 

Madam Speaker, obviously, some accounting officers may want to retaliate by discrediting some of the members of PAC. It is unfortunate that they have zeroed on me. I am ready to face this and I call for thorough investigations into this matter.

The allegations raised against me are unfounded and malicious, aimed at destroying my image and tainting my integrity. They are also intended to discredit the institution of Parliament and prevent committees, especially the accountability committees, from executing their oversight role. The principle of natural justice would dictate that I am granted an opportunity to respond to any allegations made against me. 

Madam Speaker, as a Member of this august House, I call upon your office to protect Members from malicious allegations intended to jeopardise the work of Members and also intimidate the Members as they execute their mandate. Today, it may be me, but tomorrow it could be any other Member of Parliament facing such malicious allegations. This, none the less, is not intended to prejudice any formal proceedings that I intend to take against the publishing corporation. 

I must extend my disappointment to this Parliament. I think that it is not right for a Member of Parliament who sits on an accountability committee to see our arm, that is, the Auditor-General’s Office, who feeds us with information, give us queries against Government entities, for example - If you follow the records –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have gone beyond your statement. 

MR ODRIA: Madam Speaker, just a minute. If our report proves that the Ministry of Health, for example, has mismanaged Shs 420 billion, should I, Alioni Yorke Odria, keep quiet with that query? If it comes to my notice in my committee that Ministry of Finance has mismanaged US$ 110 million, which was meant to support institutions, and the report is from the Auditor-General, should I keep quiet with that? I cannot! There is no way!

In some of our committee work, if we discover that National Environment Management Authority has given a certificate to a company to do fishing and the company turns its business into sand mining, I, Alioni Odria, and my committee should not keep quiet about it. Madam Speaker, I requested my chairperson to detain the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health until they produce evidence of the design sheets and the bills of quantities under which they mismanaged Shs 240 billion. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, the report of the Public Accounts Committee will come here and it will be discussed. 

MR ODRIA: Madam Speaker, my humble prayer is: My image has been tarnished; therefore, through your good office, I pray that you call for an immediate investigative team, chosen out of these Members of Parliament, to look into this matter before this week ends, so that they can come up with a proper report to this House. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer also is that this should never happen to any other Member of Parliament. If this precedent goes on, tomorrow another witness will come out and report that so and so approached me for a bribe. There is no evidence! I report, there is 100 per cent no evidence that I approached or ever tried to get any bribe from any member of the public. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that I need your protection and I should be given an opportunity – We should let the law take its course by identifying the complainants and we face each other in the courts of law. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made your case. Thank you so much, hon. Odria. I will advise on the way forward, but thank you for making that statement. 

Honourable members, let us go to item No.4. We had a debate on the report of the Committee on Health about hepatitis B but we did not put the question. So I just want to put the question. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Health on hepatitis B endemic in Uganda be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, when hon. Ann Adeke raised the Makerere predicament as a matter of national importance, Madam Speaker, you pledged to this House that you would create space for the entire House to debate Makerere issues. On Thursday, you indicated graciously that you will do the same. 

I have just returned from my constituency where I was confronted by angry parents and angry students, even professors. Madam Speaker, this is a national tragedy. Makerere University cannot continue in that kind of state and we as a country continue to act like there is nothing going wrong. Is it therefore procedurally right for us to continue as if it is business as usual? 

In my last submission, Madam Speaker, you will recall that before you adjourned the previous sitting, I had wanted to invoke rule No.27 of our Rules of Procedure, which states, “Statement of Business by Leader of Government Business”, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. That particular rule guides us clearly that at every last sitting day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement regarding the business of Government of the succeeding week. 

Madam Speaker, for the time I have been here, I have not seen that happen. I wonder what the basis for originating the Order Paper could be because to me, our Order Paper does not align with our pressing priorities as a country. Therefore, is it procedurally right to continue with other business without creating space for a debate on Makerere University as you had graciously pledged? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am very alive on the issues of Makerere University. At the last sitting, I said I wanted the Clerk to formulate a possible resolution. You know, we cannot debate just to be heard. What do we want? I said the Clerk should formulate a possible resolution, which we can debate, and when we take a decision there will be action. Otherwise, you will be heard talking about Makerere, then so what?

I have asked the Committee on Education to present their report. We shall then debate the issue of Makerere University after the committee presents their report. We need some solutions. 

About the Prime Minister, that is his business. He knows the rules are there, so he can start using them. Let us go to item No.5. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON SAND MINING IN KALUNGU, MPIGI AND WAKISO DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented but because it was lengthy and the sector ministers were not here, we deferred debate on this matter. So, the Floor is open for debate, honourable members.

3.35 
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga North Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: At that time, we needed the Minister of Works; I see him here. We also need the Minister of Water and Environment and the Minister of Internal Affairs. Some ministers are not here but can proceed; the Prime Minister can find his people. Tell the Minister of Water and Environment to come. The ones responsible for minerals are here. The Minister of Water and Environment should come. Proceed, hon. Kasibante. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would wish, first of all, to thank the committee for a very comprehensive report. The report shows a list of the companies that are involved in sand mining, but there is no list of the owners of this land. As far as I know, this is supposed to be public land. Actually, it could be part of the popular 900 square miles. We are yet to understand how this land ended up with private ownership. Individuals have land titles in wetlands which had been saved for future generations.

Madam Speaker, the challenge of environmental degradation as we talk now is very serious. We have heard what is happening in Isingiro and elsewhere in the country; it is partly caused by environmental degradation.

Madam Speaker, when you read page 28 of the report, it mentions irregular issuance of addenda to wetland user permits. It is NEMA that is issuing permits before actually carrying out environmental impact assessments. I have been reading the recommendations and it appears like NEMA has nothing to explain; why? They go ahead to issue permits well knowing that they have not carried out environmental impact assessments. I think it is prudent that at some later stage, we make an amendment in the resolutions and NEMA – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KASIBANTE: We need to do something about NEMA. Madam Speaker, the individuals sitting in the offices of NEMA have something to explain. They cannot just go scot-free after issuing permits before carrying out assessments of what impact this might have on the environment.

However, largely, we need to understand which individuals own land with land titles in wetlands, which are supposed to be public land, saved for the future but now given out to the Chinese. About 20 per cent of the report is about Chinese nationals causing environmental degradation in Uganda; they are not going to be affected. Who are the people who own this land? Thank you.

3.39
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have perused through this report and I want to salute the committee for the comprehensive report. This report raises two critical issues:

One is the weaknesses in regulating sand mining in Uganda by the National Environmental Management Authority. There are quite a number of illegalities being committed and in my honest opinion it appears that the hands of NEMA seem to be tied, especially on enforcement of the Act.

Honourable minister, I would like to give my humble advice. Look at all the illegalities committed by these companies: non-compliance with conditions contained in the wetlands user permit; companies lacked wetland permits; certificates of approval of environmental impact assessments issued to establish cages for fish and the company ends up engaging in commercial sand mining. It is my humble opinion that the National Environment Act be amended to incorporate a provision for express penalties by NEMA to companies that fail to comply with the terms and conditions that are set.

Secondly, the Chinese investors in Uganda have degenerated into mining sand as if we do not have Ugandans who can do this. I strongly believe that we should have a policy that states that the foreigners can only perform roles that cannot be executed by Ugandans. (Applause)  Somebody flies in from China to come and mine sand in Uganda!

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the role that Chinese investors are playing in our economy. However, as a country, we must wake up. We should carry out a census of all Chinese in this country. In Lira, there are some who have degenerated into local vendors going to the local market. We must carry out a census to establish what they are doing and if they have work permits. Those who do not have permits must face the law. This is my humble submission on this particular report, Madam Speaker. However, NEMA and the Chinese investors who are mining sand in Uganda – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As Col Mwesigye comes up, there was something I had wanted to ask the committee chair. In this report, they kept on saying, “foreign investors”. I want to know whether these sand miners are actually investors. Do they have investment licences? Have they paid the US$ 100,000 deposit? I did not see that in this report.

3.43
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this wonderful report. However, Madam Speaker, I find several absurdities in the report. The first absurdity is the foreigners mentioned in this report. How on earth can foreigners come to mine sand in Uganda? These are small businesses that should be carried out by Ugandans.

Secondly, last time I raised a matter concerning the directive of the President that no foreign investor should get involved in small businesses that are being done by Ugandan traders. We do not see any move towards stopping these scavengers who are scavenging on our little businesses.

The other absurdity is the destruction of the environment. You know how climate change is catching up with us and yet we continue to watch our environment being destroyed by the so-called investors. The President directed that all land titles in the swamps should be cancelled but we continue to see “investors” digging trenches near our lakes, especially Lake Victoria.

The other absurdity, which is in extreme, is the destruction of our roads. The Kampala-Masaka Road cost the Ugandan Government a lot of money. For those of us who use that road, you can see that it is already destroyed. I do not know how much money we shall require to repair that road. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that Government wakes up to stop all these absurdities - the destruction of the environment and roads and the so-called investors scavenging on small businesses which are being done by Ugandans. These are very serious issues which we should put an end to. We cannot continue lamenting; there must be a stop to all these problems, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to draw your attention to page 23 on the impact this has had on our roads. Lukaya Sand Dealers were mining sand within 200 metres of the Kampala-Masaka Highway, weakening the stability of the road and making it prone to flooding. They had encroached on the road buffer zone by 20 metres. Honourable members, one day that road will open up and your convoys will disappear if we do not stop the illegal mining of sand.

3.46
Ms JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to commend the committee for a thorough report and to support their recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, land is the only tangible thing of real value that is an inheritance to future generations. However, NEMA has really let this country down. On one hand, they give out permits for activities in wetlands and on the other hand, they are demolishing and chasing our people. You also find people carrying out illegal activities without NEMA doing anything; they just turn a blind eye. 

If the sand mining activities in Lwera and other areas were to benefit Uganda, it would probably make sense. If the sand quantities were known and taxed and the land was restored, at least we would say that this is an “okay” activity since there would be restoration and hope. However, everything is negative. 

Why give permits for activities in a wetland for goodness sake, as my colleagues have asked? Why send sand to Kenya, for example? Kenya has a wide coastline and a big chunk of the lakeside. Why then don’t they mine sand in their own area? They are depleting the sand in Uganda and saving theirs. I think there is something wrong and as Ugandans, we must make sure that we correct this anomaly. 

Madam Speaker, there are sand pits that are filled with dirty water and are breeding mosquitoes but we are just buying mosquito nets and distributing them instead of curbing the problem at source. We are letting these people lay our soils bare and create a problem as we are looking on. 

In addition, most of the people working in this industry are Chinese. They can bring their machines alright, but the labourers should be Ugandans. However, you find about 20 to 50 Chinese on a site. Why? The Government –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you so much, hon. Kamateeka, for giving way. The information I would like to give is in regard to the issue that we are discussing now. There is no country in the western world or in Asia Pacific where somebody can set off and do whatever they wish to do. However, that is not the case in Uganda, which has become a laissez faire country where anybody can enter and exit at any time.

Madam Speaker, today we are talking about unemployment in this country; over 70 young people have no jobs. Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations Conference of the Parties. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was here saying that she has just arrived from Morocco where she attended the climate change conference. In one of the resolutions, Uganda endorsed the passing of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs as a country in addressing climate change -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were supposed to give information but you are smuggling in your points. 

MS AMONGIN: This is very important information, Madam Speaker - relating committee work to issues of climate change. This is being done by foreigners, who are actually among the G8 and are the big polluters. In the end, our people suffer the most. 

Madam Speaker, we are suffering from drought because of the effects of climate change. I, therefore, think that the report of the committee is worth noting and should be taken on. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, give me one minute.  

THE SPEAKER: You donated a lot of your time. Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, we need strong legal frameworks and strong enforcement. If necessary, we need to disband NEMA, but individuals in NEMA should be brought to book. They should answer to Ugandans. Of course, we should take a census of the Chinese and make sure that only those who are here legally and are bringing in value should remain here and they should not take the jobs of our children. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kabanda comes in, I would like to seek information from the Prime Minister. That announcement by the President about securing some sectors for Ugandans was very important for this country. Has it been put in writing by anyone? Can we access it? 

3.53
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank you for your urgent action of sending the committee to Lwera and I thank the committee for the work well done.

Madam Speaker, after the committee’s visit, the business people in Lwera doubled their effort. It takes an hour to drive from Lwera to Kampala and today as I was coming from Masaka, I started counting the lorries that were carrying sand from Lwera. Within one hour, I counted 36 lorries carrying sand from Lwera and 27 going to Lwera –(Interruption) 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I was wondering if we have a minister in charge of the environment because as we speak, no form of action has been taken since the report came out. These people are still mining sand and the situation is actually worsening.

There is a company called Aqua World, which shifted from Lwera to Bukakata in Buwunga Subcounty. They are acting as if the world will end with us today. Therefore, I want to know whether we have a minister in charge of the environment. Why is it that these activities are continuing and yet there is nothing being done? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KABANDA: Madam Speaker, the Chinese have even imported special cars. When you look at the cars that are carrying sand from Lwera, you will notice that they were built purposely for that. They are quite different. They are very heavy and they have even spoilt the road from Kampala to Masaka. 

Secondly, NEMA has done nothing. People in the villages have realised that the wetlands have been spoilt. The local people have actually resorted to stopping those people by attacking them. In Masaka, they have started beating up those villagers who are cultivating in the wetlands while NEMA is just looking on. 

My request is that as Members of Parliament, we should pass a resolution to supplement the recommendations and resolutions made by the committee because these people are doubling their activities in Lwera. Secondly, the minister and the chairperson of NEMA should resign because of what is taking place in Uganda today. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

3.57
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya East County, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have to be people of action. Like the previous speaker has said, as we lament here, those people are mining sand. As we were going to do our work as Members of Parliament, we found a line of trucks going into Lwera. This was after the report had been presented. 

Therefore, as Parliament, let us order that sand mining in Lwera be stopped immediately, today and now. The Minister of Internal Affairs should take this matter up and make re-enforcements so that sand mining is stopped in Lwera as we institute a team that will carry out further investigations. 

Secondly, all the licences should be withdrawn. The committee was saying that some were licensed and some were not licensed through the right procedure. However, when you read the report, there is a big mess within NEMA itself. We would rather agree that all the licences be withdrawn so that the team, which will be instituted, first looks at the licences one by one to find out how they came in place and put everything properly in order.

They do not give us the revenue derived from all the sand mining. In Mayuge, there are National Forestry Authority (NFA) offices and there is some sand. In order to mine that sand, an individual has to pay Shs 3 million per month. If a person in Mayuge pays Shs 3 million per month to NFA, you can imagine how much Government would earn if all these people paid. 

Here, we do not even know the quantity of sand being mined. Little wonder that all the rich people in Kampala have been rushing for sand mining. Even Pastor Kakande left the church and went for sand mining. (Laughter) As Parliament, we need to ensure that sand mining is stopped and a team, which we might propose today, goes ahead to investigate, and all the licences should be withdrawn. 

In addition, I would suggest that NEMA be abolished. If we cannot abolish it, maybe we have to widen or review its mandate. It is this Parliament to do that because NEMA has failed to do its work. The degradation of the environment is everywhere. When you look at all the wetlands, they are gone. This Lubigi –(Member timed out.) 

4.00
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to commend the committee for this elaborate report. I think the report points in the direction that Uganda is good at making laws and policies but poor in implementing them. This is a typical example. 

The National Environment Management Authority is in existence because of a legal framework that was put in place by this Parliament. The roads that are being damaged are under monitoring and inspection of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). Uganda National Roads Authority was created by this Parliament and it has put in place mechanisms to monitor axle loads. However, on Masaka Road, for the sake of sand business, the axle load regulation does not apply. That is why the roads are being damaged.

The environmental impact assessments, which are supposed to inform the decision on whether mining permits should be issued, is a technical area that is the preserve of NEMA. However, when you look at the annexes from 1 to 3, you see lists indicating where permits have been cancelled, halted and those that are still in force. One wonders whether the committee, which was short of technical capacity, was able to do just work. The reason why this Parliament created NEMA was to do a thorough job but now, it is this same Parliament monitoring the institution that was created by it and finding it at fault. 

Madam Speaker, I think that this Parliament must pass resolutions to restructure some of these institutions that we have put in place. It seems that they have become entities for making money for individuals. People only shout when it suits their interests and not the interests of this country. 

The wetlands that we are talking about are breeding areas for fish. People are now feeding on mgongo wazi- the skeletons. Even the volumes of fish that are supposed to be exported have reduced because the breeding areas have been interfered with. 

I, therefore, suggest to this august House that we restructure NEMA as an institution that must function like a professional entity to ensure that our natural resources, particularly the wetlands, are protected. Thank you.

4.04
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is quite unfortunate that with the abundant natural resources we have, we are actually debating exportation of sand. 

In 2012, hon. Banyenzaki launched a very big ship - in fact the biggest in the country. At that time, he was a minister. The purpose of this ship to the country was to transport passengers and cargo. However, this ship is now transporting sand from Uganda to Kenya by the Chinese. You may recall that a few months back a ship caught fire. That was the ship that was actually transporting sand. 

In fact, the people along the lake basin were annoyed because they were told that they were going to get over 20,000 jobs because there is going to be business. People supported it but it is employing between 20 to 50 locals only. The Chinese are not mining using people but they are using machines; so there is no local content at all. They have dredgers, which they use to mine the sand up to the middle of the lake. 

This should be one of the last resources for which we would invite an investor to come and exploit. As we are grappling with failure to reduce our balance of payment deficit, the fishing industry is collapsing, like hon. Atiku mentioned, because there is total interference with the fish breeding areas. 

You have heard of accidents occurring in some areas where children go to swim, thinking that these areas are still as they were five years ago, only to discover that they are closed because the Chinese are mining sand around the shores. These are no longer shallow areas for children to play or for boats to dock. They are now very deep areas, even deeper than 200 metres into the lake. 

I think it is high time we streamlined who an investor is and where an investor should invest. There is a general perception that a wetland is a very good environment for investment and people think that it is better than any other piece of land because it is cheaper. When you go along Mukono, -(Member timed out)

4.07
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that since time immemorial, mining of sand has been happening. However, what was happening was sustainable exploitation; a number of people have been earning a living by exploiting sand from these wetlands. However, with the coming in of the so-called investors, they have changed the aspect of sustainable exploitation to total exploitation because they know that after tomorrow, they have nothing to desire.

I hold the view, therefore, that before we punch NEMA left, right and centre, let us first look at the terms and conditions. Hon. Waira has stated that some companies have licences. If they have licences, what are the terms, before we can blame NEMA completely?

Madam Speaker, the issue in Lwera is not very different from the issue in other wetlands. The only difference is that in Lwera, there is total exploitation. Therefore, we need to look at the terms that are contained in the licences so that we can draw our judgment.

4.09
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I draw the attention of this Parliament to the aspect of investment and the so-called Chinese investors. We need to investigate the specialty of these Chinese as they have engulfed the whole country.

Madam Speaker, in Kinkizi, a team of Chinese with heavy machines have already diverted a very strong river called Kiruruma. They are mining gold and diverting water supposedly to help the people; now they are into sand mining and they are protected. That is why I am not yet sure that NEMA should be punished because there is a minister in charge in this House.

What is Government’s interest in the Chinese, especially those in this petty business? You should tell us because as we continue lamenting, they are there cutting grass and diverting water -(Interjections)- Yes, that is the truth.

Madam Speaker, every Wednesday there is a Cabinet meeting. If the report was presented and they are still going on with the activities, it means it is beyond NEMA. We need to investigate who is behind this business because they are very well protected –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, hon. Kaberuka. The information I want to give you is that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which by God’s grace I chair, has picked serious interest in the situation of investors in the country. We have Chinese, Ethiopians, Somalis and several others who have actually infiltrated our economy and they are doing petty jobs. I hear that they are even roasting chicken in Kabalagala. 

Therefore, we thought it was necessary for the committee to delve deep into this issue and come up with a report to this Parliament. We are meeting the Minister of Trade and Industry, who gives licences to these foreign traders, on Thursday. We are also meeting with KCCA and Uganda Investment Authority and we shall be pleased to report to this House on those investors that have infiltrated our country.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the other day -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You were generous with your time; you donated it.  

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, I would like to say that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was lamenting in this House over the staggering economy. We have given the whole investment sector to the Chinese without getting our children jobs. 

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister and other ministers are here; we need to get explanations as to whether it is really kisanja hakuna mchezo or something else. Thank you.

4.14
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the natural resources committee for the work well done. 

I would like to draw your attention to page 18, table 1 - list of land titles of sand miners in Lwera wetland. We are all blaming Chinese but these Chinese are here to help us discover ourselves. Looking at this table, we have Zhongs Industries Ltd with 59.4 hectares; that is a Chinese firm. We have Seroma Ltd with 199.8 hectares and John Ssebalamu with 256.5 hectares; those are Ugandans. We have Lukaya Sand Dealers with 72.9 hectares, Samuel Kakande with 116.7 hectares and we have Tesco Industries and Peter Abomugisha. The total is about 883 hectares.

The Chinese owned firm has 59.4 hectares plus that of Lukaya Sand Dealers, which is 72 hectares. A combination of that comes to about 100 plus hectares out of the 882 hectares. Looking at what they own, we still have Ugandans in this sector owning the largest share. 

The issue with the Chinese should be the local content. Those Chinese must employ Ugandans where they are, but we still own the sand mining business that we are talking of. Let us go to page 23 -

THE SPEAKER: There is information from Masaka.

MR MULINDWA: Not yet. On page 23, we have Lukaya Sand Dealers; the company was mining sand within 200 metres from Kampala-Masaka Highway, weakening the stability of the road. With this finding, this company should be stopped immediately. (Member timed out.)

4.17
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Today we are seeing everybody lamenting because of what we did 20 years ago when we were giving definition to the word “investment”. If you people have forgotten, we defined investment to include even chicken roasting because at that time, we were trying to attract everybody who could put some money into some business. Madam Speaker, I pray that -

THE SPEAKER: Where is that definition? Do you have that definition of chicken roasters? (Laughter)

MR DULU: Just revisit the definition of investment and you will find it; it is implied. Without any fear or favour, I pray that we call upon our legal experts to have a look at what we did 20 years ago so that it is amended and so that the definition given to the word “investment” is precise. This will protect our indigenous investors. 

As of now, it is true that we are talking about investors but they take advantage of the loopholes in our laws. The best thing is to make sure that the loopholes in those laws are blocked. As such, we will have blocked them. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will ask the Clerk to check on the investment code so that we can be sure of what we defined as an investor. 

4.20
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am querying the criteria under which the Uganda Land Commission, Ministry of Lands and district land boards have gone ahead to issue certificates of land titles in wetlands. That is contrary to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution as well as the Land Act, section 44(4), and Statutory Instrument No.153(3) of the National Environment Act. 

National Environment Management Authority goes ahead to issue permits to these developers when it is actually contrary to its own statutory instruments. Uganda Land Commission also issues titles in wetlands. Madam Speaker, I beg that this House directs the Ministry of Lands to cancel those titles immediately because it contravenes our Constitution. 

Sometime back, NEMA issued some user permits to a certain developer in my constituency to undertake sand mining on people’s land. I wrote to the Ministry of Lands complaining and the minister sent some people from the Uganda Land Commission to go and find out what was happening and bring her a report. 

The National Environment Management Authority is doing things in a very awkward manner, which Parliament should not accept. Therefore, let this House direct the minister to first cancel those titles in the wetlands where they are doing this sand mining. Thank you.

4.21
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee that presented the report today. 

Madam Speaker, you raised a very important question: Have these people deposited the US$ 100,000 as required by the law? This issue before Parliament today needs a multi-pronged approach. One of the other areas that I think we should address ourselves to is the immigration policy. 

I practiced immigration law in Canada and I know that work permits are given with restrictions. Are these Chinese or foreigners given work permits that say they can go and do sand mining? Where is the human resource authority in Uganda that said, “We have advertised this position, no Ugandan is available to do this job and therefore, we need a foreigner”? That is what other countries do as a best practice.

I think that we need a centralised policy in place as opposed to all these different licences coming from different institutions where you basically have a diversity of applications. We need a centralised system that would restrict immigrants to come and work in certain areas, and set a minimum amount that an investor would be able to deposit before they can be called an investor. 

If we do not do that and if we do not give immigration that authority, at the end of the day, enforcement becomes a very big issue. It would be a mere question of looking at your permit, seeing that you are not allowed to work in a certain area and you would be deported immediately. If we have structures like that in place, we will be able to address this question very easily. Thank you.

4.24
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Reading from page 33, under illegal dredging of sand in Lake Victoria, it says, “On 4 May 2016, the Minister of Water and Environment issued a river dredging licence under Section 4 of the Rivers Act to Mango Tree Group Limited to dredge the shores of Lake Victoria. The committee observed that the Rivers Act does not apply to the lakes but rather to rivers.” 

How could a minister, and I guess this was Prof. Kamuntu - a whole professor- misinterpret the Act and use the Rivers Act to give powers to Mango Tree Group Limited? This raises a lot of questions. He must be having an interest. Such people should not continue being ministers. That is why we are seeing people doing whatever they feel like with impunity. 

Madam Speaker, during the Budget Speech reading of 2015/2016 at the Serena Conference Centre, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stated that effective midnight that day, all vehicles carrying wet sand on the roads should be arrested. What has the Ministry of Internal Affairs done? Nothing has been done. These people have continued to use the roads.

Madam Speaker, I think the committee should follow up this matter and report back on the level of implementation when we pass these recommendations. They should report back within a month on how far the Government has gone because we are disappointed. If we just stop at recommendations, we shall fail. 

I will give you an example of COSASE. When we discovered that the Chinese were holding money, which was supposed to be used for compensation, we did not just say that we were waiting for a report and then recommend that the money be refunded. We directed there and then and the following day, the money was refunded back to Uganda National Roads Authority. That is what we need. If we just stop at passing recommendations here, these people will go back because they are beneficiaries and nothing will happen.

Madam Speaker, I would like the committee to report back to this House. I am so disappointed with NEMA. If you read this report, I think we need an overhaul in NEMA like we did with UNRA, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). I am very disappointed with the people there because they have failed us. How could you go ahead to give licences in a wetland? The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is giving land titles! Why?

There are these three companies that are mining sand along the Kampala-Masaka Road. These should be stopped immediately. What are we doing? What is the Ministry of Internal Affairs doing? What is NEMA doing? Police, can you help us, please? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also disappointed with the people who call themselves men of God. How can a whole Pastor Kakande be involved in this kind of thing? He is given a licence to do something and he is doing something else. He is the owner of Aqua Limited. No wonder we get information about how they are taking money from Ugandans illegally. I am very disappointed with such people. No wonder he refused to appear before the committee.

Madam Speaker, I am very disappointed with these people who deceive the world and do the contrary. I beg that the committee follows up the recommendations and reports back within one month. Thank you.

4.28
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I note that you did not know my name. I am Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel Ssajjalyabeene from Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality.

I have two points to make. The first one is that I am this size because of that wetland in Lwera. I grew up around Lukaya and in the past, that wetland was a source of income to all the areas around there, including the area of my friend, hon. Ssempijja, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It was not only a source of income to people but also a source of protein for people in the whole area and actually, most parts of Masaka. 

The second point I would like to make is that it looks like there is a big problem with our institutions. From what has been said here, you will note that most of the Government departments that should have done something have actually either done nothing or enhanced the problem. You will note that immigration is not doing its job and Uganda Investment Authority is also not doing its job. 

We also note that when you go to Bukakata, like the honourable colleague has said, all the forests are going. We note that the Ministry of Lands has issued titles for wetlands even in my constituency, Makindye-Ssabagabo. The National Environment Management Authority that should have been the vanguard in getting everybody on board is the biggest problem. 

I would like to suggest that the appointing authority be changed because I note that in most of these authorities, the big bosses are appointed by the President and that could be the problem. Why don’t we change the appointing authority so that we can get some biting teeth in these authorities? Otherwise, we are going to continue messing up this country. Our future, our children’s future and our grandchildren’s future is at stake. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssajjalyabeene. I can see that Lwera gave you a “sajja” size. (Laughter)

4.30
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing out a very good report, which I support. 

Madam Speaker, this report shows that we have a problem, and for the purpose of this submission I do not want to use the word “investors”. Let me call them “invaders”. (Laughter) These foreign invaders have invaded the space that Ugandans should occupy in business. I think this Parliament has a role to make a statement that will go out very clearly to them and to Ugandans that we are serious and that we care for them.

If you analyse this critically, you would think that there is a problem in this country, that people come as invaders and they mutate into something else. For this purpose, I would like to say that it is like a “national robbery movement”; people who love abbreviations can get an abbreviation for that. This is something that is affecting the space that Ugandans are supposed to exploit. 

In Lira, there was a problem recently and the minister had to rush there. It took the intervention of Members of Parliament to quell things down. Washing bays, bakeries and restaurants, which charge Shs 2,000 to Shs 3,000 for a plate of food, are being run by people who come from outside this country. 

The example of Ethiopia would help us very much. In Ethiopia, you have to deposit US$ 300,000 with Government. Even when you deposit this sum with the Government, you are not allowed to go into just any business. There are businesses that have been ring-fenced for locals to trade in. 

As mentioned here, I think that there are a lot of problems in NEMA. I know somebody who left their job as the director of environmental impact assessment and joined the African Development Bank because they could not bear the mischief in NEMA. 

Madam Speaker, finally, if you look critically at how licences are obtained, you will notice that a Ugandan will apply for a land title and licence and wait for three years and he is not helped. However, these invaders come and within 30 minutes –(Interruption)

MR ODRIA: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, I think that NEMA needs to be handled properly. The information I would like to give my colleague is that, if you look at Aqua World – I could say Pastor Kakande – the title that he holds was applied for and given to the person who applied for it in a day. In less than 30 minutes, the land title was transferred to Aqua World. 

MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I think the Government should stop massaging and being an accomplice in all these robberies of our natural resources –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo West County, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 17 November 2012, in a province called Assiut, Southern Egypt, a train rammed into a school bus which was carrying about 50 kindergarteners. Forty-seven of those schoolchildren lost their lives.

Madam Speaker, I am bringing this up so that we can borrow from what the Egyptian leaders or those that were serving the Government in Egypt did. As a result of that catastrophe, the minister in charge of transportation tendered in his resignation. The minister in charge of education also tendered in his resignation. The President then was Mohamed Morsi.

Back to Uganda, with this national embarrassment that occurs or continues to occur on a daily basis, why can’t our brothers and sisters, especially from the Government side, do the honourable thing? This is a Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, not a lamentation house.

Madam Speaker, the world and this country is sick and tired of nothingness, idleness and emptiness. People have heard statements coming from leaders and they want action. I concur with my senior colleague, hon. Okupa, that we need an overhaul and a check in our national systems. 

This is a national scandal; I ask that this Parliament moves ahead to recommend disciplinary action to those that are responsible for this national embarrassment beginning with NEMA, the lands ministry and those that were involved in processing of land titles in an inappropriate manner. All of us have applied for land titles and we know how long it takes. How can a land title take 30 minutes? 

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Kahunde comes up, I would like to clarify to the House what was defined as investment in the investment code of 1991. It says, “Investment means the creation of new business assets and includes expansion, restructuring or rehabilitation of an existing business empire”. There was no chicken roasting. (Laughter) 

4.38
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done as far as sand mining is concerned.

Madam Speaker, this House on several occasions has recommended that Uganda Investment Authority should always try to follow up the investors they give licences to. However, when you read the report, it is like Uganda Investment Authority never made any kind of follow up. A company licensed for sand mining finds itself doing fish farming; that shows that Uganda Investment Authority has not done anything. 

Madam Speaker, in Uganda, we have got many beautiful offices. We have got an entire unit in charge of monitoring and evaluation in the Office of the Prime Minister. However, you wonder, when you read this report, what the role of this office is. What are they doing? Today we are talking about sand mining in Lake Victoria, the other day we were talking about Karuma, Uganda Telecom Limited and yet these offices are fully in place.

Madam Speaker, apart from wetlands acting as breeding areas for fish, they also act as water catchment areas for different lakes and rivers. Recently, we received a report on the status of the economy and there was a complaint that there is reduction in the fish catch. This is because of decreased water levels in different water bodies that we have as a result of degradation and sand mining. It also interferes with the ecosystem, leading to extinction of different species within the water bodies around the country.

Madam Speaker, when you read the report, the committee ably says that NEMA has little money and has got very few staff. They gave an example of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute; she was saying something interesting.

MS KAHUNDE: Madam Speaker, there is an example of Wakiso District, which is very big. The committee reported that it has one environmental encroachment officer who cannot monitor all the different development projects within the district. I would like to request that as we look at making reviews within NEMA, let us also think of giving them more money so that they recruit more staff, in order to supervise the different development projects around the country. 

Madam Speaker, I support the committee’s recommendations. Thank you.

4.41
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to focus my presentation on the issue of investors and look at our economic reform programme, which we adopted decades ago. I will focus on opening up our economy without retaining amorphous structures.

Madam Speaker, on Friday we were in Lira where the traders were involved in a sit-down strike because the entire production value chain is now dominated by the so-called investors. They manufacture, distribute and retail. 

What we are picking from this report is that it is very urgent for this House to ensure that the kind of liberalisation we have is structured and we ring-fence, as a matter of urgency, the kind of jobs and the level of investment that we would like immigrants to engage in. Otherwise, our people are complaining of lack of jobs and yet we have jobs that are being taken by people who come in the name of investors and start roasting chicken, opening washing bays, among others.

The problem that is reflected cuts across sectors. If we focus on one area, we are going to have an oversight and the same problem will continue to reoccur. This is because you will only change faces but the way the system is structured and the kind of policies we have will continue to encourage abusers to go on with wanton abundance and recklessness.

Therefore, I appeal to this House to come up with specific resolutions that can be followed. There should also be a review that comes periodically so that we can see how much we have changed from where we are now and where we need to go. I thank you very much.

4.44
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done.

Madam Speaker, it is only in Uganda where sand is used in the construction industry. I would like to inform this august House that sand is a raw material for the glass industry. I have been listening to what is happening in Lwera - from the number of trucks to the ship that is ferrying sand - and I got very worried.

In 1997 when I went to pursue a course in India on small business creation and development, I was taken to a glass industry and that is where I realised that sand is a raw material for glass making. In addition, research indicated that Uganda has got the best sand for glass making. Madam Speaker, the issue that we are discussing here is bigger than what we think. The sand, which is being ferried through Kenya, might be a raw material which is being looted from Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you remember during the colonial era how our mahogany timber was looted. Up to today, when you go to UK, Japan and China, you will find furniture made out of mahogany from Uganda and other African countries. 

Madam Speaker, in addition to the recommendations that the committee has made, I would like to add that there is need to have an in-depth investigation into where the sand is being taken and for what purpose. We should not only look at the construction industry; let us go in-depth. 

In addition, these people and the countries, which are ferrying the sand, should pay Uganda. Ugandans have safeguarded this raw material. Although we use it for our construction, we have never gone underneath the water –(Interruption)

MR LOKII: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I would like to give you information regarding the importance of sand. 

All of us know that sand is used in the construction industry. Apart from that, the sand that leaves our country has a mineral called quartz in it, which is used for making solar panels. I think that is the reason why this sand is leaving Uganda. Therefore, we need to protect this mineral because it is a very vital raw material for making solar panels. Thank you very much.

MS BINTU: Therefore, either Parliament or the Government needs to undertake in-depth investigations. 

Madam Speaker, you know how we shall frame our recommendations so that we do not only stop at looking at the ferrying of sand but also go into details of finding out for what purpose this sand is ferried and where it is taken. It must be somewhere in a certain industry. Tomorrow, they will bring the solar panels and glasses here and we shall buy them expensively. My government has been agitating for value addition and we need to add value to this sand. We should not allow people to take it anyhow. 

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that in addition to the recommendations by the committee, let us include a recommendation, which urges Government or Parliament to carry out in-depth investigations to find out the purpose, where and who is involved in ferrying this sand, so that they can pay the Government. Ugandans need this money. Thank you very much.

4.49
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report that they have given us. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about desertification. We have got two types of sands. There is pit sand and river sand. River sand and pit sand are all used for construction of bridges, roads, houses and so on. However, it appears that the interest of these so-called investors is in pit sand. 

Pit sand is got from the removal of grass and tree cover. Once the two are removed, it will lead to desertification. We learned in Geography that we receive orographic or relief rainfall. Once the cover is removed, the amount of rainfall will also reduce. My dear friends, 20 years ago, areas that surround the lake basin used to receive a lot of rain. However, these days, it has gone. Desertification is fast invading us and this is my worry.

I would like to request NEMA to moderate the influence of the refugees from Sudan. These people have now gone on rampage and are destroying our trees in northern Uganda, especially in West Nile. The tree cover, the grass, the swamps and valleys are all gone. We are heading into a Sahara type of desert and we are scared of that. 

My point of emphasis here is about desertification. If we do not control the activities of these so-called investors, the area that surrounds Lake Victoria will soon become very dry. Thank you so much.

4.51
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. What you have done here is to open the eyes of Ugandans, especially this Parliament. 

Allow me to borrow the statement from my senior, our Speaker, who said that last week, some of the Government agencies have made Uganda a public toilet, and they include NEMA and Uganda Land Commission. How do you issue a land title within seconds? When Abala David applies for a land title, it takes three to four months or even a year but when it comes to a Chinese, who probably came here illegally, he is given one within seconds. These are realities. 

We should not be negotiating here, Madam Speaker. We must ask the Directorate of Immigration and Citizen Control to tell us how most of these Chinese came to Uganda - when most of them are here illegally. Ugandans are suffering and they are crying that there are no jobs. This is where the trouble is.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we all know that God gave us Uganda. If you read Genesis 1:28, it says, “And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea…” However, Ugandans are eating bones. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I am saying that we should not allow the Chinese or foreigners to come and take control of Uganda.

The other thing I would like to say is that anybody who has been mentioned in this report should be held accountable without discussion. In fact, if you are a foreigner, you should be arrested, taken to court and deported immediately. We should do this if we would like to save this country. If this is kisanja hakuna mchezo, we should not discuss but we should act.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we all know that this act of criminality is everywhere. If we do not act, our country will be in trouble. We shall cry and people will abuse all of us here because we never took a decision. Thank you so much.

4.54
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the committee for this good report. We are talking about Chinese investors, but I think the real problem is Ugandans who had been entrusted with the responsibility in the Ministry of Water and Environment, headed by Prof. Kamuntu, NEMA in particular. 

National Environment Management Authority is supposed to protect our environment - our swamps, lakes and rivers - and they have a law to guide them on what to do when they are going to authorise any investment in the wetlands. However, these are the same people who will issue land titles in wetlands when they know that they are not supposed to do it. These are the same people who know the distance from the lake and the area where you can invest and mine sand but they allow these people to go beyond the limit, thereby disturbing the whole lake.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, what we should concentrate on is to ensure that the officers who are involved in this crafty work are suspended. Parliament should go ahead and ensure that if the problem is with the law which is weak, we should amend and strengthen it. If the problem is that NEMA does not have staff and capacity to monitor, we should strengthen NEMA while making those at fault take responsibility for what they have failed to do.

Madam Speaker, as we talk here in Parliament, these people are mining sand. The minister who was supposed to have taken the concerns of Ugandans and acted to sort out the issue has done nothing. This is where we come to ask for responsibility from political leaders who are heading ministries because we are tired of this.

You could find that there are people with interests working together with the Chinese and they are part of the investment. While we are blaming the Chinese, they are actually the ones getting more profit from this and having bigger shares in this kind of dealing. I would like to ask Parliament to act on this. The committee should dig deeper and then we take action. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. 

Annex 7 of the report shows you that most of these Chinese miners do not have passports. They do not even have working visas and work permits. Therefore, one wonders how these Chinese come to Uganda. After the intervention of the committee, these Chinese were arrested. Where are they now? Have they been deported to their country? Most of this is still outstanding. 

We need a report from the Minister of Internal Affairs on what has happened to these Chinese. Why would people come to Uganda and leave at will? We should also look at the directive that was given to NEMA to ensure that these people are stopped from mining. We need feedback from NEMA within the shortest period possible.

Madam Speaker, you need to understand one thing; most of these accounting officers look at us like we are equivalents. Even when you call them to a committee meeting and you want to get information from them, they tend to undermine Members of Parliament. That is why we must take action on these accounting officers of these authorities so that they can perform effectively for this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will go to honourable Atat. What are you doing with the “elephant”? (Laughter)

4.59
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, dictates of protocol demand that she speaks after me. She is my commissioner. 

I would like to address myself to the issue of the ship. Since 2011, hon. Okupa and honourable Members of Parliament from Kamuli and Teso have been urging Government to ensure connectivity on the waters. It is absurd that we can go as far as licensing a ship, which is actually undermining our natural stature as a country. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport has the mandate to license any automobile, including ships, and this mandate is well stated in the guidelines of the Ministry of Works and Transport. May I seek the indulgence of this House, Madam Speaker; may I ask that the ship, which is transporting sand from Lwera to Kenya, be stopped immediately and the licence be withdrawn from them until what they should be doing in their mandate as operators on the waters of Lake Victoria is sorted out?

Madam Speaker, if you do research in India, they will tell you that if mining is done on a large scale and safety precautions are not well entrenched, this could lead to cancer and silicosis. That means that the communities around Lwera are at a high risk. It is very unfortunate that they are being exposed to such dangers, yet the benefits that they get out of it are actually very minimal.

In 2014, Madam Speaker, I was almost dying in that spot at Lwera. My vehicle overturned four times and I found myself in the swamp. Close to where my vehicle overturned and stopped, just a few metres from that spot, was a sand mining pit. I imagined that if my vehicle had gone that far, I would not be alive.

I know that there are many people who have lost their lives there because once they get accidents, their vehicles veer into these pits and people die. Imagine, people lose their lives over the negligence of the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Water and Environment!

Madam Speaker, may I therefore ask that the Ministry of Water and Environment names those officers in NEMA who issued the licence to Aqua World so that Parliament can take a decision on those individuals? I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Gonahasa comes up, I would like to say that according to the report, that company was licensed for ship building not for sand mining. Therefore, they are not doing what they were licensed to do. What they are doing is different.

5.03
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Bintu for getting what I was going to say off my paper; I do not know how she did it. I would like to say that it is great discussing sand mining but where does this sand go? When I was a child, Madhvani Company used to make glass in Uganda and they used the sand that we are now talking about from Lwera.

I would like to request that we stop sand exports because as far as I am concerned, sand mining with value addition would be a great opportunity for Uganda. We import glass from wherever we do. Ezzi Company is one very good company that imports glass. Maybe they are actually exporting our sand, making the glass out there and bringing it back and then they take the money back.

As Parliament, can we use whatever mechanisms are in place to stop the export of sand from Uganda because we need to add value to this raw material? –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the President has been emphasising the need for value addition. Actually, we adopted a policy that no minerals should leave Uganda unless they are processed. 

The Chinese are taking advantage of this sand to make fibre glass. Right now, fibre glass is the most expensive and durable technology because they produce the iron bars from fibre glass, which are superior to the metal ones that we have. Those bars are used for making flyovers, skyscrapers and also the railway gauge. Therefore, you can see how much we are losing as a country. I wanted to give you information. Thank you.

MR GONAHASA: Thank you very much for the information. I would like to re-emphasise that we cannot stop mining sand. We should mine it but we should also be able to identify real investors with whom we can do business. We could as well process all this stuff like fibre glass, which you are talking about, in the country so that we export more and save the money used for importing some of these materials, so that we are able to find funds for areas underfunded in our budget. 

I have a problem on overhauling NEMA. We had the Bonna Baggawale scheme, we changed the name to NAADS and we now call it Operation Wealth Creation. I work with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and we think there are still problems with this programme. How can we help these programmes to deliver what they are supposed to deliver without changing names or thinking that we are overhauling anything? I think the challenge is in making sure that what we have put in place works. 

A few days back, I was on the Parliament social media and we were talking about impunity and selective justice. I think we have a problem because we make some of the best laws in this region but we do not implement them. Another country borrows them from us and they implement them and they are now far ahead of us. Rwanda is an example of this; we know what is going on. 

For Heaven’s sake, make your kisanja hakuna mchezo a reality. I refer to it as “yours” because I do not believe in the way it is framed. Kisanja hakuna mchezo should be realised. Many of us are still playing around with it. I understand Kiswahili very well. Tusicheze; we play a lot. We make policies but do not follow them. 

We have the environment police but what are they doing? You can only get the police into action if you say, “KB has passed there”; they will all go out there. Let us get every institution of Government to make kisanja hakuna mchezo real. I would be very proud as a Ugandan if after five years we are also almost at a middle-income status. God forbid, but when we talk about it, it will be an embarrassment. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Cecilia Ogwal comes up, I would like to draw the attention of the House to Article 244(5)of the Constitution which says, “For the purposes of this article, ‘mineral’ does not include clay, murram, sand or any stone commonly used for building or similar purposes.” This is the route that NEMA is using to issue these licences.

Therefore, I would like us to invoke Article 244(6) which reads, “Parliament may regulate the exploitation of any substance excluded from the definition of ‘mineral’ under this article when exploited for commercial purposes.” I think it is clear because it is now a commercial purpose. (Applause) 

We are going to give the ministers time to speak. I am speaking from what I am seeing here. I think it is time to invoke this provision. The ministers will be answering soon.

5.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the opportunity to go through the report. There are very many important issues that have been raised in the report. The report depicts Ugandans as being very angry about sand mining and yet we have overlooked some of the very critical issues raised in the report.

I would first of all say that condemning the Chinese is the wrong approach. We should condemn the Ugandans who collaborate with foreign investors to exploit themselves. That is what our concern is. These foreigners owe us nothing. They come here to make money, be they Chinese, British or American. What hurts you and I, who are leaders, is the Ugandan in a high position collaborating with these foreigners to exploit Ugandans. That is our concern and we must come up with a position on that. 

I was most hurt by a story on page 33 where it was said that our own minister issued a licence on 4th May for the purpose of river dredging and yet it was supposed to be for Lake Victoria. That is wrong and that is what we should condemn. This minister must explain why the minister at that time collaborated with whomever to exploit Ugandans.

Secondly, the story told by the MP from Masaka of how within an hour she counted over 30 lorries ferrying sand is very serious and sad. If in one hour there were 30 lorries counted, what about in one day? What about in 12 or 15 hours? Remember that these lorries even travel at night. A lot of sand is being taken away from this country with impunity and there is no action being taken. 

If we are angry about what is happening, we must take action today. From this debate, we must come up with a resolution and give orders to Government to stop the process of sand mining until all these matters are sorted out, and the police must also move into action. (Applause) This is very important because it will show that we are angry and we are here to protect our own natural resources.

Madam Speaker, I am even angrier when it comes to driving climate change issues at the global level because it is the same ministry and the same sectors that we are condemning. That is why I earlier said that this Parliament must begin to get concerned about issues of climate change to protect our natural resources. 

We are being exploited because we do not know some of these things. Although I am an MP, I do not understand some of these issues. This means that we are being exploited because there are certain things that we do not understand. That is why Parliament must begin to get concerned about how we are going to protect our national resources by using the forum -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One extra minute for the Commissioner.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you. We should protect our natural resources by using the global forum now available to us.

Thirdly, I would like to interest Members of Parliament to read the water and environment sector performance report, which I am sure the Speaker has. I would like you to turn to page 111 of the report. It is clearly stated that there is conflict of interest in the ministry. Whereas there is NEMA, which we want to be mandated to monitor and control environmental matters and issues, there is a directorate in the ministry charged with the same responsibility. The directorate and NEMA are always conflicting and the ministry always sides with the directorate. This is duplication of roles, which we, as Parliament, must stop.

As a member of the Committee on Budget, I would like Parliament to lobby me so that we stop giving these people money. We must lobby the Committee on Budget not to give them money unless they restructure the department and they show that they can monitor and stop the exploitation of our resources. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On Saturday, I was having a chat with a friend and she told me that when we tabled that report, the movement of sand increased in the night. So, what hon. Kabanda saw in Masaka was little.

5.16
MS JULIET SUUBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My major concern is that, there is a health risk because of this sand mining. We see on page 25 that there are no toilets at these sites and yet these are commercial areas, and that means there is a high population.

When you look at the sand mining map, it is along Lake Victoria. This means that our water is going to be affected with cholera. Haiti has one problem that has ruined them for all their lives and it is cholera. If we get cholera in Lake Victoria, it means that Uganda will be wiped off the world map. 

We are looking at the small investors who are sneaking into our country. Just imagine, what if we get an outbreak of cholera in Lake Victoria, we shall lose all the investors that we have and we shall not gain anything. Therefore, this is bigger than we think - sand mining in this country. 

This is too much for us. We have talked a lot and the committee has already done massive research. One of the Members was saying that the committee should go back and do more research but we have finished our research; we are giving in our recommendations. I beg that we act immediately.

Some of the Members were saying that when these people come to appear before the committee, some are so disrespectful to Members of Parliament. That is because we just talk but do not follow up on these issues. This is our time to act and to give accountability to the public. They think we are here only to talk. So let us act. Thank you so much for this opportunity. I beg to submit. 

5.18
MS KULANY CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank all the Members who have contributed. I want to thank the committee for this well researched work. 

I want to inform you that when the investors see any mineral anywhere, they come pretending like they want to do farming in that area. They buy the land cheaply and then exploit everything. Therefore, honourable members, we have to be careful about the type of investors who come into this country. 

In my district, for example, some people have identified where there is limestone. They meet with the local people and pay them peanuts and then begin mining limestone. What direction are we taking? What will our children use? They pay very little money and chase our people away. 

Even in the areas where there is strong murram, they have done the same. Honourable members, while you are out there, look carefully; these people come and buy the land cheaply and then begin harvesting our minerals and selling them. 

Madam Speaker, this is very important. Everybody should wake up and we must work for our children and the future of our country. Our children should find resources. Recently, I was in India and I found out that a resource like limestone is untouchable; it is strictly under Government control. However, here individuals are selling land at Shs 50 million and they look at that as something very important and they give away large chunks of land. 

Honourable members, we know that our people own land, but where there is a mineral, let us come in and support our people so that they can maybe partner with the investors so that they can get money. The investors can even go away and our children can use the same land later. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me invite the Minister for Water and Environment to respond to the report.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think we should start with the former Minister of Water and Environment, because in this report on page No.33, it is said that he used the Rivers Act to give permission to these people to use the lake. He is here and he can explain before the current minister comes up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the former minister was hon. Kamuntu. Please explain how you used the Rivers Act to issue a licence on a lake. (Applause)

5.21
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, I was Minister of Water and Environment and I am now Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Whatever was done, there is a principle of inheritance and it can be answered by the successor minister. 

Just as you have guided the House, Madam Speaker, I need to be given time to look at what I wrote and what I licensed. All I know is that there is nothing I did wilfully knowing that it is wrong; absolutely nothing! Therefore, if there is some wrongdoing somewhere, I need to be given the evidence for me to respond in detail. Otherwise, to ask that I answer a question that annoys hon. Elijah Okupa impromptu is not right. I want to answer in detail and I want to be given time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you access the Hansard; this report was presented last week. Get a copy and read it. Those were part of the findings. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, assured us that he was going to inform all his ministers about this. First, I want to thank him because he has consistently sat here up to the last moment; we must thank him for that. Despite his age, he has kept around. 

These ministers were informed to be around today. It is very unfortunate for a minister to come here and say he has been ambushed. We have been speaking about this. I think I was the first to raise this issue and then other colleagues, three or four, also spoke on the same issue. The reports are available on the iPads and in hard copy. Therefore, it is very unfortunate for the minister to come and say he has been ambushed. 

If he wants us to read for him, we can read for him what the committee findings were; unless he is saying the committee chairperson has lied. The committee chairperson is also here. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, read the Hansard and get the report so that tomorrow you can explain to the House how you issued that licence for a lake using the Rivers Act. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. You know, you can realise that hon. Okupa Elijah is very angry. Once you have anger, reason jumps out through the window –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is personalising this issue as if I issued the letter. This issue has been raised by a number of Members here, and that is the way I speak. 

I think it is not in order for the minister – (Laughter) - Let me phrase it in another way; is it in order for the honourable minister to impute that given the tone of my voice, I am out of reason and I have a bad motive and yet this is a concern about the whole country and not about Okupa?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Committee on Natural Resources carried out an exercise on our behalf and under our instruction. Among its findings was that issue that you gave a licence under the Rivers Act. So, it is not a matter for hon. Okupa; it is a matter for the House. Therefore, you will respond to the House as you are directed. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will respond to the House as I am directed. What I was observing was that –(Interjections)– I will oblige, but the licence I gave was not really for dredging sand –

THE SPEAKER: No, you will answer tomorrow. You said you have been ambushed and now you are offering an explanation. Organise yourself and come to speak tomorrow. 

5.26
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the committee for preparing a very good report. I have read the report about five times and I have internalised whatever suggestions have been made. I want to say that as a ministry, we sat down, looked at the report and we agree with most of the recommendations and observations made therein.

I also want to thank the Members of Parliament for their contributions. National Environment Management Authority may be having problems like all institutions in this country –(Interjections)– That is true. National Environment Management Authority is, unfortunately, constrained by lack of adequate staff -(Interjections)- Allow me to continue. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, it is true that all the work that NEMA has been doing has not been appreciated by people around the country, and also Members of Parliament. It is indeed true that you do not have enough staff and maybe you lack here and there.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the minister to speak as if granting titles in swamps needs adequate staff? Do you need adequate staff so that you do not grant titles in swamps? 

THE SPEAKER: I believe that the minister has the necessary legal framework, and that it should be what we should abide with, not staff. Please be serious because these are very serious issues, honourable minister. 

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that the Ministry of Water and Environment does not issue titles –(Interjections)- We do not. What I was saying, Madam Speaker, is that NEMA -

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to answer.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister started by agreeing with some of the observations and recommendations, which the committee came up with. However, he did not mention which ones they agree with and those they do not agree with. 

Secondly, he says that it is not the ministry that actually issues licences. Can you tell this House which ministry oversees NEMA?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let the minister speak. You are not giving him time to speak.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, I have been on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and we have been asking Uganda Land Commission to give us the list of the wetlands in Uganda, but they have been saying that it is not their mandate. That is on record. They say that it is the Ministry of Water and Environment to demarcate and give them the list of wetlands. Now the minister in charge of the environment is denying. I need some clarification on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What I can recall is that in the Ninth Parliament, we had directed the Minister for Water and Environment to bring the list of wetlands in Uganda and lay that list on the Table, but that was not done. Therefore, it is still pending in your ministry, but you go ahead and respond.

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that there is evidence that NEMA has been working. Sand mining activities in Lwera Wetland are now of a commercial nature and to-date, the extraction has been subject to an existing regulatory regime provided in the National Environment Act. 

National Environment Management Authority has been issuing impact assessment certificates and permits. Sometimes it orders some of these companies to back-fill the pits. (Interjections) Yes! In fact, most of these companies working in Lwera have been stopped from continuing to work. 

Madam Speaker, I am telling you that I have read this report five times. If the Members had read the report, they would have realised that NEMA had even taken some of these companies to court. The only problem that I foresee –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am really concerned about the minister’s statement that some people have stopped mining. I pass through Lwera on my way home. Honestly speaking, unless the minister has not taken time to verify what happens in Lwera - Even if you go there today, you will find lorries with sand. Where do those lorries get that sand from if they have stopped the mining? 

I expected the minister to say that since he has agreed with the committee observations and recommendations, action should be taken, rather than deceiving this Parliament that some people have stopped sand mining. 

The person that they have talked to, Pastor Kakande, is still continuing to mine up to today. Honourable minister, do not read PowerPoint reports from technocrats; go to the ground and practically find out what is happening. (Applause) I cannot believe that you can stand on the Floor and say that there is no lorry – Even today if you went there at night, you will find lorries carrying sand. I came from there over the weekend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this afternoon hon. Kabanda, who drove from Lwera, told us that she met 36 lorries leaving with sand and 27 going there within an hour. So, honourable minister, please, let us be serious; we need action.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move this motion, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that in this House, it is only you who cannot be a minister because you are the third in hierarchy in this country. Hon. Kyinyamatama can be a minister any time; hon. Okupa can be a minister because the President nowadays makes appointments across the board; -(Laughter)- even hon. Peter Sematimba can be a minister. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, after listening to the Minister of Water and Environment, I can conclude that he has been environmentally disastrous. If you listened to his submission, you can tell that he is actually a minister in distress. Even hon. Kamuntu, whom I respect very much, has been a minister in distress this evening. Therefore, I am moving a motion which is multiple in nature, seeking:

1. 	That we move a motion to censure these ministers so that they begin moving and others see this as a warning;

2. 	That we pass a motion of no confidence in NEMA so that they know that their budget is in trouble;

3. 	That we name and shame both the legal and biological persons, who have been named in the committee report, so that they are aware that nationally now, wherever they go, kids will be shouting “shame on you”. The motion should name and shame them nationally.  I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I was on the Floor. The reason I am concerned is because our colleagues in the ministry are our friends. However, when you see Members getting sentimental, then it is not a joke. They take it as if it is a light matter because ministers take political responsibility. 

This Parliament is a summary of Ugandans. If you do not listen to their call and take action, what will happen next? It is your responsibility to take action. Parliament just advises you and gives you a lead on what to do. However, if you respond like that, I do not think we are going to achieve what we want to achieve as a country. 

If you hear a minister saying he is agreeing with Parliament but no action is taken, what is going to happen next? This country is doing things with impunity. We are taking what we are talking about here today lightly, but the environment we are tampering with is so severe that it is even affecting the economic multiplier effect- (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Oboth gives information, join me in welcoming members of the National Youth Council of Uganda. They are up in the public gallery. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, colleague, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just witnessed the US presidential elections. The choice was between a crazy candidate and an evil one. The Americans spoke loud and chose the one whom they thought was crazy.

Madam Speaker, if we do not want to be taken as a club house, but as the Parliament of Uganda, we need to do the “Trump thing” in service delivery in this country. If Donald Trump was the Speaker and a Member of Parliament here, he would speak the same way hon. Jalia Bintu and other people have spoken here. They all said that we do not get value in donating our raw materials out of the country. It is high time we did some crazy things to get the right results. 

It is disheartening to see ourselves looking at the President every day and yet his supervisors are here looking at me. These are the people we can access all the time; of course, some of them are doing a great job. However, it is time to make them account for their appointments and not just to move in four-wheel drive vehicles and have body guards. It is time for them to be the people that we can hold accountable in this Parliament. 

I have been tickled by the mood here and the way we are proceeding. Natural resource is the only God-given resource we have. This morning, a clearing agent from Mukono called Joseph Katende asked me if we, as Members of Parliament, are aware of the sand they are clearing. He told me that sometimes they bring sand in pickups and they put it in containers. He asked, “Are you, Members of Parliament, aware where this sand is going?” In Uganda, we just give licences. 

The advice I, therefore, want to give my colleague is that we need to be relevant to this country and put the overseers of these ministries on their toes. Let the mood start today. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, be serious. These concerns are very serious indeed. 

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the impression that I am happy with what is happening in NEMA. I am unhappy. It is true that NEMA has its problems and it is also true that this country needs sand, but it should be mined in a sustainable manner. Some of these people who have been given permits went beyond what they were permitted to do. 

This report has opened our eyes to some of the problems that exist in sand mining. As I have said before, honourable members, as a ministry we want to stop all sand mining. We can even stop it immediately until some of these issues have been handled. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am not being callous. I have the interest of this county at heart. However, sometimes as a teacher, you do not condemn the child wholly; you also look at the good side and the bad side of the child but now, some of the Members here were trying - (Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, you made a ruling here directing the minister to be serious on these issues. For the last three minutes, - I have been timing him- he has not proved to be serious. Is he, therefore, in order to continue taking this House for a ride? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is probably because you were not here when we were presenting the report but its contents are very grave. So, please, address the gravity of that report. 

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, I have tried to be as serious as possible. My last word, Madam Speaker, is that I believe very strongly that something must be done to regulate mining in this country. I would like to pledge to this House that in the next few weeks, we shall put –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister was earlier saying that there is no more sand mining going on in Lwera. Within a few minutes, he said that sand mining cannot be stopped immediately – the same minister. The same minister had earlier said that NEMA is not concerned with anything to do with whether an area is a wetland or not. 

It looks evidently clear that the minister is not prepared. He comes and laughs and reads his text and we do not have a copy of what he is reading. We would wish to really file a copy of what he is reading but he seems to be having only one copy. This further shows that he was not prepared for the whole Parliament. 

Is it, therefore, in order for somebody who is not prepared to continue wasting the noble time of this august House? Is it in order? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the Minister of State for Minerals.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has told us that their eyes have actually been closed for so long despite the fact that this is kisanja hakuna mchezo. He has accepted that. He is not even sure what they are going to do or which action they are going to take.

I have a feeling that maybe we need to create a ministry in charge of destruction and place such ministers in it. (Laughter) One honourable member lamented that we are likely to have Sahara Desert here, but I have a feeling that it may not even be that; it may be called “Museveni Desert” or “Tenth Parliament Desert” if we do not take any action now.

Is it not procedurally right to proceed with a motion of censure against most of these ministers that are doing nothing? Let us censure them and teach them a lesson. (Laughter) I thank you.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the opportunity to go through this report and to also hear everything that the Members have uttered here. Before we move to invoke Article 118, – I think that is where you are directing the House - we need to also look at relevant provisions of the Constitution that do provide for the right to be heard. Let us give an opportunity to the honourable ministers to be heard conclusively. I would like you to note the word “conclusively”.

I would like to say that I find a problem with the submissions of the honourable Minister of Water and Environment. When you are giving a reply to a quality report of the kind that was submitted by the Committee on Natural Resources, your reply must also have the quality to rebut what is contained in the committee’s report. 

I would, therefore, request that as you are moving, you now separate the areas that you are concurring with and give your specific action as Government. Where you negative, you should also give an alternative. That is how I thought you would respond. However, from the manner in which you are debating or giving us responses, it appears as if you are not readily prepared to make statements that will satisfy the honourable members.

I would, therefore, request the honourable members to stay their pending action to invoke Article 118 and we comprehensively hear from our honourable ministers. That is my humble submission, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already said that I had wanted the Minister of Water and Environment to organise himself. Let me get the Minister of State for Minerals as the minister organises himself.

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Simon Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Article 244 of the Constitution confers all these minerals which are in water, under the surface, on the land under the control of the Republic of Uganda. The same article says, “For purposes of this article, ‘mineral’  does not include clay, murram, sand or any other stone commonly used for building or similar purposes.” However, it also says that Parliament, in its wisdom, will regulate and say which minerals are classified as minerals in this regard.

In 2003, they went ahead to enumerate what should be called “minerals” and they divided them it into two. One, they said that sand for building your houses and stones for building your houses are not regarded as minerals. There are then those they call “industrial minerals” used for commercial quantities. They say that for those purposes, the minerals are as follows: murram, sand, clay, limestone, granite, among others. They are there in the interpretation clause of that Act.

How do you access these minerals, including the sand, for commercial purposes? If you need it and you are looking for it, they give you a prospecting licence, which lasts one year, and you pay for it. You move around Uganda to choose an area for one year, and this is non-renewable. 

If you have specified where you would like to go to do exploration, that is, checking whether the availability of that mineral you want is there, they will give you an exploration licence for three years. You pay for the licences and also pay the rent of the land you have applied for, for the three years. If you succeed and you think you should mine, then they give you a mining lease. If you are a Ugandan who does not have a lot of money, you apply for a specific area of about 16 hectares and you get what they call a “relocation licence”.

When you are given an area to mine in and you are mining, this attracts what they call “royalties”, calculated on volumes that you have taken; there is a technical calculation. The royalties then go to Government - 80 per cent goes to the central Government, 10 per cent goes-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that information is good, but can you respond in relation to the report? Do the companies named have licences? Have they paid royalties? That is what we want to hear.

MR LOKERIS: What I am trying to say, Madam Speaker, is that those people do not have licences and they should not be doing that job because NEMA’s job is only to give permits. (Applause) We give the mining leases so that we follow the procedures. Even during the production time, we must be checking quantities and the depth so that we know. If there are any hazardous materials, we stop them.

What they should have done was to ask them, “Do you want to mine? If yes, go to the ministry responsible”. When they come, we would then ask them where they want to go and send them back to NEMA to get a permit of environmental impact assessment. That is what should be done. These sectors work together; they are linked.

However, it looks like there was a delink in the issuance of all these licences to mine sand, which is a mineral if used for industrial use. There was a factory for making glass in Lwera sometime back. When these people came, they knew they had hidden motives. If they had come to us, we would have said that you should put a factory there and then we now monitor how you make our glass.

We are not very happy as a ministry because the people who were supposed to give permits on environmental impact assessment allowed sand to be taken away. (Interjections)  Of course, it is the ministry. When it came to the House, we have come to tell you that they should stop and we follow the normal procedure of licensing for minerals. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Works to explain why he has not issued a statutory instrument to ban transporting of sand. This came with the Budget Speech this financial year. 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report on page 39 talks about the statutory instrument banning the transportation of wet sand. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development directed this during the Budget Speech of 2015/2016. Madam Speaker, allow me to inform the House that an instrument was issued by my ministry and I want to lay it on the Table. 

On the issue of licensing the vessel that has been used by Mango Tree, our responsibility as a ministry is to license all automobiles that move on our waters, roads and rails in this country. For us, we limit ourselves to issues of safety- Is it safe for transporting the cargo and transporting the passengers?

Madam Speaker, our responsibility of licensing the vessel that has been dredging was done. The issue of dredging is for another sector. As for the Ministry of Works and Transport, we license them to transport passengers and cargo on the waters of Lake Victoria. They were supposed to get permission for mining sand, as has been alluded to here by the Minister of State for Energy and Minerals.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the excess - (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, in the circumstances that the vessel, which they licensed for a different function is now mentioned in this circus of Lwera, what does the ministry say about this?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our responsibility, again, is to license automobiles that transport passengers and cargo. In this case, if we find this out, as the committee has done, in collaboration with our sister departments we can cancel or revoke the licence. That can be done when we are told by the Ministry of Energy that these people are doing something that is illegal and by NEMA. 

Now that Parliament has investigated and has come up with a report, for us we are going to act -(Interjections)- By the end of this week, we shall have acted. (Applause)

On the issue of the axle load, we are challenged on Masaka– Kampala Road. We have a mobile weighbridge; that is true. Members who ply that road know this.  However, the challenge is that when you stage a mobile unit at one point, these drivers collaborate and know where it has been staged, so they take some other routes. 

You know that road has so many roads that t-off and eventually end up in Kampala. It is an issue that we are discussing and one that we have noted, and we want to thank the committee for having come up with this concern. We are going to tighten up and see what we can do, Madam Speaker.

However, this road is one of the roads that have been lined to have a permanent weighbridge but that would also create a catch-22 situation. When we put the weighbridge in one permanent area, then they will dodge us in many places. Therefore, the ministry, through NEMA, has advised that we put up one that is permanent at a strategic place but also have one that is mobile to keep chasing around suspected vehicles that are carrying more weight than they should.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of negligence, as a ministry, through UNRA, we have our gazetted pieces of land, which are marked by road mark stones. These are the areas where we have powers to stop anyone that is doing an activity that is illegal or can affect the performance of a road. 

Beyond that area, we do not want to deny them. If we think that the activities are detrimental beyond that particular area that is gazetted for a particular road, maybe we can ask other departments to help us. However, for us as Ministry of Works, the area we gazette, especially after acquiring the right of way, is the only area that we are permitted to operate in and take action. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister, for complying with the directive of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, I would like to know who implements these statutory instruments.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The implementing agency is Ministry of Internal Affairs and enforcement is spearheaded by the police.

THE SPEAKER: On that note, I invite the Minister of Internal Affairs and then I will come back to the Minister of Water and Environment.
 
6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Before I answer the few questions which my colleagues raised, I would like to take this opportunity to thank this Parliament for having discovered sand as a natural resource of great value. 

I am saying this with due respect to Parliament because this debate has brought out the importance of a resource that we have been playing with; we have been unable to realise its value and importance. However, I am glad that the committee has come out and awakened us so that we now know that we should not play around with this resource. May we have many more returns of this so that other resources, which we have been playing around with, can be protected. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affair’s role as your servants - the lawmakers - is to implement the laws which are made. Specifically, I would like to refer to the issue a colleague raised, that the police should have stopped some of these activities. Yes, we should have, but within the laws that are available. When the police finds an investor, they will ask whether this investor has a licence. Once you have one, it becomes difficult for the police to say you should not continue with your activities. 

I would like to ask this Parliament to help us to consider a very comprehensive policy on investment with regard to who an investor is, where he gets the licence from and so on. At the moment, we have the Uganda Investment Authority where an investor reports to in the first instance and where they assess him financially. By the time he reaches the Ministry of Internal Affairs, he only comes for a work permit, which we give in accordance to the assessment that has been done by our colleagues in the investment authority. If we refuse, we will not be following the law. 

Therefore, I am trying to tell you that as far as the law is concerned, the police’s hands are tied to act in a certain way. However, if we want the police to act within a wider scope than that, then we change the law. 
At the moment, regarding this issue that my sister saw - many trucks moving with sand - there is no way the police could say these people should be stopped on the way. In our view, we need to look at that angle that was raised regarding the law.

There is a colleague who also raised the issue of the Chinese who were arrested and asked where they are. I did not exactly get the dates when they were arrested. However, our inspection department of the directorate arrests so many people, almost every week and every month, and some are deported. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, we have police officers and environmental police officers. We are not saying that the police who are doing normal duties should go and stand on the road and start arresting anyhow. The responsibility of the environmental police officers is to keep monitoring so that they know exactly what is happening. What is the role of the environmental police?

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, I partly disagree with your comment that once you ask for a licence and they show that they have it, you stop there. I will give you an example. If I have a licence to operate a shop on Kampala Road and I decide to put it in the middle of the road, will the police not stop me simply because I have a licence? You should be able to stop me. Therefore, I think what you are saying is partially not true. 

On the issue of the Uganda Investment Authority, if you read this report, it has been indicated that almost all these companies do not have investment licences. The only ones they have are the ones issued by NEMA. 

Coming to the Chinese who were arrested, if you read this report, it says they are 21. That is indicated in annex 7. The dates, names and the offences of these Chinese who were arrested for operating here are also given. Some were found without passports, some were using visitors’ passes to work. All this information is there. If you had looked at it yesterday, you should have been prepared to respond to it as stated. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister should also tell this House whether he has any environmental police monitors in Lwera. He should also address this House on whether those environmental monitors give him reports. If so, can he lay those reports on the Table tomorrow so that we know? 

The environmental police are supposed to detect that an environment is about to be degraded. Can you give us reports that your officers have been giving you if they are there? 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Beginning with the last one, the police have many departments and I do not receive reports from every department every day. However, I do receive a summary every month. We have reports from the Criminal Investigations Department (CID); from the traffic department on the accident situations on the ground; from intelligence that will give me reports on crimes. Do I have a detailed daily environmental report on my table? The answer is “no”. (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okupa alluded to annex 7, which is in respect of the information from the immigration department, which is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I am sure the minister knows that this information, which is from immigration under his ministry, is clear about who was arrested and who was successfully removed. Even the dates are here. 

I, therefore, do not know what the minister is telling us. I do not know whether he has the information. The information I am giving him is that this is under your ministry and, therefore, you cannot feign ignorance.

THE SPEAKER: I think what the minister should do is to require a regular report from the environmental police, because maybe he has not been getting it. I think you should ask them to brief you regularly.

MR RUHUNDA: I rise on a point of procedure –(Interjection)- It is directed to the Speaker. I am raising a procedural issue, Sir; I know why the General is uneasy, Madam Speaker. When you are leading troops and you see problems with your troops, of course you have to be uneasy. (Laughter) I think that is why he is not happy with me raising a point of procedure. (Laughter) Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Is the Member of Parliament in order to impute ill intentions in my mind -(Laughter)- which he cannot substantiate? 

However, I would like to inform him, and indeed the House, that I am not worried about my troops’ failure but rather the indiscipline of the Members who keep interrupting like children -(Interjections)- This is a very important House. (Interjections)- I rose on a point of order, therefore you cannot raise another point of order. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am worried about the indiscipline of some Members who keep interfering, to the extent that you cannot understand how this House is moving –(Interjections)- Don’t you see; this is the type of indiscipline. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed in an orderly manner. However, I would like to confirm that the General is in charge of his troops and does not look worried.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that that has been ironed out. 

The point of procedure I am raising is that after listening to the submissions by different ministers, as a researcher and also looking at their body language, I have come to the conclusion that actually, they have not prepared for this report.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, we are all aware of the authority of the Speaker in this House and we know there is only one authority that can make judgments on the preparedness of a Member or a group of Members. Is it in order for a Member to arrogate that role of the Speaker to himself and make such a judgment? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Minister, please proceed and do not allow clarifications unless I say so. (Laughter)

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. There was an issue raised by hon. Okupa and my colleague on the other side attempted to repeat it. I will respond to issues raised by hon. Okupa. I said we arrest many people in our departments of Inspection and immigration and I will have to find out exactly what happened to each of those people. 

If tomorrow was not just less than 24 hours from the next debate, I would say that I will bring that list with details of exactly what happened to those people tomorrow. Therefore, I will table it on Tuesday, next week.

Madam Speaker, the operational issue of the environmental police as raised by my honourable colleague still relates to the issue of the licences. The police, whether environmental or not, do not issue licences. They are issued by other people. 

If the environmental police go and find you in a wetland operating with an illegitimate licence, they are not going to pass judgment that you are in a wrong place. This is because they are not technical people to judge whether that is a wetland or not. They will have their suspicions but make a report and it is based on that report that we will, together with NEMA, find out whether that is a wetland or not. 

That is the method of work, which follows the law. We cannot just go and make a judgement that this is a wetland and therefore tell them to go away. You, the same people who make the law, will say we are operating outside the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am intrigued by what you are saying. Why did we set up the environmental police? What is their work?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Let us take the example of a wetland. If the environmental police finds out that somebody is building in a wetland, they ask that person, “Do you have a land title?” Probably, that person will produce a land title –(Interjections)- I am responding to the Speaker. Please, let us also have some kind of discipline – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister knows very well that it is the duty of the police to keep law and order. I would like to liken it to what happens here. We are the ones who make the law but do we keep the law? We do not. The police are mandated to keep law and order. Equally, when you talk about matters of environment, a different party issues a licence but the police helps to keep the condition of the licence. 

Is it in order, therefore, for the minister to make this House believe that he has run away from his responsibilities?

THE SPEAKER: It is difficult to rule on that one. However, honourable minister, it seems that your docket has forgotten the environmental police and is not using them and yet they should be reporting on many of these issues so that we take action.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you have ruled on the point of order. However, what I am trying to explain –(Interjection)- Let me finish this example. 

I think he has clearly brought out my point to the Members. If a policeman finds someone building in a wetland and he asks that person whether they have a land title and the person produces the land title, irrespective of how that title was got, the policeman cannot say that the title is illegal. 

What the policeman will do, based on his investigations, is to make a report to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the ministry responsible for NEMA and wetlands and say, “In my view, this title was improperly issued because I found this person doing what I think is not within the law.” That is where his mandate stops. 

Until he has been given clarification, he cannot arrest and stop anybody. This is what I am saying as far as the interpretation of the law is concerned. However, if he knows that – (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable minister that every permit for sand mining that is issued has special conditions attached to it. 

If I were an environmental police officer, for example, I would ask whether you have a permit and if you say “yes”, then I would ask to look at it. I will then look at the special conditions of the permit. If the special conditions say that you are not supposed to mine sand within the buffer zone of the lake and yet you are doing it, as a police officer in charge of the environment, I will say that you are violating your permit. The permit says you are not supposed to mine sand within 200 metres of the road yet you are doing it 30 metres to the road. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to the honourable minister. Your police officers are not doing what they are supposed to do. In fact, when we were in Lwera, we found the police protecting illegal sand miners. At the Aqua World site, we found environmental police officers guarding the people who were depleting the buffer zone of the lake. I just wanted to give that information.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the House agrees that mining sand should stop with immediate effect. What we expect from the Minister of Internal Affairs is how they are going to implement and enforce the directive, to ensure that there is no more mining of sand. However much assurance the Minister of Water Environment will give that there is no mining of sand taking place, we still need the police to be in place to ensure that enforcement is done. We do not want the stories you are giving us. What we want is action. What are you going to do as police to ensure that illegal sand mining is stopped in Lwera?

THE SPEAKER: I would like you to also tell us what you will do with this statutory instrument, which stopped the transportation of sand, and this is a Government document.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek clarification from the minister as to whether he is aware that even those who are transporting the sand right now are being escorted by the police, the same police that should be protecting the environment. 

I would like to put it to him that, now that we have given a directive that this sand mining must stop, as the minister in charge of internal affairs, will you take it upon yourself to give directives to those who are escorting the sand transporters and those protecting illegal sand miners to stop immediately? Would you mind taking action on that responsibility?

MR MUGOYA: I would like to add impetus to what my brother has just submitted to this august House. Yesterday, when I was leaving Bukulula - Bukulula is after Lukaya - at around 10 p.m., I met 999 patrol cars escorting sand transporters.

What I would also like to raise relates to what the honourable minister said, that they do not have a law to enforce this issue against sand miners. I find a problem with the Uganda Police Force both in practice and outside practice. Where they have pecuniary interest, they will have a law to enforce but where there is no pecuniary interest, they will not have a law to enforce. That is the problem I find with the police. 

Honourable minister, I would like to take you to the relevant laws in regard to the environmental sector. There are several that you can enforce. Look at the Evidence Act; it says you must take judicial notice of the existence of Parliament and its decisions. I do not know whether you do that as a ministry.

Honourable minister, I would like to put it categorically clear to you that your officers are primarily the key beneficiaries in this illegal business. Even now, when you leave Parliament, try to take a ride along Masaka Road, you will see and witness full participation of your officers. You must take immediate action. That is what Members are craving for. Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification -

THE SPEAKER: There is nobody on the Floor to clarify. Honourable minister, please conclude. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, since there is nobody on the Floor – [Mr Okupa: “The honourable Minister is on the Floor”]- let me - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. There are revelations in this report and what we need from you is to go and enforce the issues that have been raised here and then we will be happy with your department. 

I was taken aback when you said that you cannot stop them if you have seen the licence. You have applied preventive arrests elsewhere; it can also apply in this issue. Honourable minister, tell us what you are going to do to enforce this from the time we leave here. We will be happy. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, I do not know where I made the mistake and said that there is no law against – If I said that, then it must have been a serious slip of the tongue. 

What I said was that as far as the application of the law is concerned, if at a particular point the policeman cannot implement it, then he refers back to the authorities for clarification. We then give him directives from the ministries of water, lands on what the legal position is as far as that particular area is concerned. I was talking about the boundaries of areas not the absence of laws.

Secondly, I would like to assure this House that as long as there is something legal for us to implement, we shall not refrain from implementing it. This refers particularly to these regulations you have put here; we shall implement them to the letter. Where we have had gaps, we assure you we shall implement them to the letter just like we did in the recent operation Fika Salama on Masaka Road. You can now see people are “fikaring salama” in that area.

Generally, I would like to thank the committee for pointing out the weaknesses as far as our department is concerned. I would like to assure you that in a short period of time, we shall come back and tell you that we have closed those loopholes but within the laws which are available. Thank you very much.

6.37
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Madam Speaker, the ministry is going to act with immediate effect to ensure sand mining is regulated in this country. We shall stop all activities in Lwera immediately until they are all properly regulated. 

Honourable members, I would like to assure you that we are touched by what is happening in Lwera. One of the members of that committee told me that if I had gone there, I would have cried; I have tears. (Laughter) Therefore, I would like to assure you that we are going to act immediately. I would like to thank the committee for this very good report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in view of this debate, I would like an assurance that you are going to invoke Article 244(6) to bring a law quickly to regulate exploitation of these substances. 

First, I would like to remind you that Article 244(1) states, “…the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the Government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.” That is our property. 

As required by this Article, “Parliament may regulate the exploitation of any substance excluded from the definition of mineral under this article when exploited for commercial purposes”. 

I think we agree that sand is being exploited for commercial purposes. Therefore, we would like an assurance on when the law will come because we have already lost our sand to Canada and Kenya. We want to know when to expect the law because this is urgent, Mr Prime Minister. 

Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL, THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SERVICE BILL, 2016

6.40
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94(1) of the Constitution, and clause 4(b) of Article 94 and rule 110 empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under objective XI(i) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the state’s duty to give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development;

FURTHER AWARE that the importance of policies and programmes to promote young people is being emphasised at international level with the UN General Assembly calling upon all states, all United Nations’ bodies, the specialised agencies, the regional commissions and intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations concerned to make every possible effort aiming at cross-sectoral youth policies by integrating a youth perspective into all planning and decision-making processes relevant to youth (United Nation General Assembly Resolution 56/117, 19 December 2001);

CONSIDERING THAT the marginalisation of the youth from both formal and informal economies often results in high levels of poverty, which are then difficult to escape especially now that the incidence of poverty is highest among women and youth;

CONSIDERING FURTHER that it has been recognised internationally that national youth service programmes are intentionally geared towards supporting young people to access employment or self-employment opportunities and to help mainstream young people into the economy and development;

NOTING THAT in honour of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations International Youth Year (1985-1995), the General Assembly adopted on 14 December 1995 the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, by which programme the Assembly sought not only to make general recommendations but also specific proposals for action, such as those on the question of an integrated national youth policy;

TAKING COGNISANCE of the fact that unlike its sister states of Nigeria and Ghana, Uganda has not had in place a national graduate scheme policy nor legislation, thus lagging behind the level of youth competitiveness in the regional and international labour market;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
This House grants me leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, ‘The National Graduate Service Act’, a draft of which is hereto attached, and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Could you justify your Bill, please. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Most of us here, I believe, must have a brother, sister, nephew, niece or even a voter who has graduated and walked on the streets of Kampala to look for a job, for one, three or more year(s). This walking, sometimes, becomes almost a course and at the end of it, this young Ugandan is asked for experience.

This Bill intends to resolve this problem and empower Government to ensure that Ugandan graduates, fresh from universities and tertiary institutions are deployed in public and private entities for one year. During that period, this Bill intends to introduce a stipend; it is not a salary but a small allowance to keep one moving as they find their footing in the wide world.

This is going to act as a bridge between the study world and the working world. This is because it is a big challenge when somebody graduates and walks the streets for three years looking for employment. It even discourages other young Ugandans from studying. 

Honourable members, we need your support. This Bill is not coming from Heaven; other countries such as Ghana and Nigeria are already doing this. Even in Kenya they are doing it, although in Kenya it is not a law but a presidential initiative. In Kenya, they have started with one profession - ICT. When you graduate, they deploy or send you into an entity, whether private or Government for one year, and after that, another batch is sent in. 

The scheme has many benefits, which include providing for the youth –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion for the introduction of the Bill to place our graduates. We are fairly convinced about the Bill and right now it is not for the mover to convince us about the Bill. It is for the mover to convince us why we should grant him leave to bring the Bill, but not to belabour to convince us about the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for the mover of the motion to continue to explain to the House and the Members about the benefits or the good of the Bill, instead of explaining to us why he needs the leave of this House to introduce the Bill? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at this stage all that the Member wants is the authority of this House. If you agree that he should be allowed to bring the Bill for the first reading, then we can go into the details - the benefits and more. Now all you have to do is to convince Members to agree to give you the authority to bring the Bill, and then you come back for first reading. Do not go into the merits.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you for that wise ruling. Madam Speaker, I beg my colleagues to permit me leave so that we can go and get more details. In this Bill, there is even something that we call, “domestic capacity building” -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not go into the Bill. You have now gone back to the details of the Bill. Leave the Bill and just ask for leave.

MR MAJEGERE: I hereby beg for your support and permission so that I go and build up and enrich this Bill so that it can be debated. I beg to move.

6.50
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion. According to the information on the Uganda National Council for Higher Education website, there are over 280 institutions in this country. Among them, we have 105 private tertiary institutions, 52 public tertiary institutions, seven Government universities and 39 private universities. We also have 30 health institutions and 30 commercial, hotels, social development and cooperative colleges. 
   
As the mover of the motion stated, it is estimated that these institutions have 400,000 young men and women graduating every year. The World Bank statistics show that the unemployment rate in Uganda today among graduates alone is at 36 per cent. 

A search on the projects registered by the Uganda Investment Authority shows that Uganda has jobs for less than half the graduates we have every year. This means on a conservative estimation, Uganda can only employ 150,000 graduates every year; so 250,000 young people are unemployed after university every year. 

In his annual report in 2014 on local governments, the Auditor-General noted that there are a total of 18,347 vacant jobs at the district, municipality and town council level. Even if all these vacancies were filled, still little will be achieved in regard to addressing the unemployment situation in this country. 

We all know that the education system has not adequately equipped our young people with the relevant skills, knowledge and cultural values to deal with after-school life. In light of the above, although the high levels of unemployment may be as a result of lack of job opportunities, you cannot rule out the fact that our graduates lack the minimum skills or requirements to get employed.

A report by the Inter University Council for East Africa in 2014 showed that out of the total number of employers interviewed in Uganda, 37 per cent were satisfied with the graduates they had employed the previous year. This means 63 per cent of the employers faulted the employees, saying that they lacked the minimum requirements and were not properly prepared by their pre-higher institutions, these are the universities and tertiary institutions. 

As a result, the young people cannot find placement in the white collar job market and neither can they get economic opportunities for themselves in the informal sector. This state of affairs implies that our young people need an initiative that gives them a chance to enhanced quality and gainful employment and an opportunity to grow their ability and serve their country.

A national graduate service scheme is important for our youth because it will help them deal with their personal assets including character, connectivity, confidence and competence. We all know that employability starts by building the personal attributes of the young people for work and adulthood. It will also be an important springboard to introduce the young people to the very important practice of asset accumulation, stipends and savings. This motion will also help the Government. The national graduate scheme is also a double-edged sword in its initiative to instil patriotism in the young people. 

It will also be a good response to the unemployment level, which is at 80 per cent as we speak. It will also be a source of cheap labour for the very many Government projects; for example, in Kenya, 371 young graduates have been used to construct 118 dams and they are now going to use them to construct 200 police houses in Kiambu County.

The motion on which we seek to be granted leave is in line with key strategies of the National Development Plan to increase employment creation through fast-tracking skills development and harnessing demographic dividend; and reducing the number of young people not in education, employment or training by at least 20 per cent. 

We have grappled with the issue of youth unemployment for a very long time. I kindly beg this House to grant the mover of this motion leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill. I beg to submit. (Applause.)

6.55
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is one lesson I have learnt when it comes to seconding motions of this nature, so I will not waste time. 

I am now approaching 40 years of age and I have realised that this country has greatly grappled with the issue of unemployment. I have tried to check through the laws we have but there is no law to do with the issues we are seeking leave for. I have researched and come to realise that where this law is applied in the various countries that I have researched on, this law is helping them a lot. 

In Uganda, my former employer, the mighty Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), is trying to do something similar but the number of graduates going to URA to seek this kind of training is very big. Based on those big numbers, I realised that if this Parliament made a law that can even grant different sectors, including the private sector, the latitude to allow graduates to go and train with them for a year, I think the issue of experience will be dealt with and the issue of unemployment will also be tackled a bit. I believe this will solve a good number of problems around unemployment.

Honourable colleagues, I request you to join this team comprised of hon. Majegere, hon. Mpaka Mwine and I to write history for this country. Our children and grandchildren will remember us for doing this. I request this House to grant us leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The National Graduate Service Act.” I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have two supporting statements?

6.59
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Majegere and his team. This motion is so crucial for this country. We have witnessed that more than 40,000 youth graduate from the university but whenever these youth apply for jobs, the requirements include experience. I think this motion will help our youth to gain the required experience. 

I am quite confident that if we support this motion, the youth shall never be desperate. I, therefore, rise to support the motion. There is no way we can deny permission to hon. Majegere and his team to table this very important Bill for Parliament to deliberate on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us use one minute each.

7.01
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a country, at a time when we are facing a big challenge of youth unemployment, I rise to support this motion. 

Such a programme would actually go a very long way in instilling the right ideological outlook among our youth. The programme will also enable these youth appreciate the values of hard work and sacrifice for this country. To me –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have not spoken for long; please use half a minute quickly. The other Members will use a minute each.

MR GAFABUSA: To me, this programme is going to help us harness the immense energy that is hidden within our youth and is being misguided because of being idle due to unemployment. Some of this energy is being misused and misdirected by selfish individuals like politicians because the youth are idle and can run around the town and before we know it, we have running battles with the police. 

I strongly move that we all support this motion because Government has not come up with such an initiative where we have a law or legal framework under which we can support these youth in such a programme. I thank you very much.

7.04
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleagues for this motion.

This Bill has actually taken long to come because when you look around, the youth are the majority in our country. They are also the strongest and most vigilant, unlike the old people who dose in their offices. (Laughter)  We have really been misusing this energy.

I am very happy that hon. Majegere and colleagues are bringing this Bill. This Bill is also going to wash away the tears of our parents. You cannot imagine the feeling of a parent with five graduates in his or her house but none of them can even buy soap for themselves. We really need this Bill as it is going to do us a great deal. If as a parent I know that my children can buy soap, I will just sit comfortably and wait for them to have jobs. 

Madam Speaker, I am very happy and I pray that we –(Member timed out.)

7.05
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the other Members in supporting the motion seeking to grant the mover leave to bring the Bill to the House. There is evidence that the intentions of the movers are good. We should grant them leave to consult and benchmark with the success stories elsewhere that they have alluded to, so that we have something more comprehensive and well researched. 

However, I would like to caution because there seems to be a feeling that this Bill is going to solve the unemployment problem of Uganda. Please, it is not fait accompli. When the Bill is tabled and is successful, Government will be compelled to employ them for one year. They will actually not be employed but volunteering with Government where they will be earning something small and after one year, they will return to your homes and the streets and they will not have jobs.

Let us grant the movers leave to go and comprehensively research but the fight against unemployment and creation of jobs for our people should continue. I thank you very much.

7.06
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion.

I would like to report that since the mode of education in Uganda is more theoretical than practical for most courses, it would be prudent for us as Parliament to find a way of bridging the gap between the experienced and the non-experienced. It would help us to bridge the gap between the graduates who have fresh knowledge about doing things but do not have experience. That is why I support this motion. 

Secondly, it will help us set up stringent laws that will govern the employment sector in Uganda. I say this because of late, we have had some companies which exploit our youth, mostly the fresh graduates, in the disguise of probation. They have been on probation for over five years. If there are strict laws governing such practices, it will help us to curb such practices and help the youth to enjoy their rights as citizens of Uganda. 

However, I would like to caution the movers of this motion that –(Member timed out.)

7.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I definitely would like to join my colleagues in supporting this motion but I would like to seek clarification. 

It is good hon. Agaba here has also asked for clarification. I wonder why we do not call it the, “National Youth Service Act” so that we encompass all the youth because there are youth who dropped out after S.4 and S.6 and will not go to higher institutions to graduate. I would be happier if we widened it to encompass them all. I am bringing this up because -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now going into the Bill – 

MR OKUPA: I am just thinking aloud, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Just support the motion and then when the Bill comes, you can put in those ideas. 

MR OKUPA: Well, if that is the case, then we will give them support. I was working on something with Gen. Koreta - something near to a national youth service. So, if this can be widened, then we would have solved the issue. If that be the case, then let us give them leave to incorporate those issues. 

7.09
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion because once the Bill is considered and made an Act of Parliament, it will solve a very big problem, which is the colonial mentality that for one to be employed, they must have three years’ experience. I have not seen any advert anywhere for job opportunities where they are not asking for experience and this Bill will sort out this problem. 

Recently, interns in Mulago demonstrated because of lack of a clear legislation to regulate such services by the interns – (Member timed out.) 

7.10
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the movers of the motion. We have had instances where people use experience to close out the youth. They want to remain in offices where they say they are permanent and pensionable, so the environment is not competitive and those who graduate find it difficult to apply. 

Therefore, I believe that once we have this law in place, the young people will be able to compete favourably with these people who are 70 and 80 years who do not want to leave office – (Member timed out.)

7.11 
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues for bringing this motion. As Members of Parliament, we should allow them to go look for information because it is long overdue. 

This will help us to solve many problems. It will help us to link with the Government programme on the student loan scheme because so many of the students on this loan scheme are wondering how they will pay back without getting jobs. (Member timed out)

7.12
MS JENIFFER KYOMUHENDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Majegere and his team for this wonderful motion. I stand here to support this motion to seek leave to move a private Member’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, when you consider the number of universities we have and the graduates we are producing, it is necessary for the Government to make a deliberate plan for them to get integrated into life after school. In the absence of such a law and programme, it only becomes logical that any efforts towards that direction should be supported –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give her one more minute because it is her maiden speech. 

MS KYOMUHENDO: Madam Speaker, I would like know whether you have ever wondered what happens to Ugandans after graduating. Where do they go? Which industries absorb them? These are questions that all of us should put into consideration. I, therefore, support the motion. 

7.14
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are on record as the youngest Parliament in the history of Uganda. Therefore, we have to be ambassadors for our fellow young people who helped us to come here. 

It is on record that most of the people who go on internship usually end up getting jobs in those institutions where they do their internship. There are many job openings but people do not know. 

Secondly, these days even to apply for a Master of Business Administration (MBA), one requires some work experience and yet you cannot get a job anywhere. Some of the students who wish to go for postgraduate studies will benefit enormously –(Member timed out.)

7.15
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also support this motion and I have two points to raise. 

One, we shall be identifying special talents from these people. I will give you an example. We have a group called, “Resilient Africa Network”. These are youth who graduated from Makerere and were given an opportunity to invest in things which Uganda needs. Therefore, by bringing this law, we shall be identifying special talents.

Secondly, we have been grappling with this problem of “technical know-who”. I think through this Bill, we shall eliminate this problem and we will be opening opportunities for these people to be integrated into employment. Those are my two points. Thank you. 

7.16
MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion for many reasons. One of them is that, these interns that we want to find placement for have knowledge and skills like those who have experience of 30 or 40 years plus; this is going to help us fill the vacancies that are in various Government and private sector organisations that need experience of 45 years and above but cannot find them. 

Our largest population now is youthful, with 78 per cent being at the age of 30 and below. This will help us to get these youth have hands-on experience, making it very easy for us as a country to place these people in the right positions. Thank you.

7.17
MR OSCAR OMONY (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, we should realise that the percentage of young people in Uganda is high and our country can make good use of them. This is the time we can put them in institutions, equip them with skills and I believe we shall benefit from them.

Another thing is that it is not good for the security of this country if we leave the young people redundant. I think we will have problems in the future. So we need to help them get to these institutions and get the required skills that will enable them to earn a living in future. Thank you.

7.18
MS SHEILA MWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank my colleague, hon. Majegere and his team, for seeking leave to introduce this Bill. Indeed, you should be given leave to go and get information. 

It is obvious that we have churned out a lot of young graduates with new knowledge and it is unfair to always condemn our education and yet it has done well. It has put out people with new knowledge and actually, we seem not to recognise this. I would, therefore, request that we support our colleagues because these young people have fresh knowledge unlike those who have overstayed in those offices. They are ready to work and have both energy and zeal.

Secondly, it is also important to note –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, wind up.

MS MWINE: Whenever we put our institutions, ministries and organisations to task as to why they do not perform, the reason they give is that they have very low numbers on staff. Therefore, we should give our young people the opportunity to give their best to their country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not heard anyone speak against the motion; everybody is in agreement. The fuller debate will come when we have the Bill for first and second readings. 

I put the question that the House do grant leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Graduate Service Act” and that this House do order the publication of the Bill in preparation for its first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 09/01/2016 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS 

7.20
MS HOPE MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): “(a) Would the minister inform the House about the strategies Government has adopted to ensure that early childhood development in public schools, under which Government plans to spend Shs 1 trillion, does not suffer from poor quality like is the case with UPE programmes?

(b)	Would the minister inform the House on the strategic interventions Government has adopted and is implementing to improve the quality of Universal Primary Education in Uganda?”

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr J. C. Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to give responses to the questions.

Answering the first question, first and foremost the Shs 1 trillion that is being talked about is not yet reflected in the Ministry of Education and Sports Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). We do not have that money. However, Government is in the process of reviewing the early childhood development policy where the issue of early childhood development in public schools will be addressed. As for now, the Government maintains training of caregivers, providing guidelines for early child development and inspection of early childhood development centres.

On the second question, Madam Speaker, the following strategies have been adopted and are being implemented to improve the quality of primary school education in Uganda:

i) 	In order to strengthen and motivate the primary education teaching force, Government has been enhancing teachers’ salaries in a phased manner, beginning with Financial Year 2012/2013 up to 2015/2016, which translated into an increase of 50 per cent. This has resulted into a minimum of Shs 450,000 per month for a grade III teacher.

ii) 	Government increased the UPE capitation grant from Shs 7,000 per pupil per year to Shs 10,000 in financial year 2014/2015.

iii) 	Government, in collaboration with development partners, is also providing instructional materials to public primary schools across the country with a view to achieving a pupil to book ratio of one to one.

iv) 	Government also continues to regulate the pre-primary programme as a measure to prepare children for the intellectual requirements of primary school.

v) 	Government continuously conducts training of head teachers and teachers in the aspect of teaching methodology, management and accountability.

vi) 	Government has introduced a thematic programme which emphasizes teaching in themes and has also trained teachers in its implementation.

vii)	Government continues to conduct training of school management committees, which are supposed to oversee management and all that takes place in education institutions.

viii)	Government has continuously designed interventions aimed at improving the inspection and support supervision. These include, but are not limited to, providing facilitation to the district education office, providing vehicles and motorcycles for inspection; recently, we gave out 42 motorcycles to 42 districts.

ix) 	Government is also making a deliberate effort to create a conducive learning environment in primary schools by building classrooms and sanitary facilities.

I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary question, hon. Mukisa? There are no supplementaries. Okay, thank you, honourable minister.

Honourable members, we have concluded the items on the Order Paper today. Thank you very much for your staying power and input. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

 (The House rose at 7.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

