Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 20 November 2019

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to start with some sad news. We have learnt, with sorrow, of the death of the Chairperson of the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC), Mr Med Kaggwa. He collapsed in his car as he was driving to work this morning.

As you know, he has been a distinguished personality in the country. He represented Kawempe South Constituency, he was a Member of the East African legislative Assembly, and he also served as a Minister for the Presidency. He has been a big advocate for human rights. He always delivered his reports within the statutory period. He was a Special Rapporteur on Prisons and Conditions of Detention of the African Commission. He worked with the African Court of Human and People’s Rights and was also an Independent Commissioner of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). 

On my own behalf and on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, I convey our sincere condolences to the family of the late Kaggwa, to the Uganda Human Rights Commission, human rights advocates of Uganda and friends, both here and abroad.

Honourable members, his burial will be tomorrow at Mpigi. We shall be getting the details of the exact place. For now, I would like to ask Members to stand up for a moment of silence as he was an officer of this court.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been invited to participate in the Anti-Corruption Walk on Wednesday, 4 December 2019, starting at 8.00 a.m. at the Constitutional Square. The theme of the walk is, “Renewing the Fight against Corruption” and the slogan is, “A Corruption Free Uganda Starts with Me”. The chief walker will be the President of the Republic of Uganda. He will be using this opportunity to re-echo his commitment to Government’s policy of zero tolerance to corruption. 

Honourable members, as an institution, we have been at the forefront of fighting corruption. I, therefore, request you to turn up in large numbers to participate in this exercise. The staff have also been invited to attend. Your t-shirts will be placed in your pigeon halls by 1 December 2019 so that you are ready on 4 December 2019. Please register with the front desk at the South Wing by the close of this week so that we know the number of people we should support.

I would also like to bring to your attention the death of hon.  Jovah Kamateeka’s mother; she died last week. I again ask you to stand up so that we can honour her. Hon. Kamateeka has been a very busy person in the committees of this House.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two other matters. Last week on Friday, we had a symposium on the water and sanitation health programme here. I would like to thank hon. Jacquiline Amongin and the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) team of Parliament for the work they have been doing.

The team gave us alarming statistics about health facilities in this country. They said that there had been a study carried out in Mukono, Kampala and Wakiso districts on 63 health centres and the following were the findings: 

    a) 48.1 per cent of the health facilities did not have access to a reliable and quality water supply;
    b) 85.2 per cent did not have safe and private toilet facilities for the public. The patients have nowhere to go in those health facilities; 
    c) 51 per cent were visibly unclean; 
    d) 57 per cent did not have adequate hand washing facilities;
    e) 53 per cent did not have an efficient healthcare waste management system;
    f) only 62 per cent had conducted water quality tests; and
    g) only 30 per cent of the health centres had a budget for the maintenance of the healthcare waste incinerator. 

Worse still, we were told that we have been budgeting for supply of water but not for sanitation. I, therefore, ask members of the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Health to look out for that in the forthcoming budget. If we are supplying water without supplying where it goes, I think it is a problem for this country, especially at the health centres. I think we are going to make people sick, especially those who go for treatment because they might come out with other diseases. 

The other issue concerns something I said last week on the issue of Isimba Dam. I have heard what the Government has said but I would like to give them the following information, because I think that either they do not have it or they are just ignoring it:

First, the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) headquarters, in February this year, requested the Auditor- General to conduct a special audit on the procurement under MEMD/WRKS/2013/2014. The reference under CID is CID Headquarters GIF 8112018.

I would like to also draw the attention of the Government to the fact that there was an attempt to force the site managers of China Water and Electric to leave the country. That is how they came to me. They were being threatened and told to leave the country.

In addition, I would like to request the Government to establish the person behind the fictitious cases filed against China Water and Electric and the Attorney-General. One of the case numbers is High Court Civil Suit No.383 of 2018 - Disson Nsubuga, Berenado Ssajjabi, John Apogo, John Wafula, Okuni Owori, Adriano Okuni, Ali Kagoda, Celina Etapu, Rose Achieng Vs the Attorney-General and China Water and Electric Engineering. The purpose of that suit was actually to cease the work of the corporation. So they went to court under that suit and on 19 February 2019, a registrar hurriedly and ex parte issued the following order: No one should withdraw and transfer money from the following accounts – two are Uganda shilling accounts and one is a dollar account: 

    a) Account No. 9030010051109, Uganda shilling account; 
    b) Account No. 90300097664, United States dollar account; 
    c) Account No. 9030009766358, Uganda shilling account. 

All these accounts are in Stanbic Bank and the purpose was to stop the corporation from working. I would like to request the Government to take an interest in who was behind this. Who wanted them to leave the country before they could build the bridge? They wanted them out even before the commissioning! If the Government is interested, this is part of the information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to commend your effort, which has put you in a very difficult position as the chairperson and the Speaker of this House, to have to adduce evidence on a matter that came on the Floor of this House just last week.

Madam Speaker, I noted with deep concern that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Irene Muloni, chose to go to the Uganda Media Centre to respond to the Speaker there and yet she is a member of this House. The matters were raised before this House. Now, with that concrete evidence you have given, is the minister’s position still tenable, that she can say there is no worry and dismiss matters of public importance involving corruption with contempt, and she addresses them at the press conference? 

That is contrary to our Rules of Procedure in Parliament, particularly rule 221 that talks about contempt of Parliament. This is contempt in a sense that matters which ordinarily would have attracted an official position from Government are being taken away from the Floor of this House and discussed elsewhere.

As if that was not enough, the Speaker has now adduced concrete evidence - the account numbers and the gymnastics involved. This is a contract that was signed in 2013 and I read in the same press that only 20 per cent has been completed. However, you go ahead to rubbish such critical information brought to the Floor of this House about a person who is stealing from Government.

Rule 221 of our Rules of Procedure provides as follows: 

“Contempt of Parliament 

An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a Member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his duties or affronts the dignity of Parliament or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce such a result shall be contempt of Parliament.”

For you to try to pour scorn and to hold the Office of the Speaker and Parliament in contempt is a matter that cannot be taken lightly. It touches on all of us, Members of Parliament. In a way, we ought to protect and safeguard this only institution we have as Members who were elected by Ugandans. If matters of such a grave nature are not responded to here and people choose to go somewhere else to address them in the media as if to indicate that those who are talking on the Floor of Parliament did not have facts and were just on their own folly, I find that very contemptuous of Parliament. 

I demand that the honourable minister, who fortunately is around, clarifies her position on why she chose to respond to the matters at a press conference and yet they were brought up here. The repute of this House was damaged by implying that this House just goes on talking without facts. Now that we have the facts, can the minister sustain her position and come up to defend it? 

Short of that, I think this is the time that this Parliament must step up and not be taken for granted. We should investigate the matter and her motive in choosing to ridicule Parliament and to make it a subject of contempt, yet she had all the opportunity and time to come and present her case here as it was being awaited. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to clarify that I did not hold the Parliament of Uganda in contempt. I respect this Parliament, its head and colleagues. 

Madam Speaker, you raised the matter in Parliament last week and my colleague, hon. D’Ujang, was present and indeed he did communicate to you in writing. I was out of the country on official duty, but when I returned he updated me on what happened and what was pronounced in this House. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Isimba Dam, which is under construction, he put the issues in writing to you. I also asked my colleagues and the technical team that is supervising that project for information. The information was presented to the Uganda Media Centre, as we normally do every Tuesday after Cabinet; we update the nation on matters which Cabinet discusses. 

This was a matter that was in the media; all media was awash with news of the Shs 24 billion which had been stolen and there was no bridge. Therefore, there was need to clarify that as a matter of fact, the bridge is under construction.

Madam Speaker, I do not condone corruption. I am glad that you raised this issue and you have highlighted where these cases are being investigated. As Government, we will definitely be very glad to know the outcome of these investigations, so that appropriate action can be taken.

As far as the bridge is concerned, I had to update the public on what was going on. Cabinet was also updated on what was going on and that is how I ended up at the Uganda Media Centre. It is a routine, following the communication that my colleague made to you last week on Friday.

I would like to emphasise that I did not hold this Parliament in contempt. I respect this Parliament and that is what happens -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday after a committee meeting when I was on my way home at 4.00 p.m., I listened to what was relayed at the Uganda Media Centre on Radio One FM Station. In that report which was given, - we can always get the copies of the CDs – the minister actually ended up saying that no money has been stolen but those who claim it has been stolen know where the information is coming from.

Now that the Rt Hon. Speaker has ably laid out the evidence and has even quoted case numbers and accounts that have been frozen, can the honourable minister now tell us what she can do, in reference to this evidence which has been adduced before this House? At first, you said there was nothing, that it was only those who alleged who knew the source of the information. Now, the allegation has been proved with evidence.

Now that the evidence is here, what can you do in order to assure us, as the sector minister responsible for this activity, that you are going to have your legs down and make sure that not only the issues raised in the evidence given before us are followed, but that the bridge which you are talking about is up and running in terms of construction. I beg for your clarification on that.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the minister speak and try to tell us what she communicated at the Uganda Media Centre. In her communication, she is saying the bridge is under construction. The Parliament of Uganda should be hearing answers on why, at the time of commissioning the dam, the bridge was not constructed. 

One of the ministers in the ministry said that the bridge proposal is before Cabinet to consider the designs. That is confirmation that the earlier money was stolen. They have to present before Cabinet new designs. They have to present before Parliament new budgets for the same bridge.

We would like the minister to explain to this House what happened to the earlier money, now that she is around. What is going to happen is that from Cabinet, they are going to come before this House to look for more money to construct the bridge. They will look for more money either through a loan or the budget.

Can the minister assure us that the Shs 24 billion that was released was not stolen and it is somewhere, and they are not going to come before Parliament or Government to ask for more money for the same? Thank you very much.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the minister’s explanation. However, in the New Vision newspaper this morning, there is a report that Cabinet has rejected the position that the money for construction of the dam was stolen. I am quoting page 5 of the New Vision, which is a Government newspaper.

This project was being undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the minister who holds that docket is a member of this House. I wonder why, if the minister had the information that this money was not stolen, she did not come to Parliament and instead went to Cabinet to seek for collective responsibility. She knows that the position that Cabinet gives is what every Member of that Cabinet will hold because they have collective responsibility.

I, therefore, wonder whether the minister is giving us a position of the ministry or that of Cabinet. From what I read, it is Cabinet which came up with the position that the money was not stolen and that construction of this dam is at 20 per cent. However, what is the position of the ministry? Cabinet is not the one constructing this dam. It is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development constructing this dam. We would like to know from them. The minister is a member of this House and the matter was raised in the House; why should a minister run to Cabinet to tell her what to say? The minister is telling us what Cabinet said, not what is happening in her docket.

Therefore, we would like to seek clarification. Is the minister in charge? Is she giving us a Cabinet position or the position of what is pertaining on the ground, because it is her docket which is responsible for the construction of that dam? Thank you.  

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is good that the minister is in this House. The minister is aware that this is Parliament and we are addressed through Parliament; we are not addressed through the press.

These are resources of Government. We want clear communication and facts from the minister today in regard to this bridge, without any influence from anybody. I am sure that if we leave this to go just like that, tomorrow a supplementary request will still come to this House and they will want us to appropriate resources.

They talk about these bridges but in actual sense, some of them are not even worked on yet you find that we appropriate a lot of money. As Members of Parliament, we actually need to be doing a lot of due diligence and follow up this money; otherwise, we are left to appropriate resources and at the end of the day we do not see anything people do not feel any impact.

Madam Speaker, since the minister is here, I think this is the right time for her to give all the clarity that this House needs to ensure that this matter is put to rest. If it is not, then the House can take action in regard to a way forward.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today it has also been reported in the New Vision that the construction of the road has been taken over by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and it is now at 20 per cent. What I would like to know from the minister is whether in the original bills of quantities, the road was not part of the dam. We appropriated the money for the dam, which included the road. Now to cover up, it has been taken over by UNRA. So, which is which, honourable minister?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me confess that I think it is being built because of my insistence that they must comply with what was agreed in the contract. Otherwise, they were conveniently going to forget it, as they did for the bridge on Nalubaale. There was supposed to be another bridge joining Buganda to Busoga and they did not build it. We should have had a second and third bridge but all those – 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have listened to your detailed statement based on the subject we are discussing now. I have also listened to the response of the speaker. However, I am raising a procedural matter.

Yesterday, I carefully listened to the statement made by the minister on that subject. As a member of this House, I was extremely perturbed because the head of this institution was portrayed as a liar. This is because the minister in charge of the sector feigned ignorance about what the Speaker said in terms of the Shs 24 billion. Not only that, the minister went further to instruct or to say that the person who alleged the loss of that money should have known the procedure to use to follow such issues. So, as far as I am concerned and as a member of this institution, I felt let down.

I would like to know if we are procedurally right to continue discussing this matter. If the minister has now understood the details of the subject matter you brought out, can we first have the minister retract the statements she made yesterday, so that we know that the statement made yesterday was uttered in error, and we are here to forgive? For us to continue with the debate is as if we have exonerated the minister and she did nothing to portray the head of this institution as being a liar.

By the way, to lie in Parliament is a very serious offence. So, Madam Speaker, I cannot allow this House to continue debating as if a very serious offence has not been committed. Can we now start by disciplining the Speaker for lying or can we start by disciplining the minister for lying? We cannot proceed as if we do not know the right procedure. 

Madam Speaker, can you guide me because my seniority has not helped me. I need to be guided as to whether we are proceeding properly when such a serious statement has been made and has been captured by all the media, not only in Uganda but even across the world. Mind you, the statement was made against a person who now holds the presidency of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. (Applause) Therefore, you are not humiliating a fellow Ugandan who may be my sister, my brother-in-law, my sister-in-law or whatever it is, but you are humiliating a globally recognised personality born in Uganda. 

We cannot proceed as if we are not legislators. Madam Speaker, may I, therefore, allow you to clarify whether we are proceeding properly?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope the minister will be able to retract what she said. I would also like to say one of the people I worked with to vacate the legal order was the Attorney-General. I had to look for him over the weekend so that an application could be filed early on Monday before they took this money. I had to do that. So, if you still think that there is no problem, you let us know.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to speak as a lawyer and look at the law of natural justice. Hon. Muloni said she was not around. We are hearing that she made various pronouncements at the Uganda Media Centre. We are hearing of a lot, including the involvement of the Attorney-General to a certain extent. 

It is my plea that in order to have natural justice done and harmonise reports, we give her time so that she synchronises –(Interjections)– hold on, please - and then she comes and presents something to us. Thank you.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to applaud you for your indulgence in this matter. There is a tendency for technocrats to collude with contractors to make convenient passes and omit certain standards during construction in Government projects, for the benefit of both parties. 

Madam Speaker, we are very glad that through your guidance, you have brought it to light in this House that we need to do more as legislators in our oversight role in our various constituencies. We appropriate monies and we leave it at that - eyes on, hands off. At the end of the day, contracts are signed - for example road contracts even in the city – and you expect that walkways would be put there and they are not put there during construction and at implementation stage. Roads are commissioned but at the end of the day, you realise that a minimum of about 30 per cent has been swindled through this virement. In other cases, the contract sums are varied at different stages because the follow-up of Members of Parliament and other leaders is curtailed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to therefore applaud you for this. I would like to inform my colleague that such things normally happen. At times, you may know and at times, you may not know. You can see that the whole House has come out in a bipartisan manner to condemn the act. For sure, the Speaker of this House has done everything possible to see that the taxpayers’ money is saved. It would be a call of patriotism for you and the people in the ministry to stand up and say, “We take responsibility; this should not have taken place and it must not happen and we shall see to it that the bridge is constructed.”

Otherwise, if people lose confidence in every single project that is coming up and in all that has been done, that would not be good for the country and for investment. In future, no one will be willing to transact business with your ministry. Therefore, honourable minister, it is my humble request that your record is not tainted. The record of our Speaker and the outgoing president-designate of the biggest association of parliamentarians in the world should not be put on the line. She put her facts out clearly and she has not said you are the culprit. However, as the presiding officer of the ministry, you must take responsibility and put it in the best way possible so that people hold confidence, not only in your ministry but also in the Government which you serve. 

Also, those that intend to invest in Uganda or contractors-to-be must know that there is no room for having virements for convenience in order to profit without undue payment in this country. That is sending a big signal.

In order to respect the bipartisan debate that has been conducted in this House, I would like to appeal to your conscience, honourable minister, to come out and take responsibility and make sure that this bridge is constructed in time. Thank you.

MR ROBERT MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe I will need clarification from the minister at a certain time. I belong to the Committee on National Economy and last month, we were touring Hoima District and the neighbouring areas. We found roads and bridges under construction even before Parliament approved the loans for construction – actually before money was available. Therefore, a bridge being under construction is not evidence that money was not stolen. Money can actually be stolen while the bridge is being constructed. 

This is how the Katosi Road scandal started. The same applies to the Nile Bridge. Additional sums of over Shs 90 billion came here for approval and the reason was that there was under-budgeting, and we approved that amount.

However, if I understood the minister’s submission at the Uganda Media Centre, she called upon anyone who wishes to see the ongoing works to take a site visit for the said project. She advised that for any purported corruption case, let people, including Parliament, use the relevant authorities like the Inspector General of Government’s (IGG’s) office or CIID, among others, other than tarnishing fellow officers. I do not know who is tarnishing who. Madam Speaker, if I am to take you as the whistle-blower as far as this case is concerned, maybe you are the point of reference here and it is you tarnishing the name of the officer before us. 

Can the honourable minister, therefore, retract this statement so that we know that it is not a matter of who is tarnishing whose name, but for clarity? This is how the Katosi Road saga started. The other one was Shs 24 billion and this one is also Shs 24 billion. Can we know what is going on?

Ms JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that most of these ministers take Parliament for granted. It is high time that they changed their attitude towards Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we respect you and we know that there is no way you can say what you have not known or seen. For a long time in this House, when Members ask questions, ministers come to report what they have not gone to see on the ground; they just get reports from technocrats and that is enough for them to come on the Floor of Parliament. On many occasions, Members have refuted these reports because it is not what is actually on the ground.

I would have loved it if the honourable minister had personally gone to the ground and seen what was done before coming to report. It is unfortunate that she did not go. However, she goes to the Uganda Media Centre and utters such statements that are not good for a person of your calibre, Madam Speaker.

One, I would like that this House demands that the minister comes with an elaborate report stating the status at which that bridge is vis-à-vis the amount of money that was given. At what stage is it? Has it just been started simply because the House made an alarm? How far has it gone? 

I feel that –(Interjection)- Yes, you heard it because you were not there but it was a blunder because you are now blaming the Speaker. The House is demanding that you retract that statement; it is very unfortunate to tarnish her image. She has already told you how far it was in court. Therefore, we demand that you retract that statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I call on hon. Akamba, we have a number of children who are visiting today. We have pupils of St Joseph’s Kalangala Primary School. Can you stand up? They look very smart. They are represented by hon. Ssempijja and hon. Sekindi. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have teachers and students of Victoria Junior School, Namutumba. There they are; they look very smart. They are represented by hon. Paul Akamba and hon. Mariam Naigaga. You are welcome. (Applause)

We have students and teachers of Kampala Quality Primary School. Yes, they look like quality. They are represented by hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, to say that the person who knows should go to the IGG - I went to the biggest IGG in this country and that is the President, in March. Should I have gone to the IGG and said, “I have reported there but I am also reporting to you”; how?

MR PAUL AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to first of all thank you for bringing up this issue because it is a matter that you raised for the good of this country, to save billions of money that is apparently in the hands of some very corrupt people.

Madam Speaker, when you raised this issue, I vividly remember that you laid out the facts surrounding this entire saga. For the honourable minister to come out and try to tarnish your name, to make it appear that you are a liar, that you made unsubstantiated facts, and yet the honourable minister is not coming out clearly with facts to counter what you said is unfair.

Madam Speaker, this is just one of the many projects that are moving in a very funny manner. This House appropriates money and approves loan requests, only for the technocrats and other parties to enjoy. This is partly a weakness of the Committee on National Economy where I sit. One time I rose on the Floor and said that our Committee on National Economy has been reduced to a loans committee. I was then demanding that we should also execute our oversight and monitoring role but to date, that has not taken place.

A clear example is the specialised hospital at Lubowa. Members tried but see what is going on with that project. There are many projects where the country is losing a lot of money. The committee that is responsible is just comfortably seated, waiting to approve loan requests, which loans will be paid by our great grandchildren without any tangible work being done.

Madam Speaker, I demand that the ministry should clearly come out and substantiate or respond with facts on the matters that you raised as the presiding officer. I would also like to request that the Committee on National Economy be directed to execute its oversight role on the projects that it approves as a committee. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind the House that in the Ninth Parliament, we attempted to create an implementation sub-committee to follow up on these loans. However, a section of this House fought that proposal. It was led by the Leader of Government Business at that time. They are the ones who fought that proposal saying that the Speaker wants to become very important. It was not about the Speaker but about us following up on what money we have passed and what it is doing. However, it was defeated here.

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the years that I have known you, it is only today that your statements before this House have been cast in doubt and that is a very dangerous precedent. To get the Speaker of Parliament to table something in the august House that is being branded as lies tarnishes all our reputations. This is a very serious matter for the integrity of this country. 

I know the Speaker as a lawyer and by the time a lawyer tables a matter, he or she must have collected substantial evidence. Up to now, what we expect from the Speaker is to give us detailed evidence on this matter so that we do not get piecemeal information, so that we get Parliament to throw its entire weight to crack this kind of corruption.

We have seen a lot going on in the country because of corruption cartels. Many of these people are well connected right from the Judiciary, the Executive and the technocrats. Therefore, there is a very big crisis when we talk about corruption. This is not a small matter.

When hon. Nsereko stated how much we lose in these contracts, we can bear witness because, as you know, Madam Speaker, I am the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety. The killing factor in the country is these roads which are constructed and the designs are not being followed. This is because some people are diverting that money for their own selfish gains. It costs each one of us heavily because when we lose productive lives on these roads, it is the country that suffers.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this matter of Shs 24 billion is just a small matter but an eye opener which should make Parliament reassert itself, to ensure that we go deeper and look at all these characters who are involved in stealing our money. I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that we constitute a select committee and investigate this matter in detail.

MR JESCA ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel Parliament is not being given the due respect that it deserves. When the Speaker is attacked, the whole House is under attack. (Applause)

I do not believe what the minister said, that when she went and made statements outside she was still respecting Parliament. She is a senior Member of this House. She was a Member of Parliament and now she is a minister. If she respected you and this House, instead of going to address the media first, she would have sought an appointment with you if she believed what the junior minister presented before this House was not adequate. However, for her not to meet you in office for an appointment but just go and make statements before the media, I do not believe in that -

THE SPEAKER: Maybe she was directed by Cabinet.

MS ABABIKU: She will respond to that. Madam Speaker, you have laboured for this country; you have gone an extra mile to provide evidence, which you have given to the Members of Parliament. What I would have expected from the honourable minister is to get the detailed information you availed to this House and make use of it before making any statement against your word. It was not only against your word but all Members of Parliament as well. Now that we are debating this matter, I feel you should guide us because now it is your word against the minister’s word. It is our word against the minister’s word.

At this point I would like, for harmony, to say that if the honourable minister indeed said that you lied, for peace - If you said it, honourable minister, for the sake of Parliament, because the Speaker is the head of Parliament, withdraw that statement.

However, Madam Speaker, as it is our word against that of the minister, I feel it is going to be a problem reaching a consensus. We have a committee of Parliament, why don’t we direct the committee of Parliament to go and investigate all these matters and present a report? The minister is not conceding and yet we have our stand. I believe with this, we might not reach a consensus. Thank you, so much.

MR DAVID ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for allowing me to contribute. I would like to first read two verses from the Bible.

THE SPEAKER: Otyo (Laughter)

MR ABALA: Leviticus 19:11 says, “Do not steal. Do not lie. Do not deceive one another”. Verse 13 says, “Do not defraud or rob your neighbour. Do not hold back the wages of a hired worker…” That is basically what the Bible says.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter because it concerns money that was approved in the budget. There was a plan and by now this should have been done. Unfortunately, some people who are good at defrauding others are caught up. Even God is against what is happening on this bridge. God is annoyed as far as Leviticus 19:11 is concerned. We should not be liars.

Honourable members, the Speaker is the image of this House and the front page of this institution. To attack the front page, it means the whole book has been attacked and that is something very serious.

On behalf of the people of Ngora, we want to condemn this type of stealing. By the way, Madam Speaker, you used a very good word - the money was stolen and it was chewed by some people -(Interjection)- I am talking about what the Speaker said; do not talk about order here.  A week ago the Speaker told us that money was chewed. That is why for me as a Member of Parliament, I do not support any story outside investigating this matter. 

I support what my brother said that we set up a select committee and give them terms of reference so that within one month, they report to the House so that we are able to know. As we talk, the minister is saying the work is ongoing, but at the same time you can imagine story upon a story - the money was chewed, the matter is in Cabinet and the matter is everywhere. Therefore, it is a bit of a challenge. Therefore, we must investigate this matter and come up with a concrete solution to this problem because this is something very dangerous. 

I am sure this is the only place where Ugandans have confidence. That is why I would support not a committee of Parliament but a select committee that will be given an assignment to look specifically into this matter. I condemn the element of corruption and whatever has happened on this bridge. Thank you.

MS SYDA BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you in a special way for the revelation you have made to this Parliament. The information you have given is quite detailed and factual. I do not think anybody can doubt it.

Madam Speaker, we need close monitoring of these projects before, during and after implementation. The Committee on National Economy started monitoring all the projects funded with loans from the Eighth Parliament up to date. Madam Speaker, we have covered a few loans but the agencies that are supposed to come and present always have excuses and they do not come. We had planned to do desk monitoring by the end of this year but we have not received much response from the ministries and agencies. However, there are those who have been very responsive. 

The Committee on National Economy knows these projects right from inception. We analyse them and go through the specifications and we recommend them to you for approval. Therefore, the Committee on National Economy has the competence to follow up these projects and monitor them against the terms for which they were approved. However, the desk monitoring is not sufficient. We would like to be in the field more often than we go, but we have been curtailed on quite a number of occasions by budgetary limitations. Can we be allowed more funding for us to be able to carry out our role more effectively? 

I would like the proof of the pudding to be in the investigation of this project. I rest my case. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order that I would like to raise is against the Chairperson of the Committee on National of Economy –(Interjection)– No, the Speaker gave me the Floor. Is it in order for the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, after I raised a matter of national importance as a senior cadre of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), to come here and say that they need money? Did she have to wait for this to request for money? Don’t they have time? Is she in order to try to sway the whole Parliament and say that she is not funded?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the chairperson is aware that the Parliamentary Commission is about to sit on the budget. She is just giving us her indication because she knows that we are going to sit on the budget.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter is very serious. I would like to support calls by other colleagues that we need to have a committee that can monitor these projects or the loans. 

In 2014, we passed a loan request here to fund the Albertine Graben project, where there were supposed to be some technical institutes and roads constructed in the oil area. In Nwoya District, they were supposed to construct a technical school and it was under Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Up to date, they have only constructed a borehole. When I contacted the minister in charge of higher education, he told that they stopped constructing technical schools because the enrolments were low. We need to follow up on this; where did they take that money?

There are projects like the Karuma Dam project; we need to follow up on this. They could be leaving out certain things. I support that we institute a committee to follow up on this. As hon. Nsereko has said, these technical people are fond of putting variations in the documents and asking for more money and then coming back here, yet they have misused some. They use some money and deceive the minister and she may not even know. 

There are many projects under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development that are not running well. For every loan request that we get, we need to name a committee of Parliament that would be charged with the responsibility of following up these loans closely. Otherwise, we are tying Ugandans to debts and we shall become slaves when everything has gone to the hands of technical people and corrupt members of Government. Thank you.

MS ANNET NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. There is a trend that I have observed quietly, that is going on in this country and it is not good. Every time somebody gets up to complain about something that is going wrong in the country, they are intimidated, castigated and blamed. At times, people directly threaten you because you have said something and have seen something that is not going on well in this country. 

I am not surprised, Madam Speaker, that your doors are always open to all members of this House. When we go there to meet you, you give priority to these ministers and we, the backbenchers, come in later. I am surprised that the minister could not even take the opportunity to come to your office and first share with you for purposes of clarification before going to the media.

Recently, there was a minister who stood there when a Member from the Opposition side was raising an issue. The minister pointed at him and said, “You get out and mention the same things and you will see what I will do to you”. I wondered whether we were really in Parliament. These ministers think that they have big wings. There are those who came before you, honourable ministers, and others are still coming in the future.

Madam Speaker, it is really sad that a person of your calibre can be undermined to that level; first, by not seeking audience. If you had said something and somebody had not understood, what was wrong with them going to seek for clarification from you? Hon. Muloni is my very good friend but I do not think that what is happening right now and what is being debated here is good music to the ear; it is bad. 

Therefore, I would like to join my colleagues in saying that honourable minister kindly withdraws the statement with an apology to this House and we put this matter to rest. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

MR ANDREW KALUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is very interesting. My colleague here has just mentioned some of the points that we have been sharing. I would like to add to what she has said. 

First, the level of corruption in this country needs to be checked. If it comes to a point where the Speaker is the whistle-blower, then it means that things are out of hand. Madam Speaker, I am very happy that this is happening to you, that you are being accused of telling a lie. If the Members of Parliament who are under you were the ones giving such information, there would have been a lot of castigation. What you are going through now is probably what we go through in our committees when these people come to face us.

What is happening now is going to set precedent. We have people who come in the House and threaten other Members of Parliament and nothing is done. We have generals who appear before committees and say “you can report me to whoever you want” and nothing happens to them. We as your cubs - you being the lioness - are watching; they have attacked our mother and we are watching what is going to happen. 

As Parliament of Uganda, we should put our foot down on these issues of contempt of Parliament. If we do not stand and put a stop to this issue, we are going to continue being looked down upon. Nothing is going to go on if people lose faith in this Parliament. The issues of corruption that we are facing right now can only be curbed by Parliament. If we do not have the strength, mandate and courage to face these issues where a Speaker can come and say Shs 24 billion was stolen and the minister goes to the Uganda Media Centre and says, “Those who said the money was stolen know where they got the information.” -  The world is watching to see what Parliament is going to do to the minister. I beg to submit.

MR BENARD ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important issue, which will go down in the history of this Parliament to prove whether these three arms of Government are operating independently as enshrined in the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, you made that statement here in the House. That statement came in your communication, which is recorded on the Hansard. For that matter, it is an official statement. Just like colleagues have said, the statement you make in that Chair or the statements we make here must always contain the truth and nothing but the truth because we are here by virtue of having taken oaths. A statement made under oath being dispelled out there must attract maximum rebuke.

Mr Speaker, this is a ministry which hates the people of West Nile -(Interjection)- Yes! They have denied us power since independence. We are still in darkness. This Parliament approved $100 million to take power there and they have never done anything. Every time the matter comes here, the main minister dodges this issue. You may be surprised to hear that the money has actually been stolen alongside that one of the Kamuli Bridge.

Madam Speaker, we have a situation at hand, which we must deal with decisively. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has people who are – I do not know what I should call them - crooks. For any money which comes, whether it is a loan or something else, there is a percentage which they share. You may not be surprised to find that the minister who is dispelling this information might have shared in the loot. This is the moment for us to put this matter – There is even no need for us to establish a select committee. Imagine the Speaker appearing before a select committee. 

Let us resolve this matter in this House here. This is the time for us to prove whether this Parliament can bite or not. (Applause) Let us adduce the evidence. Madam Speaker, we request that the evidence you presented before the President be laid on the Table here. Yes, the Speaker can give us the copies of the evidence that she presented to the President. Let us put it here and we examine those statements on their merit. If we find the minister culpable, let us invoke the censure motion. It is long since I heard a minister being censured. That is when we shall prove that this is indeed kisanja hakuna mchezo. 

If a minister is appointed to work for this country, the minister must be seen to be working for the whole country. That bridge would help the whole country, not just the people of Kamuli or Busoga.

Madam Speaker, I propose that these facts be adduced before this House and we debate this matter openly on the Floor. Let us resolve and pass judgment while the whole country is watching.

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter before the House is a critical one because it touches on the very soul of this Parliament. It is too much to bear. It should have been somebody else, not the head of this institution. I do not know what has happened to our common values. Do we still have a common vision, mission, goal and objectives? 

Madam Speaker, this has become a pattern and trend; every person that tries to stand for integrity and accountability is attacked. I am the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and I have heard a lot of feedback from ambassadors. Ambassadors who are serving as the voice of their countries while doing their jobs here have not been spared either. Every time an ambassador gets to meet or interact with Ugandans to echo the positions of their home governments, they are attacked by the ministers. 

How do you do it? If you have an issue with an officer, the principle of common decency demands that you ask for an audience. You do not go to the media and begin attacking an individual.

Madam Speaker, the time and opportunity is now or never. This cannot be business as usual. We have to send a message saying “enough is enough”. We are going to make this “business unusual”. 

I would like to conclude, Madam Speaker. You have a seat of judgement. While we await a withdrawal from the minister, substantively I ask the House to consider the following: When investigations and observations have been undertaken and the report contradicts the position of the minister, I think it would be honourable enough for the minister to own up politically and say “I think I let down my appointing authority” and she should turn in her resignation. However, that will depend entirely upon –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that this is actually a racket. When you look at the law, particularly Article 159 on borrowing, it is to the effect that when we borrow, the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. 

Article 156 says that this money must be appropriated, meaning that once this money goes to the Consolidated Fund, it will only be removed by the minister for that matter. However, it is a racket. For us to focus on just one as a representative of others would be to miss the bigger point. To withdraw public money, you even need an audit warrant, which is issued by the Auditor-General. Under the ministry, the accounting officer even has a budget line. This was project money. As to how she helped herself with the money in this case, because she is the one who is the undertaker now, I think this also needs to be taken into account. Thank you.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, for evil to thrive, great leaders like you need to do one thing - keep quiet.

Madam Speaker, on this Floor, someone raised a scenario where taxpayers’ money amounting to Shs 5 billion was used to buy eight bulls. Mathematically, that means that each bull cost Shs 625 million, but everyone is quiet. The Express Highway, with four lanes, was constructed at US$ 430 million and yet for our neighbours in Kenya, who have eight lanes of the same distance, it cost them US$ 230 million.

Madam Speaker, we cannot continue to make corruption became our identity. Every time we fly out of Kampala, one question confronts us at the airport - Where are you coming from? Should you say “Uganda”, they will say, “What are you doing about corruption?”

Madam Speaker, only one institution is available to save this nation and that is Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will invite the minister if she has something to say. Members, all I can say is that this was intended to silence the Speaker and this House. That is the arrangement. Otherwise, my office is here and anyone who wants me will find me. Instead of coming to say, “Give us more information”, they go straight to Cabinet and bash the Speaker and silence the Parliament. This is what this was about. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with your last comment, that the statement that I made at the Uganda Media Centre was intended to silence you and the Parliament of Uganda. This was not the case. The statement was to simply clarify and give information about Isimba Bridge, which was the subject matter in the country.

Madam Speaker, if that statement angered you or the Parliament of Uganda –(Interjections)– I did not intend to silence you. The statement did not attack you; the statement was simply giving clarification on the subject matter. 

Madam Speaker, if the statement, in any way, has angered you and the Parliament of Uganda, I apologise. It was not intended to do so but rather, it was a matter of clarifying the issue. That statement was following the letter that my colleague communicated to you to clarify that matter. This same matter was presented to Cabinet, again to shed light on the issue. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate your efforts because you have been raising issues on all the projects that have been moving on and we have been responding. Even the case of the accounts that you mentioned and attempts by certain people to attach those accounts while demanding to be compensated for rocks on where the dam was built were all in the same direction. Madam Speaker, we are all moving in the same direction to try not to frustrate the contractor from proceeding with the work.

Madam Speaker, the clarification that I would like to give to this Parliament, which is the same information that I made at the Uganda Media Centre after presenting it to Cabinet, is to give information on what is happening on the ground.  

Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, developed the 183 megawatt Isimba Hydro Power Project as a national flagship project, which is aimed at increasing power generation in the country in order to support socio-economic development. The project was in two major components. The hydro power plant comprising the dam, turbines, power house and substations were all put together and called a plant. The second component was the transmission lines from Isimba up to Bujagali substation and the associated substations at Isimba and the required extensions at Bujagali substation.

This project was executed by China International Water and Electric Corporation through a loan from the China Exim Bank amounting to US$ 567.74 million. This project was intended to have the Isimba Hydro Power plant -(Interruption)

MAJ (RTD) GUMA: Madam Speaker, I think that this House should give sufficient time to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to go and mobilise her entire technical team and write a formal statement to respond to the issues raised by Members and the Speaker, so that the statement is brought here and we critic it.

Largely speaking, honourable minister, you have heard what everyone has said. Therefore, I think that in the order of natural justice and in view of the point raised by hon. Robinah Rwakoojo, it would be prudent to give hon. Muloni some time to go and write a report and bring it here tomorrow or on Tuesday next week so that we soberly -(Interjections)– Honourable members, this is my view and the Speaker will rule on it.

Madam Speaker, procedurally, I thought that would be more exhaustive and mature rather than the minister sporadically responding to issues raised by Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is reading a statement, which we do not have. Honourable minister, the statement you are reading is not before this House. I think you should go and respond to the issues that the Members and I have raised and report back. You can include what you have been saying, but please respond to the issues that we have raised but not at the Media Centre; you should come here.

MS MULONI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you,

THE SPEAKER: Can we do that next week on Tuesday? Okay. The Prime Minister wants to say something.

4.21
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Rtd Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me chance. I would like to add some information to what has already taken place. I am sure that the minister will come back with more information. 

The information on Isimba Dam that came to the Floor was like a time bomb; when the Speaker said that Shs 24 billion was “chewed” and that the President was informed about it - since March - that was a very big statement from the Speaker.

Since then, all of us in the Executive have been walking with our heads down - (Interjection) - you must be attentive. I am not going to talk to people who are inattentive. I speak simple English; am I going to speak 20 times? Either you listen or you do not. I am not going to speak many times.

Madam Speaker, that statement was like a bushfire in the country but it lacked one thing; if that statement had clarified  who “chewed,” the matter would have been very simple -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we appropriate money under Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is by a resolution of Parliament. If money appropriated by this House is going to be applied to any other use, Government must return to Parliament to seek for the approval of Parliament.

I am made to understand that this money had been used by the ministry even when it was for another purpose other than for which we passed the money in this House. 

Is the Prime Minister in order to create a standard and burden of proof on you, who raised the matter, that you ought to have gone an extra mile to point to a person and yet the money had moved from the Consolidated Fund for another purpose other than for which this Parliament appropriated it?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Prime Minister, if you wanted to know the names, you should have asked me instead of calling a Cabinet meeting. When I was speaking in the House I said that I provided the information and the names to the President –(Interjections)- leave the Prime Minister.

GEN (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, I was not allowed to finish what I wanted to say. Thank you, for giving me another chance –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle the Prime Minister.

GEN (RTD) ALI: Honestly, do we respect each other in this House? Isn’t this House with problems? You want to be respected but you do not want to respect others; is it fair?

How can you heckle the Prime Minister; whether you recognise me or not, you cannot do anything; I am the First Deputy Prime Minister. You should respect me because I am on the Floor. 

Let me be brief; the procedure in our Cabinet is that once a paper passes, that particular minister goes the following day to inform the country on the move that Government has taken. This is exactly what happened yesterday; the minister was wondering whether she should come here first or go direct to the Media Centre. It was agreed in Cabinet that the information was not new; it was common knowledge and the public was aware that Shs 25 billion was “chewed”.

Secondly, on whether the information should first be brought here and after it goes to the mass media; I do not think that Parliament would have stopped the minister. It would still have gone to the media.

Another thing that came up in Cabinet was that so much had been heard and the country lacked information. Now that the minister came with more information, where she says that no money was “chewed,” - that was different -(Interjection)- no let me explain, allow me to finish. What is my age, my age is my age. I am not going to share it with anybody; so, you should also respect your age. Everybody has their own age; why are you jealous of mine? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, it was a Cabinet decision; so, the minister should be spared. Do not hang her because she was told to go directly to the Media Centre to inform the country -(Interjection)- nothing can stop this; this can be disapproved, because if the money was “chewed,” the people must come out then the law takes its course. What the Speaker said has not passed; it is going to be followed up.

Madam Speaker, I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, is there anything you would like to add to what the Prime Minister has said? I think you had finished.

MS MULONI: I will on Tuesday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Your response on Tuesday; okay. Honourable members, let me invite hon. Ntamuhiira. He had a request to the House and hon. Ndeezi as well. There are two requests to the House.

4.31
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye): Madam Speaker, I move a request on the time to report on a directive by the House to investigate allegations of sex abuse of students by security personnel and allegations of mismanagement and abdication of duty by the Makerere University management. Those directives were given to the Committee on Education and Sports at the 2nd Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the 4th Session of this Parliament on 1 October 2019. 

Madam Speaker, the committee embarked on the investigations and has so far met six stakeholders. We note that the matter has a wide scope and crosscutting issues and thus, the committee is requesting for more time to conclude with the investigations and report to the House not later than 10 December 2019.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Mr Jonathan Odur rose) – Is it on that issue?

4.33
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are urgent matters that come to this House and it requires the decision of this House to help people who are out there suffering.

This chairperson has taken nearly two weeks without the committee sitting to process this matter. For about one and a half weeks, nothing has happened and yet this is a very urgent matter that affects the future of our students. The decision that should come from this House should help those students who have suffered.

It is on this ground that I beg to oppose; that this House should not be taken for granted. Tactics that are brought in to disorganise the House should not be accepted here because a decision is required. I beg to oppose that that extension should be given and this committee must report so that the House can take a decision. 

4.34
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. Whereas I would move with a little departure from my colleague first outgoing, I would like to invite the indulgence of this House and the Speaker in particular, to give a tight timeline to the committee.

This committee has been involved in meetings related to the subject matter outside the mandate of Parliament. They are eating into Parliament’s time and reporting time. They are here demanding for an extension but actually, I am aware that ever since they met the NRM Caucus, they have never met again – it is as if somebody outside Parliament is processing a report for them. So, they are meeting stakeholders outside the scope we expect of them. 

Can we give them a timeline that fits into the reporting time we expected of them, given the gravity of the matter, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in light of those allegations, I think I need to do a check before I make a ruling on the matter. I will give my ruling tomorrow. I need to check what has been happening in the committee. 

4.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a request to the House to extend the period of consideration of the National Social Security Fund Bill, 2018 by an additional 30 working days.

I beg to move that this House grants the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development an extra 30 working days, within which to finalise consideration of the National Social Security Fund Bill, 2018 and report to this august House.

Under rule 128, we were required to report within 45 days. However, owing to the scope of this Bill and the many parties interested in this matter – you know workers and many parties have an interest in this issue – we have been unable to complete the work as requested. 

Therefore, we humbly request this august House to grant us an additional 30 working days in order for us to do a neater job to the satisfaction of this august House. I beg to move.

4.37
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, the NSSF Bill is very critical for our voters because people are suffering there, when their money is lying idle and probably misused.

I agree with hon. Ndeezi but the issue of 30 working days will take us beyond Christmas. When you go for Christmas, voters will be asking questions. Therefore, I would like to request that this House perhaps gives the Member a maximum of 20 working days, such that by Christmas when we return home, we have answers.

People have their money; others are almost on their death bed but cannot access their money. My view is that we give them a maximum of 20 days and not 30.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My information is restricted to the NSSF Bill. We have done the consultations and right now, the draft report is on my desk; I am reviewing it. We should be on the Floor by end of next week with the Bill. Therefore, the Member should be -

THE SPEAKER: I thought you are working together. Are you not working together?

MR MUSASIZI: With him? No; he is not a Member of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! Are your committees not working together?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes; we are working together.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you have a draft?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes; the draft is with us. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the problem of 30 working days means they will report in the 3rd Meeting, which is a budget meeting. That is what it means. Half of the committee says you are ready.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development; I would like to draw your attention to rule 129 (2).

“The Chairperson of the Committee to which the Bill is referred or a Member of the committee designated by the committee or by the Speaker shall, after the motion for the Second Reading has been moved under sub rule (1) and seconded, present to the House the report of the committee on the Bill.”

At the First Reading, this Bill was committed to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. (Applause) It is the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development that will report on this Bill.

From the time you asked Members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development –(Interjections)– Wait, I am an old man. From the time you asked Members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the chairperson of the committee has been playing “hide and seek”. 

Last week, we were supposed to finalise the work on this Bill with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but he cancelled the engagement. It means this is a paralysis. I would like you to make it clear which committee is going to present the report. He says he has a draft of the report, which I have never seen. Who drafted the report? I was never there and I do not know where it is. If you think it is a personal report, inform this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this NSSF matter attracts two ministries; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic. The President even wrote to me about it. Maybe I will invite the two chairpersons of the committees so that we come and meet to harmonise how we are going to move because both committees have to have an input.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Bills are always brought to the Floor of Parliament and referred to a specific committee by you. I know this particular one is crosscutting. It would be in the interest of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to attend the meetings of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I see a situation where two committees are handling one Bill. Who is going to report? How shall we debate the report? I would have loved that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development hands over everything to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and then they report to Parliament. This is because the Bill was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development unless we are going to change it. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that I referred this matter to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Along the way, I also informed them that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has some aspects of interest and they should work together. However, the main committee is the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I have already told the committees to come and we look at those situations. You remember when we were handling the Public Finance Management Act; we also had, I think, three committees that were working on one Bill. It took time but eventually, they harmonised.

Consequently, I have invited the two committee chairpersons to a meeting so that we harmonise those positions.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been here updating us about a Bill that is under the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would like him to also update us on the status of the Local Content Bill, which was submitted to the committee and the time passed without them giving us a report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, what do you say on the Local Content Bill? 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true the Local Content Bill was referred to us. We have done the consultations and we have the draft report ready with us. The committee is yet to consider it and we will report to the House. This report will also come next week.

THE SPEAKER: That is an assurance from the committee.

4.45
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not hijacking any business and I would like to bring institutional memory. 

You will recall that the NSSF was under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It was around 2003 when the Minister of State (General Duties) in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is now the Deputy Attorney-General, came here and presented the issue of NSSF to be transferred from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Indeed, NSSF was transferred in 2003 - (Interjection) - I am giving you information; give me time.

When NSSF was transferred, there was an argument here. The Prime Minister then was the late Prof. Nsibambi and he said NSSF must move and it moved. Go and check the record. 

When hon. Rukutana became the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, he wanted to pick it again but we said, “You cannot take it back.” It could not go back because it had gone to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 2003. 

Therefore, the reason I got up to bring this institutional memory is because NSSF is about workers but it has money. That was the argument then and we said the institution to look after money is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is why that Bill would be rightfully sent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – because NSSF was transferred in 2003 to that ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why did the Cabinet allow the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to draft a Bill and bring it here? The Bill came under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. They could have done it but again, you have seen there are very many conflicts. It is good you have said you would like to meet the two chairpersons. I would, however, also advise that you also call the two ministers to be present. You recall the story because by then you were the Deputy Speaker. 

These are things –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, in the 10th Parliament, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought the Social Security Liberalisation Bill to this House. It was fought over and a report was tabled by the same chairperson, hon. Musasizi. The report was disputed and it was withdrawn because the two ministers were quarrelling over it.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is right to say whereas the two chairpersons could come to your office, the ministers too should harmonise and stop wasting Parliament’s time. The committee processed a report and it was on the Order Paper but they withdrew it after acrimony, which was very ugly. I would like to give that information as part of the institutional memory on this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much my brother, hon. Mpuuga. Even the Bill that deals with the regulation, you saw the crisis in which it was here. It would be better – you see, these chairpersons are going to fight for nothing. You are the one to be here to harmonise this with the chairpersons and the ministers. That would be the best way to go. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I should invite the Prime Minister because the Cabinet is allowing this to happen. One minister is pulling this side, another one is pulling the other side and Parliament is in the middle. Maybe I should invite the Prime Minister with the ministers and the chairpersons of the committees to see what to do on this issue.

4.49
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, we shall look into this confusion and report next week why this is happening. We never experienced this confusion before. I do not know why – we would have solved it.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to me after the Bill had been given a First Reading and he said that he wanted the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to participate. He wrote to me on that issue and then the President followed.

GEN (RTD) ALI: Maybe the best way forward is that you allow me to check, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.50
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, the matter for which I rise does not concern NSSF. Rather, it is a matter related to the issue I raised last week concerning the livelihoods of the people surrounding the lake.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that when this matter came up last week, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs requested for Tuesday to formally respond, in relation to a pronouncement on the date that they intend to open up Lake Kyoga for public fishing and also on the matter of consideration on the reduction of the boat size from 28 feet to 24 feet as this was a matter under review by Government.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, this august House was not able to sit but we are sitting today and in this House, I can see the Minister of State, hon. Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo present and he is very conversant with this subject. Don’t you think we would be proceeding well if we gave him the opportunity to respond on behalf of the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macodwogo, you know you have abducted the fishing industry, as a ministry.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Col Charles Okello Engola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue is not on the Order Paper. It was supposed to come on the Order Paper so that I can prepare myself and then come.

THE SPEAKER: We will put you on the Order Paper for tomorrow.

COL OKELLO ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I will be here tomorrow.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, a fortnight ago, you made a very clear ruling and directive to the Minister for Internal Affairs in regard to the attack, violence and humiliation of our leaders.

Madam Speaker, every time and every week that we meet, as members of Parliament representing the parties that are led by our leaders, this point keeps coming up. Tomorrow, I have a meeting with my leaders and this point will come up again; what did Parliament do?

Madam Speaker, you were crystal clear and you directed the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and give an account of what could have happened at Namboole Stadium. Would we be procedurally right to continue transacting business without feedback from the Minister for Internal Affairs to account for the police and security brutality that was occasioned on our leaders at Namboole Stadium? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me check. Is it on business to follow? If it is not, let us put it on the Order Paper tomorrow so that the minister can answer. It is a long standing issue. Let us have a few more matters.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure pursuant to rule 215(2). A Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety Bill, 2019” was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. We have interfaced with a number of stakeholders and we have also held a public hearing on this Bill.

However, we find ourselves unable to report back to the House in the stipulated 45 days. We hereby request for an extra 20 working days to be able to report to the House. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Twenty working days takes us to around 19 December 2019.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there should have been further justification as to why three more weeks are needed. What has been done, what requires to be done and when are our reporting lines? For the chairperson to stand and arbitrarily demand for three weeks from the Speaker is tantamount to an abuse of the due process.

Madam Speaker, since the 45 days are over, ordinarily a week would have been enough. It is more urgent than ever before that we have that report tabled before Parliament and an addition can only be a week, unless otherwise required or requested for.

In the normal processing of the Bill, an additional week would - Otherwise we are piling up work and it is becoming a habit for each chairperson, for one reason or the other, to continue asking for more time as if it is automatic.

Madam Speaker, I propose and move that you do not give an open or blank cheque. Let the request have some justification. In any case, an addition of only one week should be allowed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what is the rationale for the three weeks?

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, this Bill, being technical in nature, is very sensitive and multi-sectoral. We have to involve a number of sectors and agencies of Government to come to a common ground on very fundamental issues. Bringing all these brains together may require that particular time. I just pray to this House that you grant us an additional 20 working days so that we can do a fantastic job as a committee. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: In any case, you must report before the Christmas recess.

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR KIWANUKA KEEFA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a procedural matter under rule 215(2). Three matters were referred to the Natural Resources Committee: one is about Bulambuli where the House ordered us to visit. The other one is Buhweju and then Mubende.

We are still within the 45 days. However, on Bulambuli, the expectation was that we will just be visiting and then come back and report. However, our visit has brought up a wide range of issues, which we need to consider before we can report. This involves meeting a wide range of stakeholders. Therefore, on that one, we are asking for an additional 12 working days. 

For the one of Buhweju, the expectation has been that we report much earlier than the 45 days. However, it involves quite a wide range of issues to consider.

We have been working on it very hard - actually, we worked throughout the recess with the Members. However, there are a few more meetings that we need to hold and to write the report.

Therefore, on that one together with the one on Mubende, the committee is requesting for an extension of 12 days so that we report on 10th December without fail –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources is aware that the mines stopped being in Mubende when the district was split. 

The mines that we are talking about are in Kassanda District. Madam Speaker, I have continuously informed the chairperson to take note of the changes but he continuously insists to report on the matter as though it is in Mubende District. Is the chairperson in order to continuously defer the matters of artisanal miners in Kassanda as though they are coming from Mubende District?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he is talking about the greater Mubende including Kassanda, the old Mubende and so on.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the people of Buliisa brought you a petition two years ago and you referred it to the Committee on Natural Resources. 

To date, we have not had feedback and the chairperson decides to be selective in picking what he wants to process. It should be on first come first serve basis. Madam Speaker, can I request that the Buliisa petition is dealt with before we go for Christmas?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson and Members, the issues of artisanal miners are issues of Article 40 of the Constitution - these are economic rights of the population. I think we need to help them and give them an answer quickly. Otherwise, even on Christmas and New Year, they will have no money for their children - there is uncertainty. So, how many days?

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I have already prayed that we shall be able to report back by 10th December.

THE SPEAKER: On all of them?

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: And do not forget Buliisa. Pick it up if it is lying somewhere.

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: We had started on that but when we invited them at a point in time, they did not appear, so we thought they were not taking it serious. Now that he has mentioned it, it will be picked up.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, by the 10th December, come and report on all those petitions of artisan miners. Let us just have a few matters of national interest.

5.04
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue concerns coffee seedlings production and distribution. Since October 2014, the Government of Uganda has been distributing coffee seedlings to farmers.

I got some information that this programme is coming to an end but the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has not come out clearly to advise farmers on the next course of action. Secondly, there are so many arrears. The operators of nursery beds who have been supplying to Government demand Government a lot of money.

My prayers are that the Ministry of Agriculture should come out clearly with an official statement to guide farmers on the next course of action, regarding seedling production.

In addition, the ministry should come up with an updated status of the arrears of farmers who are demanding money and give us a plan of payment. It was supposed to be an Operation Wealth Creation programme but it has turned out to be a poverty creation programme. Most of these nursery operators borrowed money from banks and are unable to service these loans. Therefore, they end up selling property to service the loans.

Therefore, we want the minister to come up with a clear plan on when these payments will be made. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture should come with an update on the status of the continued supply of coffee seedlings and also the plan to pay the arrears that are outstanding in the coffee industry. You should come back to us next Tuesday.

5.06
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance under rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, last week, there was a fatal accident in Myanzi Trading Centre and two people died. After this accident, we gathered information that the driver was driving under the influence of alcohol. As you have been following, of recent we have had a number of accidents where some of our Members in this House have also been involved.

In summary, Madam Speaker, I would like the Ministers responsible for Internal Affairs and for Works and Transport to inform this House the causes of accidents in this country. As you are aware, this House in 1998 passed the Traffic and Road Safety Act with subsequent statutory instruments, which prohibited drink-driving and many other things.

Madam Speaker, in addition, I would like the Minister to inform this House what measures they have put in place to prevent accidents especially as we are approach the Christmas festival. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and update us on the status of implementation of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, especially, in relation to accidents. They should also inform us about the plans they have to manage the traffic and movement during the Christmas holiday. Let him come to us on the issue of the traffic and road safety by Thursday and the bigger one can come the other Tuesday.

5.08
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Local Councils (LCs) I and II.

Madam Speaker, recently when we were on a talk show concerning LCs that were elected, the complaints all over are that since they were elected two years ago, they have never been inducted. Some of them are working without even being given stamps or books. 

Madam Speaker, the result is that most of them are conflicting with the law. In Gulu Municipality, two LCs have been convicted because they made a bylaw and implemented it.

Secondly, the complaint of LCs is that their work is to assist police in maintenance of law and order. However, it seems the police is making them to do their work. They have to first detect crime, then when they report, instead of the police coming to effect the arrest and start the due process of prosecution, they ask the LCs to arrest the criminals.

When the LCs arrest these suspects and take them to the police, the following day you find them back and yet these are criminal gangs we are talking about.

In Gulu Municipality, like any other place I believe, the LCs are living in fear. When these gangs are arrested and taken to Police and released, they come looking for LCs. I have about three LCs in Gulu Municipality who are now in hiding because they are running away from these gangs.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is first to the Minister of Local Government - is there a way of inducting these LCs on their duties because I believe there is a Capacity Building Grant being sent to the districts. Can they be directed to train these LCs?

Secondly, can the Police take charge of their work? The LCs are simply supposed to assist them not to take over the work of police. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that we hear from the Ministry of Local Government whether he has got plans to induct the LC I and II about their work. However, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should address us on the relationship between the works of the local councils vis-à-vis the police, especially in their local areas. They could come back to us next week on Wednesday.

5.11
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising is very urgent and it is of great importance. It is about the fake Lifeguard condoms that have been recalled off from the market. The National Drug Authority (NDA) wrote a letter to Marie Stopes Uganda dated 30th; informing Marie Stopes to recall a batch of Lifeguard condoms with serial Nos 19040205 and 19050105, which have been distributed in the market. 

However, upon testing, they failed to meet the test by failure of freedom from holes and burst properties. The distributed condoms are over 4 million and it is estimated that almost 1 million condoms had been used by Ugandans, including me. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the major concern is how did these condoms move to the market before testing? Who is liable to people who could have contracted sexually transmitted diseases; HIV/AIDS and unwanted pregnancies? One time the minister told us that men made babies vulnerable because they try to suckle the breasts. We try to prevent pregnancies but the issues of these condoms might not be of any help.

My prayers are:

1. 	The Ministry of Health should explain who is liable to the lives of Ugandans who used these condoms, including me.
2. 	How did these condoms access the market without being tested?
3. 	The Committee on Health should investigate what exactly happened. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, I see the Minister of Health here. Did you recall the condoms? If you did, are they really fake? Please, inform the Ugandans.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that condoms were brought to this country, imported by Marie Stopes as one of our partners. It is the National Drug Authority that later detected that the condoms were faulty but not fake particularly the two batches.

Allow me to come tomorrow with a formal statement because I do not have information as to where the problem was that resulted into the condoms going to the markets without any NDA detection. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The minister will come tomorrow with the statement.

5.15
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance regarding importing and exporting of gold through Entebbe International Airport. 

A huge consignment of refined gold was imported into the country by a company called African Golden Refinery Limited based in Entebbe. The value of the refined gold is about $309 million, which is about Shs 1.2 trillion. Half of that consignment was impounded by the Police Mineral Department Protection. Eventually, an order was issued by the Attorney-General to release them and they were re-exported. There are also reports in the International Media claiming that gold had been imported into the country from Venezuela and then re-exported.

In all these cases, taxes have not been paid but the issue is that Entebbe International Airport is now accused by those who are tracking the gold trade as a conduit for this suspicious gold. Can Government explain to Parliament about this consignment and the circumstances that led to that? In addition, we would like to know - after it was impounded by police; the Attorney-General issued an order for police to release the gold - the story of the Venezuela gold that is in the International Magazine tracking gold and the use of our airport as a point of money laundering. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, I see the minister here. I do not know whether she is in position to answer or she would like to have some time?

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we request that you allow us time to go and crosscheck the facts of hon. Ssemujju and then come back to inform the House next Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Tuesday next week.

5.17
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. It concerns Lubugo-Lyantonde Road, which has been cut off by seasonal rivers. Incidentally, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has been doing some road works. Instead of mobilising more equipment like excavators after rain had intensified, it demobilised the ones they had there. 

At the moment, it is a very serious challenge. The engines of motor vehicles and motorcycles have been damaged; and they are always carried like babies and in charge and children cannot go to school. 

My prayer is I would like to request the Minister of Works and Transport to prevail over UNRA and take urgent attention. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Works and Transport should address the issue of Lubugo-Lyantonde Road and give us an update next week on Thursday.

5.19
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance. You realise that there are eminent and people who have served this country in their different capacities. When they pass on, some of them are brought to lie in state. Normally, we talk about them before they are laid to rest.

As members of Parliament, we find it a challenge. I come from Ngora and I ably represent the people of Ngora. I lost an area Member of Parliament, who was born in Ngora representing the people of Soroti Municipality some time back. We had a lot of issues with the people.

Madam Speaker, as Teso community, we recently lost the former Minister of Health, hon. Max Omeda, who had served this Government in different capacities. It was a very big challenge to the community because they normally see when different categories of people are recognised by this House.

Madam Speaker, I would like to pray that the Minister for the Presidency comes to this House and clarifies to the nation on who deserves to be brought to this House and who is given a state burial. Doing that would help the Members. In some burials, people want to beat some MPs because they believe we are not speaking for them while for other regions, whoever served – maybe even before I was born – is brought to lie in state and they are accorded a state burial. We wonder why this is discriminatory yet our Constitution talks about equality.

Madam Speaker, can the Minister for the Presidency or Prime Minister come to this House and explain about who deserves to be brought to this House when he or she passes on so that the country is aware and some of the sitting MPs are not put on pressure by the electorate? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Amongin has brought up a matter over which I have been having running battles with the Government. In the Ninth Parliament, I wrote to the Prime Minister, seeking guidance. I know the sitting Members should automatically come but I asked about who else should come so that we can budget because it involves money in terms of feeding and transporting people. The Government refused to answer and they selectively bring some people and they do not bring others. 

For instance, Chebet Maikut was a member of this House and when he died, the Members came to me. I asked the Prime Minister and he said, “I will ring you.” He did not and they buried the man. Sarah Nyendoha, the first woman graduate in this country, died and I thought she would be brought here. I even wrote to the Government but no one answered. Today, when I heard that Medi Kaggwa died, I asked myself, “Do I have power to bring Medi Kaggwa here?” We know how much he did. 

The people say, “The Speaker does not like our people; she has refused them to come here.” The Government should help me because I would like to do the needful but my hands are tied.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think we have lamented enough in this House. It is painful when we lose our colleagues. For the recent ones that we have talked about – my sister there was humiliated. People were abusing her during the burial. That is what we subject our colleagues to because someone is not doing their work. 

I would like to propose that you take this matter to the Commission and we find out whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Prime Minister is going to reject the budget for us to provide for taking care of our colleagues who leave us. Parliament should take it up. 

Let the Commission provide a budget that every year, we are likely to lose this number of people. Let us have the money there. Good enough, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are members of the Commission. It divides the country when other people are brought while are not. 

Mr Omeda had done a lot –(Interruption) 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that the Government wants to tarnish the name of the Speaker. This is because people down there think it is the Speaker who has refused so and so and allowed so and so. There is money in the ministry in charge of finance, lying idle for “air projects”. Such money should be put such that when people go for mourning, at least they eat rice instead of the money disappearing into thin air.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not just about MPs but judges also. Are the judges of Uganda not entitled to be honoured?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Waluswaka because out there people think it is the Speaker that has refused. Let Members present their concerns on this matter before even the Prime Minister comes in. 

Each of us here has been affected one way or the other. For us in Teso we lost many people recently – Ekemu, Omolo, Omeda and Euku but none has been brought here. The worst case was that of Max Omeda. Hon. Moses Ali has the experience of how they were able to get to join the Government. Max Omeda was a peacemaker. He was able to convince his colleagues to come back home. He is the one who sent hon. Ecweru here to go and convince hon. Omaria to come back to this country from Kenya. When hon. Omaria said, “No, I cannot rely on you, young man,” hon. Omeda – because he had signed a peace pact with the President – went and brought other fighters who were outside there. How can we let such a person just go like that? The Government should really feel embarrassed.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, do you have something to say about this issue?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This situation causes a lot of sympathy. As of now there is no clear policy on who actually qualifies to be brought here. The Government has directed the Minister of Public Service to bring a paper quickly so that Government decides on whose body can come to this House and who can have official burial, state burial and so on. This is in the process and we also sympathise with such situations. In a short time, we shall come to this House with this policy.

THE SPEAKER: We have talked about this matter for very long.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Member who has raised the matter. The answer of the Prime Minister partly answers the issue. The policy needs to be customised. You may have VIPs or someone who has died of an epidemic that you cannot bring their body to Parliament. In my faith, it is very difficult to bring a person to Parliament. In fact, you will be violating my faith. For example, I do not think that if I died before lunch time you would even have an opportunity to bring my body here. 

The moment it is either official or state burial, it goes beyond the honouring of the person coming to Parliament. There are also costs involved. The policy will need to address the various faiths and circumstances under which people die. I request, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: One would have to take that into account. Let us close.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having heard from the different colleagues and the Prime Minister who said that there is no clear format in terms of who should lie in state and who should not, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Parliament to take this up and come up with a formalised way that is agreed upon so that when a Very Important Person (VIP) passes on, it is clearly stated? I wonder whether it wouldn’t be procedurally correct to do that since there is no formality the House -(Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you very much. I wish that you clarify because some of these dignitaries that pass on have been neglected and the Government is embarrassed to bring them here because when they were sick, nobody attended to them. An example is the case of hon. Max Omeda and many others. How will the House handle this because people who have served this country have been neglected? I know for example that a former Prime Minister is suffering and nobody is paying attention to him. Now assume that he passes on, why would you bring him here? Thank you.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, honourable member –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to guide the speaker on the Floor that this issue seems to be too broad and it might be difficult for Parliament to handle. Even if the Ministry of Public Service comes up with the guidelines that you talking about, implementation will continue to be selective.

I would like to suggest that Parliament, through the Commission, comes up with a mechanism of working out our own internal arrangements - what we call death insurance - as part of our medical insurance. This is so that even if a Member of Parliament has passed on when he or she is no longer in Parliament, the insurance mechanism that was arranged together with his or her pension can help the family to decently bury the person.

However, this must be our own scheme, worked out in a way that we are doing with our pension. We can broaden it to include funeral insurance, which we can start working on. I have seen it work in other countries and I think we may have to do it. Otherwise we shall continue to lament.

Honourable members, there is no way we are going to cater for our colleagues who are no longer in Parliament. We shall become too many and it may be difficult. Madam Speaker, I think we need to work out our own mechanism to deal with our colleagues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a big thing. How far back will we go? Should we go back to the First Parliament? Should we stop only at the parliamentarians? What about the Judiciary?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, you are right. Two weeks ago, Rtd Justice Tsekooko of the Supreme Court passed on -

THE SPEAKER: Justice Karokora also passed on. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Their causes were very shameful. For instance, the late hon. Max Omeda died of anaemia; lack of a pint of blood. Just a pint of blood would have saved his life.

Madam Speaker, Rtd Justice Tsekooko died because there were no funds to enable him undertake an operation in India. As hon. Jonathan Odur has alluded, for the country to rush for burial when we would have saved the afflictions to their lives is challenging.

Madam Speaker, like you have guided, we should have a national cause. When I travelled with hon. Tinkasiimire to Mbale to bury Rtd Justice Tsekooko, there were no representatives. The only message read, allegedly from the President, was on a mobile phone. It was very shameful.

Madam Speaker, we are all Ugandans and these things should be crosscutting. When one passes on, we do not pass judgement. We leave it to the deceased together with his or her God.

However, the selective way in which we are handling senior citizens who have served this country with distinction is lacking. Therefore, it should not be a question of waiting for a procedure from the Ministry of Public Service. This Parliament should task Government and a time should be given to them within which we should have a comprehensive policy. Whether it follows the order of precedence of a country - whether you are in Parliament, in the Judiciary or in the Civil Service, once you fall under this, you are expected to be honoured. That will save the image of this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Amongin. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia and hon. Ssekikubo. I think they drove my point home.

Madam Speaker, I think we should give Government a timeframe of about one month to come up with a comprehensive policy on who should be accorded a state burial. This will harmonise our dignitaries and those who have served in Government. 

In so doing, this will reflect well on the community and the country as there will be no selective process of picking who should be brought here and who should not. That is my prayer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we need a debate to lay the parameters of the coverage and what should be contained therein. It is really a difficult thing.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have been talking about this matter but it is the people in Government who attack me when I say that I am not allowing this person to come since it comes with costs. They go and attack me on the radios and say, the Speaker does not like our tribe. 

Honourable members, why don’t we have a debate and exchange views on the parameters? Minister of Health, is there any possibility of discussing that issue in the Health Insurance Bill?

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very much aware that the Ministry of Public Service has details on who is supposed to be given an official burial, although sometimes, a state burial is given at the discretion of the Head of the State.

I would like to suggest that rather than start from the blue, the Minister of Public Service could come here and brief Parliament. We can take it up from there and make our additions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a good proposal. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I can see the Minister of State for Public Service. We have been speaking but he is silent; he should say something because we would not like the Minister of Health talking when we have the honourable minister here. 

He should state where the thing has reached and how much time he needs; is it one week, two weeks or at most one month before he can bring this policy here. Otherwise, we can ask our research team to do some research on this matter. I am happy that he has come, let us listen and see.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Elijah Okupa has brought me to the Floor because the Leader of Government Business, the honourable Prime Minister had indeed briefed the House on the directive we were given at the Ministry of Public Service.

As it stands, there are guidelines on the serving officers as to who qualifies for a state burial and official burial. However, for former serving senior citizens who deserve a befitting burial, it is true we have been handling it according to the need and assessment.

Of course, Government has categories of workers where we have a schedule of specified officers. At first, we did not have a policy and for unavailability of funds, we have been meeting challenges. Now that it has been brought to the Floor of Parliament, the Ministry of Public Service would be happy if we considered it in an official way and provided funds for it. As a ministry we are requesting for a month because -

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable minister, you said that you already had a schedule. Can you bring it here so that we look at it and see what we can add? You are not going to reinvent.  

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, we have a schedule for the specified officers and the category is quite big –(Interjections)- it is easy; even tomorrow, I can bring it but as the Prime Minister said, to have the other policy and taking into account the submissions of Members here, we would request the House at least to give us a month so that we can have a good debate about the issue.

THE SPEAKER: That will be before 19th December because that is our last sitting day. Okay the week before we go for recess. 

MR KARUBANGA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding compensation of property lost during the wars in this country. You remember the wars of the triangle in Northern Uganda, where a lot of property was destroyed and got lost. 

It is hardly that you hold a meeting in Northern Uganda without having to answer a question on when are we going to be paid. There is animal compensation, which case was won in court and then right from West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja, Sebei and in Luwero Triangle. Up to now, we are asking; what policy is governing the payment of property destroyed in this country? 

Minister of Finance and the Attorney-General, there are many cases still pending in court, which have been won and which has been scheduled for payment; have we put some money somewhere to meet these beneficiaries who have won the cases in court?

It is becoming very serious in this coming elections; last election, it was a very difficult question to answer when we went for campaign rallies. This time, it may be a serious issue because it has taken so long.

People were awarded cases in Lira High Court and then it was alleged to be about Shs 4 billion. Now, some people have been paid and then the payment policy has not been fully understood. Some are complaining that they had not been paid well.

We pray that the Minister of Finance informs this House what policy he has put in place to pay for the compensations of cattle and other things; how much has been put aside to meet these obligations.

We also pray that if there is no money budgeted for this, why we can’t go for a loan like we have been recommending for a loan to pay this. It is not simple money. If we do not borrow, tell us how they are going to meet this obligation. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay but honourable Member, I do not know whether you are assuming that the minister of finance knows all that is due. Why don’t you mention the cases from Teso and Luwero; otherwise he is going to go on a fishing expedition.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister of finance knows who is to be paid. He should be the one to tell us; it is on record that in Lira, there was a case won by Dr Basasa. In Acholi, there was a case won by a group of court lawyers in Kampala and some payments have been made but not up to date. He should be in position to tell us how much has been paid.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you want proper answers, you should also provide proper details. You are assuming that he knows all the cases and that those were the only ones. Just provide some details; like this case was concluded and not paid, this one is still pending; so that we can get some answers. Otherwise, he will even say that he did not know.

MR GUTOMOI: You are right. Tomorrow this will be available. Thank you, very much.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON THE IMMINENT THREAT OF EVICTION OF RESIDENTS OF MPEEFU, KYATEREKERA AND NDAIGA SUB-COUNTIES AND LACK OF MODALITIES AND PLANS FOR COMPENSATION OF THE LANDLORDS

5.47
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; the humble petition of residents of Mpeefu, Kyaterekera and Ndaiga sub counties in Kagadi District over an imminent threat of eviction from their land and lack of modalities and plans for compensation of the landlords.

The prayers of your humble petitioners;

They pray that Parliament urges Government to expedite the process of compensating the landlords/registered proprietors using funds under the Land Fund.

The also call upon the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to issue certificate of titles to owners or residents who have been verified to have genuine claims to the land and protect them from interferences. 
 
Your humble petitioners as duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, appended, are the signatures of your humble petitioners. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think we should send this petition directly to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I do not think it needs to spend time in our committee. Let us send it straight to the ministry and ask for a report before we go for Christmas.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE 74TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY HELD IN NEW YORK, USA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Songa is not here. Were there other Members?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, we are members of the United Nations (UN). We noted, with concern, the absence of the sector minister at the UN in New York. The Minister of Foreign Affairs was not present and yet, he is a former President of the UN General Assembly.

We also noted that the President of this country did not attend and this is the top most UN meeting. We are concerned and, therefore, demand that a statement is presented to this House. For how long must Uganda’s chairs be left empty, yet just a few years ago, we were the President of the United Nations? Something must be wrong and is being hidden from us.

We, therefore, demand that as a matter of urgency, we shall be here tomorrow and I pray for your indulgence that a report be presented tomorrow. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you asking for the Government report or the report of our delegation?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, ideally, it would have been Government but the fact that the Government wants to play above the rules, we only have our delegation report. Therefore, we shall partake with the report of our delegation, where we shall make our demands.

Fortunately, the Leader of Government Business is here. From therein, we shall demand that Government now, having heard our delegation’s report, tables its own report as well. We shall use this as a vehicle, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is deferred to tomorrow for presentation.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 456,370,000 MILLION FROM THE EXIM BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE UPGRADE AND CONSTRUCTION OF NATIONAL OIL ROADS UNDER PACKAGE 1 (MASINDI-KASANJA/PARK JUNCTION, TANGI (PAKWACH) JUNCTION-PARAA-BULIISA ROAD, WANSEKO-BUGUNGU ROADS), PACKAGE 2 (HOIMA-BUTIABA-WANSEKO) AND PACKAGE 3 (BUHIMBA-BULAMAGI-IGAYAZA-KAKUMIRO)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the last time we adjourned this matter, it was for a reason. There was the issue of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Kasaija, promised to come the following week on a Tuesday. He did not show up. 

Last week, this matter was again raised. We have not got a response regarding the issues Members raised here. We have not seen him again because last week, he had been told to bring a report this week.

Before we proceed with this matter, Madam Speaker, could we hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the fate of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway regarding its financing? The issue of the financing modalities and issues of that road have been on the Order Paper.

Can we be briefed on what the minister promised before we move into this? Will it be procedurally right for us to move without that ruling and the guarantee the minister had given us on that day when we postponed these matters, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has actually been pending since September. Can we have some answers from the Government?

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have been discussing the issue of Kampala-Jinja Expressway at Cabinet level. This week, in Cabinet, we discovered that there were some issues on the process of procuring the people to work on it under a public-private partnership, vis-à-vis a combination of a private-public partnership and getting a loan.

We discovered there were some issues with the processes. The Inspector General of Government (IGG) has now been instructed to look into the matter. We hope His Excellency the President asks the IGG to look into this matter and that the IGG will be able to complete the matter before the process can resume.

We also considered a number of 18 roads, which were under the instruction of His Excellency, the President to be constructed and the list will be brought to this House in due course. However, in the meantime, we think that also given the importance of the oil in terms of the economic base of this country, we could go ahead and approve this loan, as we also complete the other side.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also thank hon. Bahati for endeavouring to defend the un-defendable. When we talk about the funding modalities of Kampala-Jinja Expressway and others, we are also being nationalistic. Honourable minister, do you think when we handle the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, we shall be segregative and only be realistic when we handle the oil roads?

Information reaching me – and I have data – is that there is even no oil. Simply say “roads”, not “oil roads”. Members gave information that there are some roads, which were started and contracts were signed before coming here. I think we are simply coming to wash the plates when people have eaten. It is even in the report.

I think we should first stay this one, so that Government organises itself and comes with the modalities of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. Hon. Bahati, as you go to the west, I go to Butaleja. Voters are going to ask us questions. Let us be nationalistic.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as a representative of the people of Butaleja and also a member of the NRM, for the first time on record, let us first leave this. Honourable minister, even when you look around, we cannot commit Government. We do not have quorum now; you count.  Quorum now is so tight; you see the Members.

So, even if you try, you have blockages today. Count us, honourable minister. That is my submission. They should not rush us. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the issue we are grappling with is the financing modalities for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, where they were saying it should be a PPP. They got a Chinese who is going to bring all the money or we also get a loan for it or it is a mix.
The issue the minister talked about was mainly on the procurement process. Can the minister clarify to us if they have agreed on the financing modalities that you are going to have like how African Development Bank had given us a loan of this amount so that the company that is going to come and do the road adds on a certain amount?

We know the Jinja-Kampala Expressway is sorted in terms of financing –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, you may recall when Uganda National Roads Authority published the companies that had been shortlisted and another time picked a company. The chairperson of the committee knows this very well. You know the dinner we had at the Kampala Serena Hotel with the World Bank’s team. The World Bank was ready to fund where they had a 51 per cent shareholders.

Of the companies that were shortlisted, there is a Chinese company, that they fronted, which did not qualify. That is the company that has caused problems and some people wanted it to be given the contract. That is where the problem of procurement arose because the company did not qualify on the first attempt because of the issues that had been raised against it.

As such, even the problem of procurement that the minister is trying to bring was created by them because the process had gone normally until when this Chinese company came, saying they could provide the money. That is when they said, “Please, let us halt the other companies because this other company is going to give us money and build the road.” That is where the problem is.

If people want us to spill some things that we know about this, we shall do so in this House. My colleague, hon. Oboth there, knows some of the things I am talking about. We shall spill them here. Let us not be taken for granted. Hon. Waluswaka here knows what I am talking about.

We are not stopping the issue of the Bunyoro oil road. We are also using this opportunity for the other road to be worked on. No one is against the issue of the oil road but this is the time we must get the Government – If we allow this, the issue of the Jinja-Kampala Expressway will not be worked on. This is the only way we are going to get the Government to assure us on the financing of the Jinja-Kampala Expressway. 

UNRA came here and told us that the road from Kampala to Bweyogerere will be eight lanes and from there, it will be six lanes up to Mukono. From Mukono onwards, it will be four lanes. All these things were covered. We are Members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we are privy to this information. Let people not fool us.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, like I told you last time, I can again stand on my feet and authoritatively tell you those Chinese were conmen. I have clear information that they have withdrawn. They could not get money. Some of us have information because we move beyond this country. 

There is no one who can come and say, “I will invest $1.1 billion and I will recoup through collecting money.” You can never succeed. I have information to that effect.

In conclusion, it is my belief that we should stand our ground until we are clearly given the financing modality of the Jinja-Kampala Expressway. We should not, however, also use it to deny Bunyoro what it is entitled to. Let me put it clearly. Bunyoro has also suffered like many other areas – the same way I am suffering in Mitooma. 

Therefore, let us use this opportunity to ensure that the Jinja-Kampala Expressway is catered for while at the same time, we support the Bunyoro on this issue.

6.04
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, you had given me an opportunity. I think we should be fair to the people of Uganda. Bunyoro is going to bring oil but Uganda Revenue Authority collects taxes as well. 70 per cent of the collection comes from the eastern route. If you know the customs collections, the greatest collections come from Malaba and Busia.

Therefore, if you are talking about the return on investment, the best return is the eastern route and that is the Jinja route. 

Madam Speaker, when you are going to construct a road, you look for what is called the “internal rate of return”. Where is the best return? I know Bunyoro will have a return but we are not very sure as yet. Where the return is high is in the east. Why do you then bring PPP in the eastern route, which has been bringing in 70 per cent customs collection and for the one which you are not yet even sure, you are saying it is urgent. 

The other day, we talked about roads. I would like Government to tell us how many new roads you have constructed from Kampala up to Karamoja. Show us any new road. When you do Tororo-Soroti Road, you are repairing what exists already. When you do Kampala-Jinja Road, you are doing what is in existence.

Let us count from Western Uganda: Ibanda, Isingiro, the Bypass, Rukungiri and the road that connects to Kasese. What are you talking about? What do you bring from there other than onions? (Laughter)
It is high time that today, we said this road should wait for ours. All of them use the eastern route when they are going to bring food from eastern Kenya. If you would like, then make them concurrently. (Applause) 

You see, there will be a crisis. If we decide to do this, the heaviest cars go to one side and the light cars go the other side. When the road is bad and we have a light car, accidents are easy. What we want to propose is – we are not rejecting the Bunyoro loan. We are just putting it on halt until it comes together with the Kampala-Jinja Expressway and if possible, the road should go up to Busia. Thank you.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from the east and therefore, I know how inconveniencing it is to use that road from here up to Jinja. These days, I go via Kayunga when I am going to the east. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS OPENDI: It is in our interest to also have the Standard Gauge Railway constructed so that our people can benefit. It would take me just one hour, if that railway line was working, to go to Tororo. 

Honourable colleagues, while in Cabinet, we also look critically at documents when they are brought. Therefore, what hon. Bahati has said that this matter was referred to the IGG’s office is not a simple matter that we should just brush off and just ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring here the financing modalities.

I would like to request this House to allow the investigations that have been sanctioned to take place; because there are issues around the financing modalities that had been presented to us in Cabinet. Therefore, we cannot say everything here and this is why I am saying that as mentioned by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this matter has been referred to the IGG and we expect the IGG to report back to us, hopefully in two to three weeks’ time according to the President’s statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, which of you does not travel in this country? I have been to Kitgum, Moroto, Mbale and Sironko among others. What is the problem?

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Bunyoro and it is until recently when these roads were being worked on. (Interjections) Yes, I was using the murram roads.

What I would like to say is that the roads are not being made for Bunyoro but are specifically made for the requirements of the oil and gas industry. Indeed, I felt perturbed when I heard hon. Waluswaka and an engineer who has always been briefed by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and who is aware that there are serious investors who have put money in this sector, to stand here and say that there is no oil in the Albertine Graven. We have got the briefs, there are technical reports and I suppose that statement fell short of our standard here as Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, Government constructs roads for a national cause depending on the economic viability. It is true that the east is the backbone of our country. It would not be proper to say that we stop the roads in Bunyoro, which are on the critical path of the production of oil until this issue, which is under investigation has been cleared.

We have just been roasting my senior colleague, hon. Irene Muloni here over allegations of money, which was stolen. It would not be good to move when there are issues. It would be better we wait until the IGG is done with the investigations and then we move for implementation of that Kampala-Jinja Express. I beg to submit.

6.13
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much. I come from Ngora and it is located in eastern Uganda. Every week, I pass on that road that we are talking about. I remember sometime back, hon. Oboth said that men are failing to “produce” in the morning because of the nature of the road. 

Secondly, my friend hon. Waluswaka, made it clear that he had not raised the issue regarding this road of Jinja-Kampala Highway; I am confident that Government would not be able to identify these problems.

The Minister of Works and Transport is here and she is actually a big person, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also around and all the responsible. However, they failed to identify that there was a problem when Parliament kept on raising matters to deal with the Chinese. I am told some Chinese now want to become Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to relay some details;

    1. What could be these issues that we are talking about? As Parliament, we should be able to know and Government should tell us. When we talk about the IGG now at this stage when we are talking about the funding modalities of the road, that becomes something very serious. That is why we are not going to keep quiet and wait.

    2. The minister was talking about oil roads. What is the relationship between oil roads and a Jinja-Kampala Highway in this arrangement? 

Madam Speaker, I am confident that I support the construction of those Albertine roads regarding oil. However, because of this as the saying goes, “East or west, home is best”, I would like to say that as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Ngora that this loan here, since there is an investigation on the modalities and procurement of the contractor of that road; my opinion is that let this one also wait and relax since we have been relaxing in the east.

The problem is that it will be bad manners for us to come tomorrow, God forbid for us to go and pick a dead person. Members of Parliament are getting accidents on these roads. For example, we are here appropriating money. A lot of money has been given to the Albertine region but not the other side. 

That is why we are concerned that this one in terms of this kind of arrangement; there is no equity. Since there is no equity, in my opinion, I would like to appeal to my colleagues here not to entertain this loan here. There are problems in the east moreover poverty is higher in the east as compared to any part of this country. It is on record.

Madam Speaker, this one I will not support and I would like to say that let the other one be number one and the next one is this loan. I thank you very much.

6.17
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All the time, we are rotating on oil roads. We appreciate the fact that oil is in Bunyoro. However, we are forgetting that before we get the equipment to reach Bunyoro, these machines have to pass via Tororo, either to Kampala to Bunyoro or Tororo the other side accessing Bunyoro. 

Therefore, the definition of oil roads has been confusing us here. Where is the heavy equipment going to pass to access the oil region? Are we going to fly this very heavy equipment? When we are talking of construction of the roads we must look at the roads that come from the sea where the heavy equipment is going to pass to access Bunyoro in order for us to get the oil.

Otherwise, just concentrating on only the ring roads there and yet the equipment is going to pass these very roads of ours, we shall be missing the point. Therefore, let Government come with a substantive position to construct all these roads that access Kampala in order to transport this equipment.

Roads from Tororo-Malaba via the north should be built in order to access the oil equipment to the Albertine graven. There, we shall have balanced the whole country and we would have all prepared ourselves to benefit. We will be happy and not have arguments here that are back and forth.

These roads are all needed for oil and they should be considered for us to get the first oil. I beg to submit.

6.18
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is important that this country works on Kampala-Jinja Express. The minister has briefed this House that there are issues regarding the contract of that project. He even went on to clarify that the IGG is going to give us a report in two weeks’ time.

We have been battling for credit in this Parliament, castigating Government that it is borrowing heavily. For this particular issue on oil roads, it is what we call strategic investment. It is revenue enhancement investment.

Therefore, the country needs to look at this issue strategically. Once we invest in these roads, we shall be able to get our oil and solve the problem of financial constraints. I, therefore, want to ask my colleagues to earnestly support this issue for the benefit of Ugandans as we also implore the Government to critically consider the issue of Kampala-Jinja Express. I beg to submit.

6.21
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the Members especially those who use Jinja Road.

I would not want the minister to misunderstand that Members are against the loan for the oil roads. It is not true. We the people from eastern Uganda are saying that we have waited for very long. 

When I heard that Government was going to work on the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway, I felt happy that since Butaleja is also in eastern Uganda, after that, Government would tarmac Butaleja Road connecting us to Mbale.

I really feel a lot of pain that the project has halted and Butaleja being the most productive area for rice, I thought that we would also add to the economy of this country if the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway had been completed.

I would like to advise the minister that maybe, he goes back to Cabinet and presents the position of the Members that we concurrently bring a motion for both the oil roads and the Kampala - Jinja Express Highway. I am sure the Members will be very supportive of that motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.22
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I have heard Members saying that most of the money is going to Bunyoro. In this case, we are not looking at Bunyoro as a region. We are looking at the infrastructure of the oil. Since we have oil, we need to improve on the infrastructure that is going to get that oil out of the region.

Currently, there are already modalities whereby the contractor is already working using his money and in this case, we are looking for money to pay because they have been asking when we are going to pay.

Therefore, this loan is about paying some of the money that the contractor has already spent. If they hear that we are now suspending the loan, they will lose the morale of working. These people are already putting in their money and the project is going on. Therefore, we are looking at formalising the modalities so that we can improve the infrastructure and be able to get oil from the ground to move to this area.

Madam Speaker, I agree that the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway should be worked on and we support the idea. However, we should also appreciate that the Government has worked on the different roads going to Jinja. Look at Kayunga and Katosi.

Madam Speaker, if the minister brings the issue of Kampala-Jinja Express Highway, we shall also support because we are in agreement. However, let us not stop the loan, which would make- (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should look at your geography properly. Let me just stop there. 

6.24
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate Government plans to work on the road in the oil region. However, like Members have said, our concern is about the financing modalities. This House passed a number of loans for construction of roads in the country. We are now wondering why for the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway, Government is saying it should be PPP arrangement.

Madam Speaker, the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway leads to Sebei and Karamoja sub region. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has informed this country that there are commercial deposits of oil in Karamoja sub region. They call it Kadam Basin. 

Just yesterday, the Minister of State for Minerals also informed the country that there are oil sips in Kween District. Therefore, Madam Speaker, you can see that the whole country is actually endowed with resources, which should be exploited. Therefore, Government should be planning for roads for the whole country because there are resources. 

I pray that Government considers procuring a loan for the Jinja Express Highway way just as they have already planned to procure a loan for the oil road in Bunyoro. They have told us there is oil in Karamoja and Sebei. They should now be thinking of roads for those sub regions where they have said there are oil deposits. Thank you.

6.26
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the submissions of people who are making passionate appeals for the two roads and I am glad some sanity is beginning to prevail.

For quite some time, allocation and construction of roads has been a political issue without due consideration to what must actually inform investments in construction at a particular place. That is why in places like West Nile, we were told our people had to become rebels so that the roads could be worked on.

Why am I saying this? There are several roads that were done using loans and to date, Government cannot report what we have been able to earn from those investments.

If you cannot have such information, how are you going to justify that if we put more money here, we can actually be able to get these returns?

I have as well been informed that the oil process has actually stalled. Some of the key partners in the oil sector who should have made oil to come out quickly have pulled out. Why don’t we spend some time to deal with that issue first? Why are we rushing to borrow money when there are a number of other unconcluded issues which must be put right?

I think it is important going forward –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really want you to help me because there is a motion, which hon. Okupa brought that before we consider the report of the Committee on National Economy, we should deal with the issue of Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. I would like you to address that but you should go straight into the merits. Can we address that? How do we move?

6.29
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that we first dispose of the issue of the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway and then, deal with the oil roads. I do not come from the east but I feel that this road should be worked on. Government should go back and look for money and we build the road as we look at the oil roads. Thank you.

6.30
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since tarmac road construction in Uganda started, I think Jinja Road must have been one of the first roads to be built in this country. That has been its importance to the economy of our country.

It must be as important as the oil roads to improve the economy of our nation. Therefore, we should look at modalities of stopping the IGG; we should work on the Jinja Road first and go to the oil roads next or they can be built concurrently. Let the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development work on the modalities to bring both motions concurrently so that both roads can be worked on because of their importance. Thank you.

6.30
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that Kampala-Jinja Express Highway is very important because of traffic jam. Recently, I said that the only challenge we have is that most of our colleagues who are not supposed to have lead cars in this country, have lead cars and they do not feel the heavy traffic that we go through every day. Some of the lead cars want to knock us along the way. That is why the big team is not bothered to think about the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. This morning, I moved from Entebbe for only 20 minutes and I was here. There is no need of having a lead car. I would like to request Members that since these oil roads have been on-going, let us give Government chance to go ahead and get this loan; on condition that they will not come here on the Floor of Parliament to bring any other loan before handling Kampala-Jinja Express Highway.

6.33
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, whereas it is very important for the oil roads to be worked on in Bunyoro region, the same importance that was attached to the oil roads in Bunyoro should be the same importance attached everywhere in this country.

The fact that there was an earlier presentation on the Jinja Express Highway – if the Jinja Express Highway is worked upon, it will still serve the interest of the whole country but not the interest of the people who come from the east, west or north. Therefore, whereas I support the oil loan, I would like to suggest that we defer and all these be brought together at once including Jinja Express Highway and the House harmoniously passes them together. This should be a win win situation.

The Kampala-Jinja Express Highway is as important as the oil roads in Bunyoro. Let us adopt these together as the most important roads that we want to work on and allocate for them rather than passing this one. Let them go hand in hand. They are all very important for the people of this country.

6.35
Mr OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need Jinja Express Highway even before the oil roads. I am saying this for economic reasons. Jinja Road is the one which makes money for this country and there is no doubt about this. You can go to Uganda Revenue Authority, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda. The records are there and speak for themselves. That oil we are talking about - it will take time for this country to start seeing any money, if at all we get any money from it.

Therefore, for us to pay for this loan we are trying to borrow, you need the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway to raise money to pay for this loan. It would be very bad planning for us to start thinking about oil roads when we are not sure of how we are going to pay for those roads. It would be very suicidal for us to ever imagine that those oils will ever pay for those loans. First, the recovery costs are too high. They are more than the revenue we are going to collect.

As a country, it would be suicidal for us to imagine that we shall construct the oil roads and the revenue from the oils are the ones that would be used to service the loans; that is a fallacy. The reality is that you still need the revenues that are going to be generated from the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway to pay for the loans of that road itself and even run the country, in addition to paying for these loans.

Therefore, I would like to urge colleagues – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point; one sentence.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I have seen an executive order saying there is no more borrowing of money for roads. That means that the moment we allow this one without a guarantee for Kampala- Jinja Express Highway, it will be the last loan the Government is going to borrow. Therefore, you will not get any money to finance the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. 

We should not be dubbed into passing this loan when there is already an order that there is no more borrowing for Kampala-Jinja Express road. Furthermore, it should also be a free road. Why should a road, which makes money be the ones where you pay in order to make money for it? Others are free – (Member timed out.) 

6.37
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This trend of debate is appearing to divide us; west and east. This one is caused by the ministry itself. This Kampala-Jinja Express Highway was thought of long time ago when we started the Entebbe-Kampala Express Road. I remember I was on that committee. Government has dragged her feet for too long. By now, this road should have been done. Now, you have not done the one of the east and you have decided to bring – oil is very important and we really need the oil roads but I think they are also very many. When you are brothers and sisters and one person is given no meat at all while another is given a big piece, you feel bad. 

Let some of these oil roads be left out so that we borrow money for Kampala-Jinja Expressway and they can go concurrently. If you look carefully, there are not many tarmacked roads in the east. At least, you can say that there are many tarmacked roads in northern and western Uganda. They are few tarmacked roads in the east and that is why people are very angry. Let us be fair and borrow money for Kampala-Jinja Expressway so that they are done together so that we do not hate each other. The sooner you plan for Kampala-Jinja Expressway, the better.

6.39
MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support hon. Okupa’s motion that we hold on the Bunyoro road loan until the Kampala-Jinja Expressway is handled. This House has passed over three loans in support of the Bunyoro oil projects, which projects have not even kicked off, such as the airport. I find no reason why the minister cannot hold on for a while and find money for Kampala-Jinja Expressway. We passed a loan for Hoima-Masindi Road, which is still ongoing and there is no reason we should hurry to pass more loans before we sort out the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. I beg to submit.

6.40
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to support the decision that the loan for the oil roads be deferred and that the motion be presented concurrently to the House. 

Sometimes it takes four hours to travel from Mukono to Kampala, a journey that would ordinarily be for 30 minutes. For me who stays in Nsambya, I have to leave by 6.00 a.m. if I am to go to the east. Otherwise, I would spend three hours before I get to Jinja. Besides that, it is both a health hazard and security hazard to have such a buildup of traffic. Other than inhaling the fumes of petrol, terrorists can also attack or an oil tanker can explode. 

It also plays into politics. Development is about negotiation and power relations. There is already agitation in the east that there is an imbalance in economic allocations. As politicians, it is not playing well in as far as power relations are concerned. It is a good approach that we hold Government to act on this road. Thank you.
	
6.42
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Baale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Gauging from the mood in the House, we need to strike a middle ground. It is good for Bunyoro roads to be going on but we also need to think about this main road, which is causing us problems in the east. Therefore, I would suggest that the minister in charge considers and puts Kamapala-Jinja Expressway in this loan. The minister should also consider scaling down on the number of roads in the oil zone to accommodate this road. 

Indeed, there is the Kayunga-Galilaya road, which you know very well. Kayunga has also been mentioned as having oil but we are yet to know. That road has been on board since 1993 but nobody has ever thought about it. This is the opportunity – now that we have got wind that this might be the last loan by Executive order. Kayunga-Galilaya Road, which can open up to the north, is a very good connection. This is a very productive road for this country but it is put to stay and we are busy thinking about roads that may be locked up without opening up the rest of the country. I would suggest that the minister –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuubo): Madam Speaker, Jinja Expressway is important, not only to the people from the east but all of us as a country. Every part of the country needs a road because somebody from Kisoro will travel to the east or the north. However, to be honest, Bunyoro has lagged behind for long. It is during this time of oil that we have started seeing some life in Bunyoro. It is during this time of oil that we have started moving on dust-free roads. Why do we use these oil roads as a bait to have the Kampala-Jinja Expressway? 

We are a planning entity here. Why can’t we apply for a special loan for that road without putting the ones of Bunyoro on halt? Actually, whenever we see these requests for loans for road construction, I see everybody saying –(Interjections)- Allow me to continue. You will get your own time.

Madam Speaker, I believe we can still have applications and requests for loans for the other regions but let this one come and we also enjoy. After all, it is not for us to travel only but it is for benefiting the economy.

Madam Speaker, currently, we are developing the airport and the pipeline-related issues. How do we transport the equipment? We were talking of first oil –(Interjections)- I request that we allow this one of Bunyoro – to be honest, we had only 26 kilometres of tarmac from Kafu to Hoima. Now that they have started giving us roads, you start remembering that even the other road is a necessity. Yes, it is a necessity but let the region also benefit.

6.48
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, in this case – to me – we have two children who are equally important. We have oil in Bunyoro region and we have Kampala-Jinja Expressway -(Interjections)- I need some protection, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are heckling the honourable member.

MR KANGWAGYE: We have Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. Much as we have oil in Bunyoro, there is need to create an avenue for that oil to be transported easily. Kampala-Jinja Express Highway should have been done yesterday, if we are to be realistic. Economically, that road is too viable.

Madam Speaker, I come from the border of Uganda and Tanzania. We have Mutukula-Masaka Road, where we shall have an opportunity. If you do not use this road of Kampala-Jinja, you can as well use Kampala-Mutukula-Tanzania, where a person like hon. Kangwagye who is in Isingiro,  Bukanga would be in position to see that he should be privileged to have a tarmac road like the oil people.

Madam Speaker, these people do not think that they are the only people who are going to benefit from that oil alone. Even we who are going to be transporting - those heavy machines are going to be using Bukanga Road, which I always cry for and it is the most productive road in this country. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Please, conclude. 

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as we need oil, we need food. Much as we need Jinja, Bukanga needs a road. 

Madam Speaker, Kampala-Jinja Express Highway should be a priority so that we can be able to have that oil from Bunyoro transported. Thank you. 

6.50
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I support that Entebbe-Jinja Express Highway should be considered, Kampala-Jinja Express Highway should be considered as well.

Before we move with the motion, I am proposing that the Chair and the minister should present a report on the existing framework of that loan. We can then move to co-opt both the programmes to be undertaken at the same time.

Madam Speaker, we are planners. You cannot sit here and say we first stop one of the Government’s projects because of the other. We are planners and owners of the resources and we are still here. We are not even about to go. That is my proposal.

6.52
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we debate, the rest of the Ugandans are looking at us. I do not come from eastern Uganda but I am entitled to travel to eastern and I have been travelling there because I do business.

The stress we go through on Jinja Road – I am even surprised at the ministers who said they look at each and every road critically when they are setting priorities. I am wondering what they have been doing not to have thought about Jinja Road.

Madam Speaker, the intention of the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway is to ease traffic on Jinja Road but it has taken all this time without thinking about going eastern. I, therefore, support the motion that we halt the processing of the loan until Kampala-Jinja Express Highway is brought here to be processed. After all, the contracts for oil roads in Bunyoro are pre-financing. They should continue working on the road before approval, as they have been doing so that we process Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. This will make the ministers run quickly to bring both –(Member timed out.)

6.54
MR GODFREY ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this particular issue, we are confronted with two dimensions. The first dimension is effectiveness and the second dimension is efficiency.

Under effectiveness, the ministry is trying to do the right thing and under efficiency, the ministry is supposed to do the right thing right.

Uganda is one family. Uganda is not about the west. I come from the western part of the country. However, it bothers me that every other time when we talk about child and maternal mortality, it is eastern Uganda. When it comes to poverty levels, it is eastern Uganda. Starvation and malnourishment is also eastern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you gave us an assignment to serve on a Select Committee on Sexual Violence and I had the opportunity to traverse the entire country. When I got to the eastern part of this country, I noticed that the roads were bad. 

Uganda being a family, I totally support that we prioritise the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. (Applause)  This is about setting a priority list. The Kampala-Jinja Express Highway should take the first priority.  If we are confronted with choice because of limited resources, then I ask that this House considers first, as priority, Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. Thank you.

6.57
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to thank Government for re-opening and improving Kenjojo-Fort Portal-Kasese to Katungulu Highway.

Madam Speaker, the people of Kasese and the traders from Congo use this road. However, the materials that we used come from Mombasa. I do not know how Government plans but I would think that Kampala-Jinja Express Highway would have even been constructed or improved faster than Kasese. Jinja Express Highway is as important as the Entebbe Express Highway. To ignore Jinja and then concentrate on the Bunyoro oil roads where we have got several loans whose products we have not seen would be unfair.

Therefore, I support that we halt this motion until it is brought together with the one for Kampala- Jinja Highway. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.59
GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to the submissions of Members and would want to suggest an amendment to the motion. I propose an amendment because I am just looking at these two areas and have a feeling that each of them is equally important but still each has peculiar merits.

When you look at the eastern route, like Members have rightly submitted, it contributes a lot to the economy and therefore, deserves to be looked at and prioritised. 

However, when you also look at the oil roads because this time we are not looking at the roads as a region - I would say that there is a baby already on the way. If we stop it now, perhaps you are forcing a stillbirth of a baby on the way.

They said that oil roads is part of a prerequisite for the exploration and drilling to go on and yesterday, they said that Government had allowed the drilling to commence. We should allow…(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude your sentence.	
	
GEN. BYEKWASO: We allow her to present but defer to go into the details and debate until the report and how the Jinja Express way is brought on board.

THE SPEAKER: That will cause more anxiety because if you present and say that we go home and sleep, how will that help. Let us hear from the minister before I make a conclusion.

MS AZUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Kampala-Jinja Expressway is a very important road; many people here have travelled on it. You know the time you spend coming from Jinja to Kampala - we have access to the sea and there is no question about it.

The oil roads are critical and the goal was to have transport infrastructure to support the development of the oil so that we can get oil out of the ground by 2023; so, they are also equally important. (Interjections)  Can I be protected Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle the minister.

MS AZUBA: Thirdly, we have other roads, which are equally important like the tourism roads because we will soon come again with tourism roads and we know how important they are. Right now, tourism is bringing in a lot of funds.

Just as my colleague told the House, there are issues and they have been handed over to the IGG. Nobody said that Kampala-Jinja Expressway is not going to be done-(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when the honourable minister Kasaija came here, the issue was the financing modalities. Today, they have shifted goal posts and claim that it is IGG. How sure are we that tomorrow, it will not be a different matter? 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to come and say that the issue is with the IGG and yet, the senior Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who we had asked and promised twice to bring the matter here said that it was financing modalities.

Is the minister in order to keep changing goal posts given what the senior minister had told us here and to assume that we are sabotaging their region when they have even gone ahead to tell us that it will only take two weeks? What harm will it be there to wait for two weeks?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to find out what exactly the IGG is looking into before we take a decision. May be, it is not related to the road. What has been submitted to the IGG?

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, some of the issues that have been presented to the IGG have to do with the financing modalities and so, we cannot bring them here at this time. If I may continue-(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the order I am raising is that we have passed loans here but I have never seen anybody going to the IGG that Parliament is going to pass a loan to finance such a road. 

I am now hearing this one for the first time in my life that they took it to the IGG because of financing modalities. Is the Minister of Works and Transport in order to tell Parliament that for the first time, a loan for Jinja Expressway has been taken to IGG and yet, since I came here, we have passed over 500 loans and none has ever be taken to the IGG.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not how quickly Cabinet transmitted their request to the IGG. I shall want to hear from her what she is looking at and whether it affects the minister telling us how we are going to get money. The minister is avoiding telling us how we are going to finance the road. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this House that the financing modalities that was brought before Cabinet had issues. A whistle blower -(Interjections) No. I am informing you.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not heckle the Member; she is informing us.

MS OPENDI: His Excellency, the President got concerned. I told you about the Standard Gauge Railway, which was a priority item, for which Government should have borrowed funds to have that railway line constructed.

This financing modality that was brought before us by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was a toll. So, regarding what you are talking about here, as Cabinet, we could not process what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had presented because information had reached. 

This matter is what the President –

THE SPEAKER: The minister is giving us clarification.

MR WALUSWAKA: Honourable minister, I would like to seek for clarification. It is clear that east, north, north-east and west Nile regions are the burden of poverty. Are you going to put a toll road in the east, where there are high levels of poverty, such that poor people, who are unable to afford even a meal, will be charged? Do you want to charge the eastern route? 

Clarify whether the honourable minister, Ms Opendi from Tororo wants the people of Tororo who are poor to pay for a road? Come and clarify, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: No. The minister was giving us information about what has been sent to the IGG.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I can clarify. I would like you, hon. Opendi, to clarify to the House. If you are telling us today that the matter was about the financing modality, do you mean a Government entity like UNRA can advertise and award a contract before you are sure of the financing modality? That is what took place.

It was advertised, eight companies were shortlisted and a contractor was picked. How can you advertise before you are sure of the financing modality? I would like you, hon. Opendi, to clarify to me how that is possible.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I would like to propose that you give me time to look for the IGG. I will find out what exactly she has been assigned to do in regard to this matter. Then, I will come back to you with a position tomorrow.

However, for now, let us defer the presentation. I will give you my ruling tomorrow after I have spoken to the IGG.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, allow me to inform hon. Waluswaka. I have not stood here to say I am supporting any road toll. I have not said that but I am only informing the House that this is what was brought to us that was not approved. It does not mean that I support the road toll. 

I told you I come from the aast. I am inconvenienced these days because it takes me four hours if I use the Mukono-Jinja road. That is why these days, I opt to go through Gayaza and Kayunga and get to Jinja in one hour and fifteen minutes.

So, get the information from the IGG but what was before us as Cabinet could not be passed because it had issues and this is the matter that was referred. This is what I would like to inform the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave that matter until I have heard from the IGG and I will give you an update tomorrow. Tomorrow afternoon, we shall start with the next item after I give my ruling.

However, I would like to remind you that MTN Uganda is organising its annual run. This morning, I received the kits for all the Members and staff so that on Sunday, very early in the morning at six, the whole town will be yellow with MTN running for maternal health. So, please, register and collect your kit also so that we can run on Sunday.

Otherwise, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
