
Tuesday, 12 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament Building, Kampala

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon.Members, I welcome you to this sitting. On Thursday, 14th November, that is in two days, Parliament in conjunction with the Anti-Corruption Coalition in Uganda (ACCU) and the Green-light Movement will host a televised grand youths debate on the theme:“The Role of CSOs and Government in Protecting Activists.” This debate is aimed at helping the public better understand aspects of the Public Order Management Bill.

Debate will be in the Conference Hall from 9 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. You are all invited to attend and to participate. So, please, we have that notice; see what you can do about it.

Hon.Members, we have business; we should see how much of it we can accomplish today. But just to put on record that there has been concern about the business that has been pending before Parliamentary committees.So, in the last Parliamentary Commission meeting, we agreed that we should have a status report from the chairpersons of the committees, to tell us what they have been able to do; what is pending and the status of the business, which is still pending before them, so that we can finish with the business before the committee within the time frame that we can understand. 

The rules make provision for how soon business should be handled but it looks like some of the businesses before committeesare taking much longer than desired by the rules and the interests of this House and the people of this country. So, we should sit todayand have the reports presented on this status and we see how to move. Thank you very much.

2.45
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a matter of national importance to bring before you and the House. This matter concerns this institution and more specifically the Commission. I have had interest to read the external advert, which has been made by the Commission on various jobs available inthis Parliament and I have found that the advert seems to fundamentally contradict the provisions or the requirements of the Public Service Commission, particularly stating the upper age limit.

Mr Speaker, I come from the Northern part of Uganda where many of our children stayed in the camps and started going to school at the age of 12 or 13 years. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think that matter could be better handled by the Parliamentary Commission now that you have raised the issue? I suggest that you leave it there for now and allow us to handle it as the Parliamentary Commission. Some of these concerns have already been raised with the Commission. Please.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, can this assurance be put down so that I can assure the people of Dokolo?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are speaking to the Chair of the Parliamentary Commission.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON SPECIAL INVESTIGATION INTO THE MANAGEMENT OF LOANS PORTFOLIO BY UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not see papers to be laid on the Table. Can we proceed to the next item.

REPORTS ON THE HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM IN SRI LANKA

2.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Mr Speaker, this report has some issues, which the committee needs to reconcile and I would request that we get some time.

REPORT ON THE FIELD VISIT TO WEST NILE REGION ON HIV/AIDS PROGRAMMEE

2.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Ms Sarah Kayagi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS on its findings and recommendations arising out of field visits conducted in West Nile Region in Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Find an appropriate time when you will present these reports to the House and we look at the recommendations you have made so that we can see how to guide on this matters.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVICTION OF UGANDANS FROM TANZANIA

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Mr Speaker, I wish to inform this House that I am not ready with the statement on the matter of the expulsion of Ugandans from the United Republic of Tanzania. Consultations are ongoing and at an appropriate time, I will bring a statement to this house.

2.50
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County, North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the hon. Minister, when he comes to give a full statement, to tell us who is a Ugandan. How is a Ugandan identified, so that we have an understanding -because you can identity a Tanzanian with some identity but the Ugandan, there is a bit of a problem? So, I would like you to, please,identify these Ugandans who were expelled from Tanzania.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister you take note of that. We expect a comprehensive statement on this. You did not give us a time frame, hon. minister.

MR BAGEINE: Mr Speaker, within a period of two weeks, I should be ready with the statement. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the minister has not comprehended the gravity of the situation. To ask for two weeks to identify Ugandans who are being evicted? You do not know the conditions under which they are living, whether these people are actually Ugandans or people covered under Ugandans. It is a very serious matter. So, how can he talk of two weeks? This matter has been in the media for the last one month and the minister who is in charge of information is telling us he needs two weeks to come here with that report.  It is important for this minister to be properly whipped.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I then appoint you the whip of the ministers? (Laughter)

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for the concern. When we request for two weeks, it does not mean that Government is not taking appropriate action. We request for two weeks so that we bring a comprehensive statement since this is an international and sensitive matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, tomorrow is Cabinet. I am sure you have some preliminary document that you want to share with the Cabinet because that is the brief we got last time, that all statements must be cleared by the Cabinet. I am giving you up to Thursday to come and address the House about what you have agreed should be brought to the House. Let the minister come back on Thursday to update us on the status of what has happened.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your guidance on this matter but there is a matter, which is close to this; this is the case of the integration threat. You realise that the President of Tanzania addressed the Parliament on key issues of integration and a threat that is apparent between the so-called coalition of the willing and things like that. 

So, Mr Speaker, I seek guidance from you because I wanted to raise this issue as a matter of national importance so that we get a clear statement from Government on the status of this apparent split that there is in the East African Community, which is threatening our integration process. May I seek your guidance whether that is going to be part of what the minister will bring on Thursday, or the two weeks he wants will engulf all that so that we can give him more time and we have a more comprehensive debate. I seek your guidance, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, an issue has been raised. Go and consider them, share with Cabinet, come back on Thursday, tell us what you can deal with and if you need more time. Thank you. I am told the report is ready now?

LAYING OF PAPERS

 REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE MANAGEMENT OF LOANS PORTFOLIO BY UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK

2.55
 THE VICE CHAIPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIESAND STATE ENTERPRISES (Angelline Osegge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report from the Auditor-General on the special investigations into the management of Uganda Development Bank loan portfolio. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious examination and reporting to the House. The other item is not there; so, can we go to item No.5.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE BUSINESS TRANSACTED BY COMMITTEES SINCE THE INCEPTION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AND BUSINESS PENDING

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said in the communication, this matter has become important. So, we need to listen from chairpersons of what business has been transacted and what business is pending and what time frame they give the House, when they will bring these reports back to Parliament. Can we start with the first one?

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, committee on Agriculture?

COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Defence and Internal Affairs? Let us go to the Committee on East African Community Affairs.

COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on East African Community Affairs has so far done the following activities - I do not have the copies but I request you to allow me to just read verbally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. It is supposed to be oral.

MS MWABAZA: Mr Speaker, the committee carried out oversight visits to border communities in Busia, Malaba, Tororo, Mutukula, Rakai, Bukwo, Lwakhakha and Katuna. 

The committee visited organs and institutions of the EAC. The institutions include the East African Legislative Assembly and the East African Court of Justice. 

The committee visited the Lake Victoria Basin Commission, the East African Civil Aviation Authority, the East African Business Council and the Lake Victoria Fisheries Commission. 

The committee went on benchmarking visits. It visited the countries of Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. During the visits, the committee interacted with East African legislative Assemblies, which were in their stations in Arusha, Kigali, Burundi and Kampala. 

The committee attended the 14th Ordinary Summit of EAC Heads of State in Nairobi from 24 November 2012 towards December, and it also attended the 11th Extraordinary Summit from 27th to 28th April in Arusha in 2013. 

The committee has the following reports, which were compiled; Some were considered by the committee while others are still pending.

The first report, the policy statement of the Ministry of East African Affairs of 2012/2013 was considered and adopted by the House. 

The policy statement and financial estimates for 2013/2014 were also adopted and considered by the House. 

The report of the Committee on East African Community Affairs on oversight visits to borders is before the House for consideration. 

The report of the Committee on East African Community Affairs on its visit to organs and institutions of the EAC is in draft form and is under consideration by the committee.

The committee also has a progress report, which was presented to it by EALA Members of Parliament. It is still under consideration by the committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What timeframe do you give these people to come back to the House? 

MS MWEBAZA: Mr Speaker, the committee report for border visits is ready for presentation. I can present it today. The one on institutions and other organs of the community can be ready by the end of this month, that is, within two weeks. Then the one EALA, members will be ready in December. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, Chairperson.

COMMITTEE ON HEALTH

3.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the House that the Committee on Health was formed in 2012. It was born out of the former Committee on Social Services and we derive our mandate from rules 175(2)(c) and 177 of the Rules Of Procedure.

On the performance of the committee, I would like to say that the Committee on Health examined the health sector policy statements for the financial year 2012/2013 and presented a report on its recommendations to this House in September 2012. One of the policy recommendations made and adopted by the House was the need to recentralise human resource for health and health facilities especially at health centre IVs, districts and general hospitals and then the district health offices as a way of attracting specialists at these levels.

The Committee on Health also examined the health sector recurrent and capital budget estimates for financial year 2012/2013, and presented a report to this House on its recommendations. One of the major recommendations that the committee put forward was that the health sector budget for the financial year 2013/2103 should not be passed by Parliament until the ban on the recruitment of health workers had been lifted. More health workers were recruited and salaries for doctors in lower health facilities were enhanced. 

The committee examined the health sector policy statement for the financial year 2012/2013 and presented a report on its recommendations to the House in September 2013. Some of the key policy recommendations were made-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Chairman, just give us the items that you have handled and those that are to be handled.

DR OMONA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the glorious things that the committee managed to do was to attract more funding for the recruitment of health workers and I would wish to report that out of this, Government was able to recruit 1,021 health workers at centre IIIs and centre IVs by January 2013. 

We have held a number of meetings with the relevant stakeholders, particularly ministries. We have conducted field visits particularly in the districts of Western Uganda and held meetings with oversight organisations concerning health. This was to establish whether the performance indicators outlined above were met.

Our findings were informed largely by the recommendations of the committee on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2013/2014. Mr Speaker, this report was adopted by this House and one of them is to ensure that this financial year, Government buys mattresses for general hospitals through allocations within the sector budget.

We have also examined a number of related Bills. Our committee has considered the Bill entitled, “HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010.” This Bill was introduced by the Committee on HIV/AIDS as a private member’s Bill during the Eighth Parliament. It was considered by the then Committee on Social Services. However, the term of the Eighth Parliament expired before the passing of this Bill. The Ninth Parliament received the Bill but referred it to our committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Through the intervention of the leadership of the HIV/AIDS committee, the Rt Hon. Speaker directed the Bill to the Committee on Health in 2012. 

The committee has held a number of consultations on the Bill and is in the process of synthesising the recommendations received from the various stakeholders. By the end of this month, November, the committee should be able to present this report to facilitate the second reading of the Bill.

Secondly, the Committee on Health gave a go ahead to hon. Lyomoki to initiate a Bill on the recentralisation of some cadres of health workers from the jurisdictions of local governments. 

Mr Speaker, there are no Government-sponsored health-related Bills that the House has referred to the Committee on Health during the course of the Ninth Parliament, so far. 

We have received four petitions. These petitions were referred to the Committee on Health. The subjects of these petitions were: 
    1. The outbreak of Hepatitis B in West Nile presented on 8 November 2012
    2. The children and parents with Spina bifida presented on 8 November 2012
    3. The Pharmaceutical Society of Uganda presented on 3 July 2012.
    4. The petition by children living with HIV/AIDS in Uganda presented on 12 December 2012.  The technical team of the committee has already examined these-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has happened to those four petitions which were presented in 2012? 

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, we felt that the petition on Hepatitis B had been overtaken by events because the Minister of Health presented on the Floor the interventions that Government is taking as far as Hepatitis B is concerned. So, the committee thought this had been over taken by events, but we can still revive it if there is need. 

We have examined the veracity of the allegations made by the petitioners of these different petitions, the legality of the prayers and the proposed best course of action. The Committee on Health has programmed to hear the petitioners to dispose of these petitions. 

On benchmarking, the committee has so far sent delegations to benchmark best practices from the following countries: 

There is one, which was done in India on management of super specialised care facilities and the other one was to Sri Lanka about successful Primary Health Care. These reports I hope by next week- just like I had said earlier on- the issues in them would have been reconciled and they are ready for presentation to the House.

Finally, our committee is optimistic and we wish to see innovative approaches introduced in the delivery of healthcare through the introduction and spending of public-private partnership in the health sector, the introduction of health insurance schemes that work – we are trying to fast-track and Government needs to hurry up with this. The introduction of mobile hospitals and clinics, these are some of the benchmarks, which are being carried out by some partners in development, particularly, in highlands, which are on Lake Victoria.

We also wish to have increased participation of community efforts in healthcare delivery systems through revamping village health infrastructure and finally increasing efficiency in the use of health services. (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to have interrupted the hon. Member on the Floor but the guidance I am seeking from you is, wouldn’t it have been better really if in future the chairpersons are given a format such that we can also follow and at the same time, these areas are printed out such that the hon. Members here follow exactly what is going on in those committees where we rarely sit? 

There are very many petitions, there are many concerns of Members of Parliament but right now, as he is trying to bring out whatever he is trying to bring out, some of us are not following. Some of it is a bit detailed and it is not flowing as it is supposed to flow. 

So, the guidance I am seeking is that in future, it should be made more formal so that we can also come in where necessary. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When this matter was discussed and a decision was taken that these reports be given, a format was announced by the Speaker who was presiding; that you tell us what you have achieved as a committee. It was announced here that you tell us what you have achieved as the entire business before the committee, what is pending and how much time you need to finish the pending work. That was the format that was given. 

On details of what resolutions you made, it was not so required but the number of business. The reason is simple: that the rules provide for a timeframe for handling of issues, which are before the committee. Now, we have heard of petitions, which were presented in 2012 and the chairman says some of them were overtaken by events but they cannot be overtaken by the events from the record of Parliament because the committee chairperson has to come back to Parliament and say, “this particular issue has already been concluded in this way”, so that we stop it from showing in our system that it remains pending and yet, according to the committee, they think it is already resolved. So, there should be a briefing period where the chairperson comes and says,“this particular matter has been overtaken by events; this particular matter has been handled” so that we mark it off our list. That is why we are going through these processes. 

Please, give us the business that is before the committee, what has been handled, what is before the committee and what timeframe you need to finish and bring a report back to Parliament so that we can do a catalogue of these things and plan properly. That is what we are required to do. 

DR OMONA: Finally, if I could request, the challenge sometimes we have in committees, Mr Speaker, is where committee clerks are shared. We have had a challenge where the same clerk has to attend to the Committee on HIV/AIDS. When our clerk went out on some official duties, the clerk who stood in for him was actually handling three committees. So, this sometimes also hampers our activity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the second issue that may come up when we start investigating why these things are delaying in the committees but for now, what we want is, how many petitions do you have? Which petitions? How many Bills do you have? Which Bills? How many have you handled? How many are pending? What timeframe are you giving the House that you will bring the report on those pending issues? That is what we need for now, so that we can begin investigating the causes of the delay later. For example, these petitions that were in 2012, why are they not before the House? Those are the issues. So, have you finished? 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have addressed my mind to Rule 29(11) of our Rules of Procedure, which is to the effect that after consideration of a petition under this rule, the House may take any decision it considers appropriate and communicates this decision to the petitioner through the Office of the Speaker. As my hon. Colleague said that these petitions were overtaken by events, I am only wondering whether we would not be violating this rule if we proceeded in that style.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely, that is the point I have just made. You need  to come back to the House and inform the House that we were handling this petition but because of this event, they have taken over the recommendations from this event, or that we have now completely finished the subject of this petition and then, we inform the petitioners accordingly that,“for your petition, it has already been addressed in this particular policy, in this particular statement by the minister, in this particular budget” or something like that so that the petitioners know that their matters have been handled. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard you properly. My chairperson ofthe Committee on Education is not around, I do not know whether it would be okay - because I know our programme in the head and how we have handled our matters. Should I give some assistance in this direction or is it supposed to be presented by the chairman? I have everything here; how we have moved and what is pending.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe by the time we finish, the chairman will have come. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, my point is related to his except that all my chairpersons are on trips. So, they left a comprehensive report with me and a brief for Gender, Labour and Social Development. I do not know whether your due diligence should prevail.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will present that one because you are presenting on behalf of the committee but hon. Ssewungu wants to present from the head. (Laughter) Okay, let us go with the order and we will come back to those who have come now.




COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Vincent Bagiire):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on ICT received the Bill on Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012, considered it and it was passed by Parliament and is now an Act of Parliament by way of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013.

The committee on ICT has for the last three financial years considered the ministerial policy statements and made reports as required by our rules. The committee has also undertaken field trips to consider or to assess the national post code and addressing system that was being piloted by the Ministry of ICT in Entebbe. Another field trip was undertaken to assess the implementation of ICT activities in schools and health centres in Eastern Uganda and the central part of the country in Iganga, Mukono, Kampala and Entebbe. 

The committee has also made an assessment of the implementation of computer labs in schools in Western Uganda. In addition to that, the committee made an assessment by way of a field visit on the National Backbone Infrastructure in Northern Uganda. The committee also had a field visit on the Rural Communications and Development Fund in Arua Regional Referral Hospital, St Joseph’s College Ombaki and St Mary Girls School in Ediofe in Arua.
Mr Speaker, in terms of benchmarking or international trips, the committee undertook a benchmarking trip to India on a business process outsourcing; a trip to Dubai to attend a telecommunication summit under the auspices of the International Telecommunications Union, an international trip to Ghana to benchmark on business process, outsourcing and the workings of the Intelligent Network Monitoring System and e-governments.

The committee also travelled to Tanzania to benchmark on the National Post Code System and analogue to digital migration. The committee visited Nairobi to benchmark on the mobile money environment and attendant regulations. 

The committee also attended a global e-governance forum in South Korea. Mr Speaker, all these visits that we have undertaken; local and international, should ideally amount to reports. We have two reports that are in draft form and that should be ready in two weeks. These include the report on oversight visits to Mbarara and Rakai districts on the assessment of the Rural Communication Development Fund with emphasis on school laboratories as well as electronic health initiatives.

The other report that is in draft form and that should be ready in the next two weeks is the report on benchmarking visits to the ICT sectors in Ghana, Tanzania and Kenya. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Victorious Education Primary School represented by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you. You are welcome.

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

3.21
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since the cardinal role of Parliament is legislation and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is mandated under Rule 177(c) to critically examine Bills brought by Government before the House, I, therefore, stand to give an account of what our committee has done and what is pending.

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs brought before the House the following Bills, which were subsequently passed: On 22 March 2012, the Companies Bill, 2009; on 17 April, 2012 the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007; On 26 April 2012, the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010; On 6 February 2013, the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008; On 6 August 2013, the Public Order Management Bill, 2011; On 1st August 2013, the Industrial Properties Bill, 2009. 

Bills concluded by the committee and yet to be passed on the Floor of Parliament includes: The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009and The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009.

The reports that have been passed on the Floor of Parliament include: The report of the committee on the Sectoral Policy Statement for financial year 2011-2012 on 29 August 2011; a report on the Sectoral Policy Statements for financial year 2012-2013 on 30 August 2012; a report on the Sectoral Policy Statement for financial year 2013-2014 on 30 August 2013.

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that the reports on the medium term expenditure framework were presented to the Committee on Budget. The pending business in the committee includes: The implementation of the Government Assurances Bill, 2008; The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2011; The Chattels Securities Bill, 2009;The Anti-Corruption Bill, 2013; The petition by the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board.

The committee has a strategy to expedite the pending work in the committee and the committee is in the final stages of considering most of the business. It will soon bring the complete business for consideration by this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

3.26
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is presenting a quarterly performance report for the period July to September, 2013.

I will begin with a summary of the activities done. The committee has held 21 committee meetings; conducted two field trips;produced two committee reports and facilitated two Members of Parliament to travel abroad. The committee has also held 15 public hearings. We have not held any workshops and we have 15 pending petitions.

The details are as follows for some of the business:

We have handled a petition from residents of Kabiro LC I, KinoniBoma LCI, Kyattuba B LCI, Lubaga LCI of Bulango Parish,Lwemiyagacounty in Sembabule District brought in by hon. Ssekikubo and the report is under consideration and will be brought to the House later.

The people of Teso region represented by hon. Dr Francis Epetait petitioned over irregular allocation of land in Amuria and Aguuin Kapelebyong County and in Ngora and Amutu in Bukedea District for the establishment of a cattle ranch, sugar cane growing and rice growing.

We are handling a petition by the people of Okung sub county, Kapelebyong County in Amuria District, represented by Dr Eriaku Peter Emmanuel, against allocation of land for the establishment of a barracks and an animal breeding centre.

A petition by the people of Otuke, represented by hon. Fr Deusdedit Jacinto, against the allocation of land for the establishment of a barracks and an animal breeding Centre.

Mr Speaker, on Thursday, 2 May 2013, the Speaker directed the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to travel to Karamoja region where Parliament conducted an outreach programme to access the condition of roads and report back to Parliament with solutions and the report is under consideration.

The people of Zombo brought a petition on the land claimed by Mukwano Group of Companies and they are represented by hon. Kwiyucwiny. The report is also under consideration.

The people of Junjumba constituency in Kalangala District petitioned against Kalangala Infrastructure Services (KIS Limited) on infrastructure services on Bugara Island on Lake Victoria.

There is a petition on encroachment of community land by Uganda Wildlife Authority and this was brought by hon. Kafuda.

We are also handling a petition against irregular allocation of land in Mbale by the Uganda Land Commission and this was brought in by hon. Wamanga-Wamai.

Number 10, we are also handling a petition on the private acquisition of land by Tororo Cement Industry Limited, brought in by hon. Ekanya. 

There is a petition on the unprecedented or orchestrated encroachment and grabbing of the historical scouts land at the Kaazi Training and Camping centre, brought in by hon. David Bahati. 

We are also handling a petition on irregular allocation of land in Teso, brought in by hon. Epetait. The other petitions we are handling include: a petition by pupils, parents and the school Management Committee of Nakesero Primary School on the grabbing of land at Nakasero Primary School, Plot 34A, Kyadondo Road and Plot 5C, Mackinnon Road, measuring 0.57 hectares by Prestigious Apartments Ltd, in collusion with Uganda Land Commission.

We also have a petition by taxi drivers against the Traffic and Road Safety Regulation Bill, 2012 – brought in by hon. Betty Nambooze; a petition by occupants of Ranch 11, Kyemogoro, Butunda Sub County in Kiryadongo District, brought in by hon. Jalia Bintu.

Mr Speaker, the committee was able to present a report, which was long overdue on the benchmarking trip to Nairobi, Kenya.  The challenge we have as a committee is that there are too many petitions and whenever the committee goes out, there are political interferences by the people who petition. We would like to beg the honourable House to restrain members who bring in these petitions to leave them to the committee to do investigations and report back. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the petition for example, the one from Mbale, was tabled about one year ago, yet, the rules give us only 45 days. What happened to those 45 days? And usually whenever you need an extension, you either come back to the House or you write to the Speaker to seek that extension and it will be granted. All these petitions that you are talking about have exceeded those 45 days. Why?

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, we are aware of this. We have actually informed the Speaker’s Office as we proceed with our work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what timeframe do you need to finalise with this work?

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, we need two more months to complete this work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to the next committee.

COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, I rise to submit business handled by the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs since the inception of the Ninth Parliament, as per Rule 175.

The Ministerial Policy

The committee received the ministerial policy statement for votes under the Office of the President and the Prime Minister for the financial year 2011/2012. This report was presented, debated and adopted by the House.

Ministerial policy statement for the votes under the Office of the President and that of Prime Minister for the financial year 2012/2013: On this, I would like to inform the House that a report was presented and adopted by the House.

The ministerial policy statement for the votes under the Office of the President and that of the Prime Minister for the year 2013/2014: The report was presented and adopted by the House.

Business Received

Monitoring and evaluation and performance of Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, Phase II Project in the districts of Pallisa, Kumi, Soroti and Katakwi: Reports were presented and adopted by the House.

Monitoring and Evaluation of the Performance of the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, Phase II in the Lango Sub Region: On this, the reports were presented and adopted by the House.

A petition by Rwamwanzya in Kibale Sub County over an Eviction Notice by the Minister in Charge of Disaster Preparedness in order to use the land for resettlement of refugees from DRC. On this, I would like to report that the committee suspended deliberations after the petitioners went to court, which made deliberations sub judice. So, we abandoned the report because the matter is still in court. This was done in line with Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure.

The petition by vendors of St Balikuddembe Market on the management of the market was presented and adopted by the House.

The committee went on a benchmarking trip to Nairobi Kenya on the disaster management policies. A report was presented and laid on the Table.

We also went on a benchmarking trip to the House of Commons in the United Kingdom and the report, in draft form, is due to be discussed by the committee for presentation, next week.

We received a petition by vendors and residents of Mpererwe, Buwambo and Kituru Zone Roadside Market, in demolition, loss and damage of property by Kampala Capital City Authority enforcement officers. The report on this matter has been discussed in its draft form and is now ready for consideration by the committee. It will be submitted next week, Mr Speaker.

We have requested and received the first quarter budget performance evaluation for the financial year 2013/2014 for the votes under the Office of the President and that of the Prime Minister. The committee will consider these before forming a basis for the approval of the budget for 2014/15. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek guidance from you and the House. I have another engagement at 4p.m. and I thought this business would be brief. So, I would like to seek your indulgence that I am allowed to summarise the report for the Committee on National Economy; if I can be allowed, so that I can catch up. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t there any other person who can present it?

MR MUKITALE: My other members also belong to the Committee on ICT and Finance. Can I request hon. Isabirye to – (Interjections) – that if I cannot summarise it now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, will you be able to present it? Okay, you can now hand it over to the member.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Sir.

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

3.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Freedom Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present business of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government since the inception of the Ninth Parliament.
A number of reports has been produced by this committee including ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2011/12, 2012/2013 and 2013/2014.

There was a report on investigational failure to procure and deliver bicycles to the LC I and II chairpersons, which was adopted by this House.

There was a report on the petition on the operations of Pioneer Easy Bus and there was a report on the amendment of Local Government Bill, 2012 on the election of lower local councils; that was also presented to this House. 

There was a report on a petition on mismanagement of KCCA Affairs. This report was presented here and it has been referred to a select committee. There was a motion for a resolution of Parliament on creation of new districts presented to this House and the committee did some good work on it. The report was almost ready, but the Minister of Local Government came to the committee and said that there has been put a moratorium on creation of new districts. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the minister comes to the Floor of this House and withdraws the motion because there is a moratorium on creation of new districts. We cannot proceed and yet, the committee had done some work already. 
There is a petition by Uganda Railways Pensioners Association. This report is ready; it was presented by hon. Fungaroo. There was a petition by the people of Kilayi Parish in Mbale District who want to secede to Sironko District. This is a very old petition from the Eight Parliament but it was rejuvenated and brought back to the committee. We have done some work on it and the report will be ready next week. 

There is a petition by the people of Bulegeni Town Council in Bulambuli District on the alteration of boundaries to create Kamu Sub County. We are working on this report and it will be ready in two weeks’ time. 

There is a petition by councillors of Kira Town council on mismanagement of Town Council funds. Some work was done on this and only few witnesses remain to be met; they are the hon. Minister, and the Permanent Secretary for Ministry of Local Government. 

We have discovered on the same issue that the Auditor-General has qualified reports and we request that this goes to the Committee on Local Government and the Accounts Committee to avoid duplication of work. 

There is a petition on leadership vacuum and resultant insecurity faced by the people of Kimwanyi LC1 Zone in Wandegeya. This has not been handled yet, but we have discussed it in the committee. Petitions of this nature should be handled at the lower local Government first before they come to Parliament. 

There is a petition of former employees of ESO on their unpaid retirement benefits. We would like to start handling this in the month of December. There is a petition from vendors of Goma Division, Mukono Municipality; we have also scheduled to handle it with effect from December. 

There is a petition by the people of Mbale Municipality on the sale of Municipal Council land. We have also scheduled to handle this with effect from December. 

A number of field reports were made and these include; oversight on budget performance in Mbarara District, Rwampara County, Kamwenge District, Fort Portal, Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa – there are other field reports on Oyam, Lira and Dokoro on local government financing and budgeting. 

There was also a field trip to Jinja by the Ministry of Public Service on the Public/Civil Service College. 

We have recently gone to Western Uganda, Bundibugyo, Rubirizi and Rukungiri on local revenue performance. We have also gone to Eastern Uganda, Mbale and Bulambuli. On the conflict to solve the petition and this is what we have done here in Uganda. 

We have gone to South Africa to benchmark on monitoring and evaluation in local Government and this report is also being worked on. 

Mr Speaker, these are the issues I can report. I thank you for allowing us to work during recess. 

COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

MR EKANYA: Just for the record, Mr Speaker, you need to remind Members of the rules that nobody has the power to withdraw any matter from the committee. I heard it clearly from my sister that the issue of the district, which my people of Tororo County are disputing about was withdrawn by the minister from the committee contrary to our Rules. Mr Speaker, you need to come out very strongly on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you do it?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much for the permission. Hon. Members, the rules are categorical; once business is presented to this House, it ceases being a business of the Government and of the person who presented it. It becomes business of the House;whether the person who presented it dies or ceases to hold office. 

Therefore, I request you colleagues not to accept any intimidation of compromise; please, report to the House. That is how I used to handle business with my brother hon. Nandala when we were chairpersons of committees. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, no business of the House can be stalled or stopped at committee level. Once it is presented here, it goes to the committee and the committee must report to the House. Whether to say that business is no longer relevant or to make recommendations – it is a must. Even if it means coming here to say the minister says there is a moratorium; that would be your report to the House so that it is debated. 

So, do not sit back with business because somebody has made statements that amount to withdraw at that level; just like a Bill cannot be withdrawn at committee stage. 

COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

3.47
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Grace Namara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The mandate of the committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, according to Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure the sectoral committees are mandated:
    a) to examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministries covered by them; 
    b) to initiate or evaluate action programmes of those ministries and sectors and to make appropriate recommendations on them; 
(d)	to examine critically, Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House;
 (e)	to monitor the performance of ministries and departments;
(f) 	to ensure Government compliance with approved plans and programmes.”

Under the rules, the achievements of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry are as follows: 

Under Bills, the committee presented a report on 10 April, 2013 on the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Amendment Bill. It was considered and adopted by this House. 

The committee had the Anti-Counterfeit Bill. The minister coordinated with the Office of the Speaker and it was withdrawn. So, we are waiting for the ministry to present that Bill again. 

Before the committee is the Trade Licencing Amendment Bill, 2012; it is pending, but we are doing everything possible to expedite it and write the report of this important Bill. 

Under petitions, the committee presented a report on the petition by Uganda Traders in Southern Sudan. It was considered and adopted by this House 

Before the committee, is a petition by residents of Nwoya District on human rights conflict; we have a petition by residents of Kasese and Kabarole on human rights conflict, this report is awaiting signatures by committee Members, quite a number have signed but a few have not. But it is ready and the committee plans to present these two reports of Nwoya, Kasese and Kabarole because they have the same issue of human rights conflict. At an appropriate time, once given an opportunity on the Order Paper, they will be presented.

Before the committee, we have a petition by the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers’ Association. The first meeting to handle this petition will be tomorrow.

Monitoring and evaluation inland field visits.

Mr Speaker, the committee took up a field visit to Kakira and Mayuge to assess the production capacity of Kakira and find out about Mayuge industry’s compliance with the National Sugar Policy. 

The committee took a field visit to Murchison Falls to find out Uganda Wild Life Authority’s conservation activities, infrastructure under the protected areas for management of sustainable tourism project and environment protection activities of oil companies.

We took up a field visit to Uganda Wild Life Education Centre Entebbe to get information about the operations of the Centre. 

We took up a visit to Kalangala to assess the infrastructure provided under Kalangala infrastructure service project.

The committee visited Nwoya District to conduct public hearings on the petition by residents and that is how it went ahead to write a report that will be presented.

The committee visited Kasese to consider Katunguru– Katwe-Kabarole Town Council petition and we conducted public hearings on a petition and that petition is ready like I reported earlier.

The committee visited Murchison Falls, Kibaale and Kidepo National Parks to assess the facilities in the three national parks. 

Mr Speaker, under monitoring and evaluation, benchmarking visits abroad, the committee visited Mombasa Kenya, to find out the activities being undertaken by Uganda agencies during implementation of the single customs territory. The long-standing complaint of the business community about the customs warehousing rent by Kenya Revenue Authority and the storage waiver by all Uganda bound vehicles that have overstayed at the bond.

The committee had a visit to Namibia to benchmark tourism best practices. The committee also visited Nairobi, Kenya to attend the Nairobi International Trade Fair.

The committee visited South Sudan to handle the petition by the Uganda traders in South Sudan and that field visit helped us to write a report that will be presented on the Floor.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the business before us, we are working hand in hand to see that we expedite the work before the committee. I beg to report.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In November 2011, the traders of Masaka municipality petitioned this Parliament over what they considered arbitrary trade licence collections and having seen that before the committee is a Trade Licence (Amendment) Bill, I am made to understand that it must have been occasioned by this petition.

I would like to seek your guidance as to whether the committee considered this Bill to substitute it for a petition and therefore, it does not even appear on the business pending before this Committee of Trade, yet indeed, Parliament considered this petition to be valid and we hoped we would get a solution to the arbitrary collections, which I also believe still continue and the committee seems to have dumped the petition somewhere. I do not know how to proceed in the circumstances, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, what has happened to that petition?

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much for that clarification. Mr Speaker, the petition by Masaka traders seeking for a review of the trade licence under Cap 101 – this petition is going to be catered for during the consideration of Trade Licencing Bill, which I had already reported earlier that some  -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How does that work, Madam Chair.

MS NAMARA: Mr Speaker, I know this is a petition and the other one is an amendment, but we thought by handling the Bill, after making consultations, then, it would also help us deal with the petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you do, Madam Chair, is to report to the House on the petition, that that petition is now covered in the proposed legislation so that we strike it off our list and we wait for the Bill. That will be the most appropriate way of handling it.

MS NAMARA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with that suggestion. If the committee goes that way - but in the circumstances that the petitioners were not informed, I do not even believe that they will get time to consider their views over this particular Bill.

May they commit themselves that actually they are going to involve the petitioners to input in the amendment so that their issues are captured; if they can make a commitment, now that they seem to have ignored them while handling this particular amendment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would only be natural because he has a petition, the subject of which, he has no idea and there are petitioners, now you have informed the petitioners that the Bill is supposed to capture all those issues raised; it would only be proper if they were called to speak on the Bill. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, I read on the Floor of this House, the petition of the farmers concerning Bugisu Cooperative Union. I have just looked at the list, I sat waiting and listening and there was nothing mentioned about that petition. The people of Bugisu are concerned about their union and are waiting to get the outcome from the petition I presented here.

The residents of Namatala in Mbale who are allocated Government pool houses and were paying Housing Finance: Later on, they were being forced to leave their houses. I also read the petition on this Floor; to-date, we have not got an outcome. So, those committees, which the Speaker directed to handle these petitions expeditiously, up to date, there is no decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought I heard the Physical Infrastructure talking about that particular issue of the houses. I thought I heard them saying it is part of the pending business before them. They said it; you might not have been in the House.

3.59
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Mr Speaker, from the beginning of the presentations from committees, we have been battling with the problem of petitions. Most people petition Parliament because they have failed to get redress in other organs of the State. The petitions are the last resort. The reason is that within a stipulated period of time, we are able to provide a solution. If we consistently fail to respond to this appeal, our people will in the course of time lose faith and confidence in us. As you can see, the rules clearly say this committee that received a petition should be able to report within 45 days but those committees have failed and we do not know why. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my request is that if it is possible, the cure is in the rules and privilege committee. Let us ask the Rules and Privileges committee to go back and review the rules concerning petitions. If Parliament cannot stand petitions, we should be frank to our people and tell them, “Let us leave petitions to go elsewhere.” Otherwise, keeping our people waiting for what we cannot provide is not good for this country. The rules committee should take up the matter related to the confusion and give us a long-term solution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you look at sub-rule 6 of that same rule 29, “The Speaker may refer a petition to a particular minister where he or she is of the view that such petition would be better handled by such a minister and the minister shall report back to Parliament within 45 days.” So, the rules on petitions give that latitude. It does not have to be handled by the committee all the time. 

There are petitions we have referred to ministers and they were handled very quickly. For instance, there was one on eviction of some people from some land in hon. Mable’s constituency; there is another petition that we have referred to a minister that had to do with a business person who lost property in Kenya. We thought Parliament would not competently handle that; it had to do with relations in the region; so, we referred that to the minister. So, there are avenues that we can use to deal with some petitions that do not have to come to the House but can be handled better somewhere else. But also, there are issues with the period given, 45 days and we have had issues with that. 

Then, the other issue in the rules is that all petitions must be sent to the Clerk’s office and the Business Committee to be cleared. Previously, we thought it would be easy to make people access Parliament and bring these petitions but it became a problem; you can see by the volume of the petitions that we received. Some of them were not matters that could be handled by Parliament really but they brought them nevertheless and now, they are on our pending list of business. So, we need to see how to clear that and we systematically deal with these issues so that they do not begin making Parliament look like when you present a petition, it takes forever, no action is taken, like it is beginning to look. 

So, we are taking collective measures to deal with this situation. But your concern is well taken. 

4.03
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking further clarification to know about the petition that was brought before this House concerning the Kibwetere issue. I wanted to know what happened because the report has never come out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a petition to this House?

MS KARUNGI: Yes, there was a petition brought before the Parliament and then it was referred to the committee.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you colleague, for giving way. The information I am giving is that that petition was allocated to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and it is part of what I am going to report this afternoon. Thank you.

MS AURU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened very attentively to the presentation by the Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I expected tohear about a petition from different sub-counties of Moyo District presented on this Floor by the MP of West Moyo on elephants, that is human-animal conflict. I would like to know the fate of that petition. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t I hear it from Trade and Industry? Was it one of them?

MS NAMARA: Mr Speaker, the petitions about human-wild life conflict are only two: one is from Nwoya and the other from Kasese.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It might have been at a time when we would present petitions; then it is not extracted properly and sent to the committee. So, we need to trace where it is. If it was presented here, we will forward it.

MS NABULYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to ask where I can always trace the petitions that I have presented on the Floor regarding the workers from the banks, water board,  andformer workers  of Uganda Electricity Board. None of them has ever been presented on the Floor. I have been chasing them right from the Clerk and the Clerk seems not to know where they are exactly. So, I do not know which respective committees are handling them and they have taken quite long.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It might be the same problem. I said earlier that petitions were presented but not properly extracted and forwarded to the committees. We need to deal with those properly. I am being informed that it might come in a subsequent report from the Committee on Natural Resources. It might be there, so, let us wait and hear their report.

4.07
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also recall that on 10 April 2013, I presented an issue on the Floor of this House on the relationship between National parks and- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What issue did you present? Was it a petition or-?

MR SABILA: It was kind of a petition on national importance and the Speaker referred the issue to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to be expedited. Up to today, I do not know how far it went and I am interested in knowing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was a petition, it should have been captured. But if it was “kind” of a petition, it might not have been captured.

MR SABILA: It was a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us take that and trace where these matters are. This is why it is important because sometimes, you think your matter is just being delayed when actually, it is before nobody. So, it is important for us to update ourselves on these. -Petition of the Nubians?

4.08
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad you remember that. There was a petition by the Nubians who were repatriated from Gulu in the 70s and resettled in Masindi Port. So, I have not heard about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It might be coming under Natural Resources also. It is coming under defence.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we move to the standing committees? Hon. Members, you all know that the Committee on Appointments and the Business Committee have their different- there are those whose chairs-

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, there are those whose Chairs were not present and are now in the House. I would beg that you go and find them on the way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you one of them, hon. Member, or are you speaking for them?

MR KYANJO: I am speaking for them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Members, we will come back to that. Let us go to the standing committees. No. 1 and 3 have different reporting mechanisms, that is, No.1 Appointments Committee and No.3 Business Committee of the House. They have a different reporting mechanism. They do not speak to the House directly. So, can we go to Budget Committee?

4.10
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to represent my Chairperson, hon. Tim Lwanga, who is the Chairperson of budget committee. He is unable to be here with us. He lost his foster mother in the US and they have travelled to the US for the burial. So, I am here to present on behalf of the budget committee. 

The mandate of the Budget Committee is spelt out under Rule 138(2), 161(3) and the Budget Act as follows: 

Rule 138(2): “The House shall consider the sectoral committee reports within a period of fourteen days and if there are any inconstancies in the recommendations by the sectoral committees, the Speaker shall refer the inconsistencies to the Budget Committee for reconciliation and harmonisation.”

Rule 161(3): “The functions of the Budget Committee shall be to-
(a) consider preliminary estimates and macroeconomic plans and programmes and submit recommendations to the Speaker;
(b) consider the national budget and compile amendments and refer them to relevant committees;
(c) carry out such other functions relating to the national budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any other law.”

The Budget Act section 7(3) states that “the budget committee shall scrutinise the estimates and reports of the sessional committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May every year.”

In accordance with the mandate above, the budget committee has conducted the following activities since the commencement of the Ninth Parliament. 

Financial year 2011/2012
 
August to September 2011

In accordance with rule 138(2) quoted above, the committee synchronised the budget figures for the different sectors with a view to finding money to increase teachers’ salaries as per the Speaker’s directive. 

The committee travelled to the national assemblies of South Africa, Rwanda and Ghana to benchmark the budget process in those jurisdictions. I believe these reports were dully presented.

April to May 2012

The committee considered the MTEF for financial years 2012/2103, 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 and compiled a report to be presented to the Speaker for onward transmission to H. E the President in accordance with section 7(3) of the Budget Act.

The committee considered the supplementary expenditure schedules 1 and 2 for financial year 2011/2012 in accordance with rules 161(3) and section 12(1) of the Budget Act and of course, subsequently, the appropriation Bill for that financial year.

Financial year 2012/2103

August to September 2012

In accordance with   Rule 138(2) the committee synchronised the budget figures for the different sectors with the view to finding money to increase health workers’ salaries as per the Speaker’s directive. 

In the course of the financial year, the committee travelled to the US to attend conferences on financial management. They also travelled to Zambia to benchmark the budget process.

In the same financial year, the committee also travelled to the hospitals of Kawolo and Tororo to assess the situation of health workers following the salary increment as passed by Parliament.

April to May 2013

The committee considered the MTEF of financial years 2013/2014, 2014/2015 and 2015/2016 and compiled a report to be presented to the Speaker for onward transmission to His Excellency the President in accordance with section 7(3) of the Budget Act.

In the course of the financial year, the committee considered supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 for financial year 2012/2013 in accordance with 161(3) and section 12(1) of the Budget Act. 

The Appropriation Bill was also considered by the budget committee and dully handled. 

Financial year 2012/2013

The committee considered the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014 in accordance with Rule 161(3).

August to September 2013
In accordance with Rule 138(2) the committee synchronised the budget figures for the different sectors with the view to finding money to increase teachers’ salaries as per the Speaker’s directive.

The committee travelled to the Uganda High Commission of Nairobi and London to assess the capacity of missions to handle non-tax revenue for the management, development and acquisition of Uganda properties abroad as previously recommended to the House. The report is being processed. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the budget committee has no pending work? It is clear.

MS AKOL: To date, the Budget Committee has no pending work apart from this report, which should be presented next week. Thank you.

COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES

4.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I rise to present the status report of work done by the committee and that which is pending before the committee and I do this guided by the Constitution and Rule 169(1) of our Rules of Procedure that we follow as we do our work.      

Mr Speaker, two petitions came before the committee. The first one, in respect to land on Old Port Bell Road in Luzira brought by former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation was dealt with, brought to this House, presented and the resolutions passed by this august House. 

The second again brought by former workers of the Uganda Railways Corporation in respect of 57.49 acres of land at Nsambya, was considered. We now have a report that is ready for presentation to this House; in actual sense we have the report on the Order Paper.

Sometime last year, we considered the affairs in performance of the Uganda Investment Authority for 10 years. We finalised our report, presented it here and the recommendations were approved by this House. We, therefore, await Treasury Memorandum from Government. 

Before the committee is a final report on the affairs of Uganda Investment Authority and their performance from 1998 to 2001. This is on the Order Paper for presentation today. The committee on COSASE has finalised hearings for the following entities- URA is on the Order Paper. I beg your pardon. This was a slip of the tongue. 

The committee has conducted intensive hearings and has finalised hearings for the following entities in the health sector:
    1. The Joint Clinical Research Centre for 10 years
    2. Uganda Medical And Dental Practitioners
    3. The National Drug Authority 
    4. The Uganda Nurses And Midwives Council 
    5. The Uganda Allied Health Professional Council 

We have reviewed the responses of documentation from the National Medical Stores in respect of their performance and in a matter of weeks, Mr Speaker, we should be ready to present reports of the Auditor-General for the various entities under the health sector.

We have also received and reviewing documents of responses from the Electricity Regulatory Authority and so, we should soon set the stage for hearings of this particular entity. We have finalised hearings for the Cotton Development Organisation and we should soon be coming up with a draft report, ready for consideration by the committee. We have also, under the agriculture sector, finalised hearings on the reports on the Uganda Coffee Development Authority and should be retreating very soon, to write our reports.

The Bank of Uganda is coming for the final meeting tomorrow. We have held a number of meetings with them on their affairs and after the final meeting; we should be ready to generate our reports. 

We had commenced hearings on the performance of the National Housing and Construction Company Limited. Unfortunately, along the way, we had to stop because the committees felt it prudent to ask the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic audit on this company. We had a lot of trouble with this company and so, the Auditor-General is doing his work. After that, we will then proceed with hearings.

Mr Speaker, on the transport sector, we have a draft for Civil Aviation Authority and so, we should finalise our report within a couple of weeks and we should be able to present it to this august House. 

In the course of our work, among the many value-for-money audits, we have only considered one and this is the one in respect to the National Medical Stores. The committee has a draft report and should soon be able to present this to the House. We made a number of both local and foreign trips and the reports will be coming as the reports of the entities are brought here. 

COSASE handles more than 100 entities. This work that I have presented to you does not even constitute a sixth of the work that needs to be done. This is as a result of the huge backlog that we have accumulated over the years and surely, we would like to thank your office, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to work during recess. We are actually working overtime to try and see that we bring all these reports up to date.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I rise to report to this august House business transacted by the Committee on Equal Opportunities under Rule 171 of our Rules of Procedure since the beginning of the Ninth Parliament. 

The committee held 17 meetings and I want to report that all members attended. The committee held an orientation retreat of its members at the beginning as members had to be equipped with the procedures and the rules of committee management and what was expected of them.

Monitoring and evaluation

The committee undertook a field trip to assess issues of gender, equal opportunities and service delivery in the local government in the following districts: Iganga, Namayingo, Luuka, Kaliro, Mbale, Sironko, Bududa, Manafwa, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo and Kasese. 

The committee presented its report, which was considered and adopted by this august House with much support and I want to thank the honourable members. 

The committee undertook a field visit to some selected water stressed districts under the cattle corridor to assess water equity distribution and the following districts were selected: Lyantonde, Ssembabule, Mbarara, Isingiro, Kyegegwa, Kibaale, Buliisa, Nakapiripirit and Kapchorwa. 

I would like to report that the report of this field trip has been ready and it was lined up for some time on the Order Paper.  Unfortunately, I do not see it as business to follow, and it is my request that we should have it because it has been there for some time.

Mr Speaker, I want to present the committee’s work for monitoring and evaluation and the foreign trips. This Committee on Equal Opportunities took a trip to Malaysia on a fact-finding mission on the issue of Ugandan women trafficking and sexual exploitation. A partial report as well as a comprehensive report was presented, considered and adopted by this House. I want to thank the members and I want to report that Government already took action and a mission was opened in Malaysia. 

Trafficking in sexual exploitation

Again, the committee undertook a benchmarking foreign trip on the same issue in the countries of the United Arab Emirates, India, Hong Kong and China and a report was presented to this House, considered and adopted. 

The line ministries of Internal Affairs, Gender and Foreign Affairs were asked by this House through the Speaker that they should come within 14 days to present a comprehensive report on the way forward and mechanisms of ensuring a long lasting solution. As a committee and this House, we are waiting; we have not received that from the concerned ministries.

Benchmarking trip to the following national assemblies and parliaments on issues of gender, equality and best practices that this august House can adopt: The committee benchmarked with the Parliament of Burundi, the Parliament of Rwanda, the National Assembly of Kenya, the National Assembly of Malawi, the Parliament of Ethiopia and the Pan African Parliament.  I want to report that each member on this committee managed to have an opportunity to go outside and benchmark. All the members on this committee have had equal share on travel abroad or equal opportunities for exposure. 

I want to report that these reports have been on the Order Paper for quite some time. A comprehensive report especially on the best practices that this august House can adopt is ready for the committee to present so that it is considered and adopted. It is my humble appeal once again that it is brought back on the Order Paper through you, Mr Speaker.

Pending activities

These are pending but on schedule as per the committee work plan: 
    • Inland trip to the Northern region and the islands on the same issues of service delivery and equal opportunities, especially resource distribution.

    • Assessment of gender equity regarding Albertine oil to see how the Oil Sector is considering issues of gender equity.

    • A Private Members’ Bill on gender and equity. This has also been here and we have been waiting but now the committee is moving to bring a Private Members’ Bill.
    • Benchmarking trips again on issues of gender, equal opportunities and the best practices. I want to report and thank your office, Madam Speaker that the benchmarking trips to the Parliaments of Botswana and Mozambique have also been approved and all Members are going to share equally so that they are also exposed in these two parliaments.
    • Pending tours to Turkey, Kuwait, Nigeria and Ghana will be the last ones on our itinerary as we look at the picture of the Pan African Parliament.

 I want to thank the Rt hon. Speaker for the guidance and cooperation that your office has given the Committee on Equal Opportunities. I also want to thank the Members for your support whenever we bring our reports here. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES

4.32
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation Committee on the activities handled from the commencement of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament to date. 

The Government Assurances and Implementation Committee has handled a series of activities as provided for in Rule 167 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament since the commencement of the Ninth Parliament. These activities include: meetings with ministers and ministry officials, meetings with district leaders and other stakeholders, oversight visits, benchmarking visits and on spot visits.

As far as Bills are concerned, this committee has only one Bill, the Government Assurances Bill. The committee has handled its part of the work on this Bill. However, this Bill has been referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to consider and report back to the House.

As part of the work in preparing for this Bill, the Government Assurances and Implementation Committee had a benchmarking trip to the National Assembly of Zambia, from which most of the provisions in the Bill were derived.

The committee also had two workshops to further develop the Bill, one of which had a facilitator from the Parliament of Zambia. 

The following publications have been made by the committee:
    • The Government Assurances Volume I from June to December 2011.
    • Government Assurances Volume II from February to May 2012.
    • Government Assurances Volume III from June to December 2012.

The committee has prepared a report on presidential pledges from 1986 to date and this publication is going to be launched this Thursday, 14 November 2013 at 11 a.m. in the Conference Hall, South Wing, Parliament of Uganda. Members of this honourable House are invited to attend this meeting so that they can follow up on the presidential pledges, which have been made in their constituencies and districts.

The following reports have been compiled and considered by the committee:
    • Report on Government Assurances made in the eighth Parliament. This report is before the House and it is awaiting space on the Order Paper.
    • Report on Government Assurances on the Health Sector. This report is also before the House and awaiting space on the Order Paper.
    • Report on Government Assurances on the Works and Transport Sector. This report should be ready within a month.

The committee has conducted oversight visits and has considered in its oversight visits, assurances in the sectors of health, education, roads, water, agriculture, immigration and energy.

We have also carried out oversight visits in the areas below: Under the Health Sector, the committee visited in Central and mid-Western Uganda, Kikandwa Health Centre III, Kyantungo Health Centre IV in Mityana district, Bukomero Health Centre IV in Kiboga district and Hoima hospital.

In Eastern Uganda, the committee visited Namwezi Health Centre III in Mukono district, Buseta Health Centre IV in Iganga district and Namayingo Health Centre IV in Namayingo district.

In North Eastern Uganda, the committee visited Katakwi Health Centre IV in Katakwi district and Iriri Health Centre III in Karamoja.

Under assurances in the Water Sector, the committee visited Arechek valley dam. In the Agricultural Sector, the committee also visited agricultural projects in the Karamoja area.

Under assurances in Energy, the committee visited the Bujagali power project sites at the time when the project had not yet been completed. As of now, the work is completed and the dam is operational.

Assurances in the Works and Transport Sectors: The committee has carried out oversight visits of roads and bridges in Kanungu, Rukungiri, Kamuli, Mayuge and Mubende. The committee also carried out oversight visits in the different divisions of Kampala under Kampala Capital City Authority and held discussions with mayors of all the divisions in Kampala. We also carried out on spot visits of road and drainage works in Kampala city.

Conferences attended

The committee was represented at the International Consortium on Government Financial Management in Miami, Florida, USA. Two workshops were held to propose amendments to the implementation of the Government Assurances Bill, which is currently under consideration by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Benchmarking visits

The committee has travelled to the National Assembly of Kenya and the House of Commons to benchmark how government assurances are handled in those Parliaments. The committee also visited the National Assembly of Zambia, Parliament of Seychelles, Rwanda National Assembly and also interacted with the East African Legislative Assembly at their recent session in Burundi. MrSpeaker and hon. Members, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Member on whether the Namwezi you are talking about in Eastern Uganda is a different one from Mbikko- because Mukono is part of Buganda. One would get an impression that maybe-(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, we did visit that particular health centre but the –(Interjections)– yes. So, I beg to be excused in case it was misplaced, in terms of the location. Thank you.

COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Ms Sarah Kayagi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on HIV/AIDS has handled the following activities: the committee conducted an assessment of HIV/AIDS programmes in selected districts. A report was presented to this House in July 2012. The committee also conducted field visits in Central Uganda in November 2012 from which a report was also presented to this House.

We have a draft report in regard to the committee’s field visit to Western Uganda. The committee is yet to approve it.

We also conducted a field visit to West Nile Region. The report from this visit was laid this afternoon. Our report from the committee’s visit to Eastern Uganda is still in draft form.

Workshops

The committee organised two workshops for MPs. The first workshop was organised in November 2012. This workshop brought together all MPs and sensitized them about the resurgence of the HIV/AIDS infection.

The second workshop was organised for six committees of Parliament to discuss the challenges financing HIV/AIDS Programmes. In that workshop, we put our heads together and thought about how to establish an HIV Trust Fund. This workshop was organisedby the following committees: Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Health, National Economy, Budget, Finance and HIV.

Scrutinizing Bills

Mr Speaker, the committee worked hand in hand with the Committee on Health to finalise on the public hearings for the HIV/AIDS Management Bill, 2010. The Committee on Health should soon present the Bill on the Floor of Parliament as a way of enacting the Bill into law.

Benchmarking

Mr Speaker, the committee sent members to the following countries for benchmarking: Malawi, to attend the conference on social justice based approach in combating HIV/AIDS endemic; Zimbabwe, to benchmark on the establishment, management and operation of the Zimbabwe HIV/AIDS Trust Fund; in Tanzania, to assess the Ant-HIV/AIDS regional mechanisms.

The committee laid a report on its findings and the lessons learnt from Malawi and Zimbabwe. The House is yet to set time for these reports to be debated.

The report on the trip to the Tanzanian Ant Regional HIV/AIDS Programme is ready for presentation to the House.

Pending Business

Mr Speaker, the committee has got pending business. This is in regard to the field trips to all the landing sites in the different regions of this country, to assess the HIV/AIDS programmes as per our own plan.

We shall have a field trip to all border entry districts to assess the HIV/AIDS programme available in these cross border communities. In the same vain, we will also do a field visit to selected districts to assess the different regions on male involvement in the fight against HIV and the promotion of HIV programmes. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jova Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I rise to give a brief account on the business of the Human Rights Committee of the Ninth Parliament.

The Committee on Human Rights was created in July 2012, under Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure and given specific mandate under Rule 174.

The committee has undertaken capacity building workshops for members in partnership with the human rights stakeholders in the country. This has enabled members to appreciate the role of the committee and other stakeholders in the promotion of human rights in the country.

In a bid to ensure that all business of Parliament is human rights compliant, the committee with the help of the British High Commission developed the Human Rights Checklist for the promotion of human rights observance. The checklist was officially launched by the Rt Hon. Speaker on 10 September 2013.

This booklet is a guide on what to look out for in any proposed legislation, policy or any other undertaking by any institution to ensure their human rights compliance. The committee has undertaken field work in the following areas and held public hearings:

Gulu

While there, the committee visited the prisons and police station, juvenile detention centres and held a public hearing with the civil society organizations and other stakeholders.

Mbarara Region

Here the committee visited Mbarara Hospital, Kyamugolanyi Prisons, detention centres in Bushenyi, the Central Police Station in Mbarara and Health Centre IV in Mitooma District.

Mbale Region
The committee visited Mbale Hospital, detention centres and held a public hearing in the municipal centre.

The committee has considered the Human Rights Commission Report and concluded work on the reports that were pending from 2008 to 2011. All the four reports were tabled, discussed and adopted by the House.

Mr Speaker, although no Bills have been specifically forwarded to the committee, under our mandate, the committee has examined the Ant-Homosexuality Bill and the Marriage and Divorce Bill to ensure they are human rights compliant.

The committee carried out benchmarking in the House of Commons in the UK, the Pan African Parliament in South Africa before visiting the Mozambican Parliament and that of Botswana together with the European Parliament.

I want to also report that the committee participated in the working group conference of the IPU on Domestic Violence in Dar-Salaam. The reports are ready and will soon be tabled in the House.

Further, the committee also sent three of its members to the Pan African Parliament for attachment.

Mr Speaker, since there are usually complaints about external trips, I want to state categorically that all members of the committee have been given the opportunity.

Apparently, the committee is considering the latest report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, which is the 15th Report covering 2012.

We also intend to analyse the Pornography Bill and the Bill on HIV/AIDS in order to ensure the two are human rights compliant. We are scheduled to visit Soroti, Jinja, West Nile and Kampala to check on the health facilities and detention centres to assess their compliancy on the basic human rights standards.

The committee further plans to hold sensation workshops on the checklist for human rights compliance as a way of promoting of human rights issues in the country. We are also to participate in the 16 days of activism, culminating into the international Human Rights Day, which is celebrated internationally on 10 December every year.

The next committee report will be ready by the end of February 2014.

Challenges

Mr Speaker, all business of Parliament contains human rights concerns and it is hard for the committee to look at each of them. There is also need for short term consultancies for some select Bills but the budget is limited. 

Secondly, as a Standing Committee with a lot of work, we are deeply concerned about the collision of meetings with sectoral committees. Those are our major challenges. I beg to submit.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights is whether your committee also considers the report of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, which issues a report on the violation of human rights in Uganda every year. What has your committee done about that?

MS KAMATEEKA: Under our mandate on holding Government accountable for international instruments, we held meetings with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and all the security agencies and indeed, questioned them about the observations that were made by the UN report and we got responses and we were assured that Government is handling those concerns. We will be reporting in our next report.  

COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): The Committee on Local Government Accounts on behalf of Parliament under Article 164 (3) of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 171 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is mandated to monitor expenditure of all public funds whether transferred from the centre or locally generated by local governments. The committee assesses and evaluates levels of compliance with the established laws of Uganda, the performance, adherence, compliance to performance standards and regulations governing public expenditure.

Work plan

The Committee on Local Government Accounts planned to consider reports of the Auditor-General for the following years: 2008/2009 - Local Governments; 2009/2010-Local Governments; 2007/2008/2009/2010/2011 –value-for-money reports on NAADS;2007/2008/2009/2010/2011-value-for-money reports on rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads in Uganda. 

Achievements

The committee compiled and presented to Parliament reports on the following: 2008/2009, we presented reports from the following districts – Vote 501- Adjumani, Vote 565- Amuria, Vote 570 – Amuru, Vote 502 – Apac, Vote 503- Arua, Vote 504 – Bugiri, Vote 506 – Bushenyi, Vote 775 – Dokolo, Vote 508 – Gulu, Vote 510 – Iganga, Vote 560 – Isingiro, Vote 511 – Jinja, Vote 512 – Kabale, Vote 515 – Kalangala, Vote 661 – Kaliro, Vote 517 – Kamuli, Vote 522 – Katakwi, Vote 523 – Kayunga, Vote 525 – Kiboga, Vote 562 – Kiruhura, Vote 526 – Kisoro, Vote 529 – Kumi, Vote 531 – Lira, Vote 580 – Lyantonde, Vote 523 – Masaka, Vote 537 – Mbarara, Vote 568 – Mityana, Vote 535 – Mayuge, Vote 541 – Mubende, Vote 574 – Namutumba, Vote 546 – Ntungamo, Vote 547 – Pader, Vote 549 – Rakai, Vote 550 – Rukungiri, Vote 551 – Ssembabule and Vote 553 - Soroti. 

For the financial Year 2008/2009 for municipalities, we considered Vote 755 - Jinja, Vote 757 – Kabarole, Vote 758 – Lira, Vote 759 – Masaka, Vote 761 – Mbarara and Vote 763 – Soroti. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a municipality called Kabarole?     

HON. MEMBERS: It is called Fort Portal.

MR SABIITI: I beg your pardon, it is Fort Portal. For the year 2009/2010, we considered the following votes: Vote 565 – Amuria, Vote 570 – Amuru, Vote 502 – Apac, Vote 503 – Arua, Vote 504 – Bugiri, Vote 506 – Bushenyi, Vote 575 – Dokolo, Vote 508 – Gulu, Vote 510 – Iganga, Vote 560 – Isingiro, Vote 511 – Jinja, Vote 512 – Kabale, Vote 515 – Kalangala, Vote 561 – Kaliro, Vote 517 – Kamuli, Vote 522 – Katakwi, Vote 523 – Kayunga, Vote  525 – Kiboga, Vote 562 – Kiruhura, Vote 526 – Kisoro, Vote 529 – Kumi, Vote 531 – Lira, Vote 580 – Lyantonde, Vote 523 – Masaka, Vote 537 – Mbarara, Vote 568 – Mityana, Vote 535 – Mayuge, Vote 541 – Mubende, Vote 574 – Namutumba, Vote 546 – Ntungamo, Vote 547 – Pader - 549, Rakai - vote 550, Rukungiri vote 551, Sembabule - vote 552, Soroti - vote 553.

We also considered value for money reports. We considered management of NAADS, a case study for Kabarole, Kasese and Lira, for the years 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 but this report was never adopted by Parliament. Parliament requested for its revision.

Reports not yet presented but ready for presentation are reports of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on reports of the Auditor-General for selected municipalities for the year 2009. It is ready for presentation. 

Next is value-for-money report on maintenance and rehabilitation of feeder roads in Uganda; a case study for Masindi, Hoima and Kumi districts. The report is ready for presentation. 

Other committee activities
The committee had two retreats and completed the above reports. They had study tours and benchmarking trips to other Parliaments in other countries. 

The committee further attended a number of conferences and symposiums. All in all, 98 percent of the committee members travelled to different countries for capacity building.

Pending work in the committee

Consideration of the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year 2010/2011 for all the districts except West Nile District, Nebbi, Arua Municipality, Moyo, Yumbe and Adjumani.

Consideration of the annual reports of the Auditor-General for the financial year 2010/2011 for all the districts except the West Nile District of Yumbe.

Challenges

The committee mandate covers Auditor-General’s reports for all the 114 districts, over 20 municipalities, over 114 town councils and about 600 sub-counties. This, of course, causes a challenge in terms of financing and time.

Another challenge is low attendance of committee meetings and hearings as a result of Members belonging to two committees. In fact, we recommend that if we are to do much work, if you are on this committee, you should belong to one committee and not two committees.

Lastly, I thank the Clerk and all committee members for their cooperation. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, did you say there are now 114 districts? We need to correct the record. (Laughter)

MR SABIITI: 112 districts. They change every day - (Laughter) but as of now – if you remember, we had a resolution here and the number of districts was supposed to be –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, as of now, there are 112 districts.

MR SABIITI: 112 districts. I thank you.

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, when the chairman was reporting, he said that 98 percent of his Members had travelled outside this country and if my mathematics is correct, this can mean that these must be 50 Members and 49 have travelled. That is what it would mean. If 98 have travelled, that would be the minimum - (Interjections) no, I am asking a question; why don’t you wait for me to finish? The question I am raising is, does this committee have that 50 or does it have the 100 to give us 98 people because if they are 25 – (interjections) - the problem is that you do not know this Mathematics. If it is 98 percent of all the members, it cannot be any number, because if they are 25 and 24 have travelled, it cannot be 98 percent. (Interjections) No, it cannot be 98 percent. There is no half a person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members we are now re-inventing mathematical principles here. (Laughter) but let us not get into that. We need another debate on that one. Thank you, chairperson.

COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

5.06
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County, South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to present the business transacted by the Committee on National Economy since the inception of the Ninth Parliament. The committee managed to present a total of 24 loan requests to this august House and all the loans submitted were approved. I thank the Members for the support.
We managed to present the following loans:
    1. A loan of $50 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for General Budget Support for the Financial Sector Development Policy Operation. 
    2. A loan of UA40 million from the African Development Bank and another ID 7 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the implementation of Phase III of CAIIF.
    3. A loan of UA46 million and another UA10 million from the African Development Bank and Nigeria Trust Fund respectively for financing the improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the city of Kampala.
    4. A loan of SDR 55.9 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for poverty reduction support credit.
    5. A loan of $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group of financing the Uganda Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in selected municipalities.
    6. A loan of $40 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme. 
    7. A loan of an addition SDR47.4 million equivalent to $47.5 million from IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the Transport Sector Development Project, Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road.
    8. A loan of $14.1 million from the Islamic Development Bank and another $5.0 Million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa for financing phase II of the Technical Education Project and Nakaseke Technical Institute respectively.
9. 	A loan of $30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of specialised Maternal and Neonatal Healthcare Unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital.
10. 	Loan of SDR74.1 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group to support the electricity sector development project for the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line.

11. A loan of Kuwait Dinar 3.59 million from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development for financing the reconstruction and equipping of four technical institutes in the Technical Vocational Education and Training Programme.
12. 	A loan of $10 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for financing the Energy Development and Access Expansion of the Project in seven towns in Uganda.
13. 	A loan of SDR87.1 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing of the water management and development project.
14. 	A loan of €55 million from the European Union for financing the widening and improvement of the Kampala Northern Bypass and the construction of the Mbarara Bypass.
15. 	A loan of $2 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development of Africa and another $15 million from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund for International Development for financing the upgrading of Masaka-Bukakata road project.
16. 	A loan of $9.75 million from IDB for financing the consolidation and scaling up of millennium villages projects in Uganda.
17. 	A loan of UA57 million from the ADB of the Africa’s Development Bank Group for financing the support to high education science and technology.
18. 	A loan of ID 53,390,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing construction of Opuyo-Moroto Electricity Transmission line project.
19. 	A loan of an additional SDR8 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Uganda Energy for Rural Transmission Adaptable Programme loan, Phase II project.
20. 	Loan of $23 million from the French Agency for financing the Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line and associated substations project.
21. A loan of $15 million from the KFW of Germany for financing the Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line project. 
22. 	A loan of $ 34,050,000 from Islamic Development Bank for financing enhanced national food security through increased rice production project.
23. 	A loan of $ 72,940,000 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the road sector support project and upgrading of Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road.
24.	A loan of $15 million from the Islamic Development Bank and $5 Million from the Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development to support the dry-land integrated development project in Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, we also submitted to this august House a report on the economic situation in Uganda. The pending business is as follows:
1. 	There is a proposal by Government of Uganda to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development and $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe General Hospitals project.

2. 	The proposal by Government of Uganda to borrow up to SDR 19.3 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the programme for financial inclusion in rural areas.

3. 	A proposal by Government of Uganda to borrow up to $12 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli Road.

Mr Speaker, we have the following draft reports that are waiting for consideration by the committee: 
The report on the request by Government to borrow ID 66.1 million and another ID 100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development project. 

We have the report on performance of the economy for the financial year 2012- 2013. There is also a report on the debt sustainability for financial year 2012-2013. There is also a report on the matter of Government of Uganda signing loans without approval of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What timeframe are you giving to those ones pending? 

MR ISABIRYE: Mr Speaker, one week is enough because most of these reports are almost ready; we are only waiting for space on the Order Paper.

5.16
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If only the acting chairperson could listen. I am only seeking clarification from you on two points. Wouldn’t you think Parliament should reconsider renaming your committee from “national economy” to the “loans committee” because 98 percent of your business is about borrowing? When looking at national economy, we are talking about the sectors that make up this economy but all we are getting is loans.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is that matter substantial before us?

MR KATUNTU: I was seeking clarification from the chairperson, Mr Speaker. 

MR ISABIRYE: Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy performs its duties within the mandate of the Rules of Procedure. Secondly, what I have submitted is not only loans, but if you talk about a report on the performance of the economy, it can actually take a whole week discussing the state of the economy. So, it is not all about loans but also the state of the economy. Thank you.

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

5.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I beg to submit the performance status of the Public Accounts committee. It derives its powers from Articles 90, 163(5) and 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The mandate of the Public Accounts committee is to receive and examine the audited books of accounts as supplied by the Auditor-General; examining the sums of money appropriated by Parliament to several Government ministries, agencies and departments to enhance service delivery. 

The Public Accounts committee of the Ninth Parliament started its work with the audited books of accounts of the Auditor-General dating 2009/2010 financial year. The committee has exhaustively looked at this report of the financial year and completed it, save for the missions in Nairobi, Dar-es-Salaam, Canberra, Australia and Pretoria. 

The following reports have already been submitted to Parliament and debated:
    • Report on compensation to Haba Group of Companies
    • Report on compensation to Rhino Investments Limited
    • A report on compensation to Dura Cement.

Mr Speaker, this afternoon, on the Order Paper, we also have a report, which has already been presented but not yet adopted, on compensation to British Service Development Services Ltd.

The following sector reports are in draft form and await endorsement by the committee: 

The Health Sector

Under the health sector, the following are the votes that have already been considered with draft reports ready: 
    • Ministry Of Health
    • Health Services Commission 
    • Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital 
    • Uganda Blood Transfusion Services
    • Uganda Heart Institute
    • Uganda Cancer Institute
    • Mulago National Referral Hospital
    • Uganda AIDS Commission and;

The regional hospitals of the following regions:
    • Arua Regional Referral Hospital
    • Mbale Regional Referral Hospital
    • Kabale Regional Referral hospital
    • Lira Regional Referral Hospital
    • Gulu Regional Referral Hospital 
    • Mbarara, Fort Portal, Jinja, Soroti, Moroto and Hoima regional referral hospitals

Under the Education Sector, the following are the votes that the committee has already examined and a draft report is ready awaiting endorsement by the committee:
    • Ministry of Education
    • Uganda Management Institute
    • Education Service Commission 
    • Busitema University
    • Gulu University
    • Mbarara University of Science And Technology
    • Makerere University Business School
    • Kyambogo University and 
    • Makerere University

Under the Justice, Law and Order Sector the following are the votes that we have completed and await endorsement by the committee members:
    • Ministry of Justice And Constitutional Affairs
    • Ministry of Internal Affairs
    • Uganda Police Force
    • Uganda Prisons Services
    • Judicial Service Commission
    • Law Reform Commission
    • Uganda Human Rights Commission
    • Department of Public Prosecutions
    • Uganda Registration Services Bureau 
    • National Citizen and Migration Control

Then, we have got the public sector, which covers the following votes: Ministry of East African Community Affairs, the Electoral Commission and Ministry Of Foreign Affairs.

We have another sector dealing with missions and High commissions abroad and we have so far covered the following commissions and embassies: Kinshasa, London, Brussels, Ottawa, Kigali, Rome, Paris, Copenhagen, Tripoli, Berlin, Beijing and our consulate in Guangzhou, Bujumbura, Abu Dhabi, Addis Ababa, Washington, Cairo, Moscow, Khartoum, Tehran, New Delhi, New York, Juba and Abuja. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, did you say Department of Public Prosecutions? Is that the name?

MR WADRI: Directorate of Public Prosecutions. I am sorry, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it had been changed recently.

MR WADRI: No, I am sorry. It is because I lumped it together with the other departments. It was a slip of the tongue.

We have special audit reports known as forensic audits. A special audit report on financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister was processed and handed to the Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Clerk in May this year. It awaits space on the Order Paper for debate and presentation.

Mr Speaker, I would like to make this appeal. Once these forensic audits are generated by the Auditor-General, they are time-bound in terms of the issues. The longer we delay in having these reports debated and adopted, the higher the chances of the recommendations becoming stale and being overtaken by events. I beg that time be found and this scam, scum which has been reported on, is discussed and disposed of.

We have got a special audit report on market vendors and small business operators, which was reviewed and the draft committee report awaits endorsement by the committee members.

Value-for-Money-Audit Reports

The following value-for-money-audit reports have been reviewed and drafts await endorsement by members:
    • Value-for-money-audit report on the Presidential Initiative on Banana Development
    • Value-for-money-audit report on the fisheries sector
    • Value-for-money-audit report on maternal health provision
    • Lastly, value-for-money-audit on Universal Primary Education 

We also have the following reports, which cover the financial years 2010/2011 and 2011/2012. The committee has embarked on the consideration of the audit reports for the years ended 30 June 2011 and 30 June 2012 and has already covered the following - and as I report, we are covering these concurrently meaning that we are disposing of two financial years at the same time but the reports will be separated according to the financial years. 

These are the areas or the votes that we have so far covered:
    • Justice, Law and Order Sector covering the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Services, the Judicial Service Commission, the Law Reform Commission, the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions.

The security sector

We have covered the following:
    • The vote for State House, President’s Office and Ministry of Defence.

The committee has also covered the vote on Tourism and Trade, covering the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry and then the second Trade Capacity Enhancement Project and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute.

On the sector of ICT, we have covered the following: the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology.

Under the Lands Sector, we have covered the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Uganda Land Commission.

And under Public Administration, we have covered the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, the Electoral Commission and Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Mr Speaker, apart from the routine vote examination and scrutiny work, the Public Accounts Committee of Uganda has hosted the accountability conference for the four regional accountability bodies on the continent of Africa. This was held in the month of May this year.

We have also had opportunity to participate in the East African Association of Public Accounts Committees; in the West African Public Accounts Committees and SADCOPAC, that is Southern Africa Development Community Organisation of Public Accounts Committees. 

This same committee has also participated in the formation of the continental body known as AFROPAC which stands for African Organisation of Public Accounts Committees, which deals with the - Mr Speaker, these are fora through which the committee members have shared best practices and it has also provided training opportunities for the members of the committee. 

At the close of this year, the committee will have completed reviewing the reports for the financial years 2010/2011 and 2011/2012 and by close of January 2014, the committee will be ready to present its findings on both the reports that I have mentioned and those of the past financial year and those that are being examined at the moment.

Mr Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to thank your Office for having allowed us to conduct business during recess. If that opportunity had not been given, I can assure you, with the volume of work before us, we would not have made any progress. 

I also want to thank the hon. Members of the committee for having spared their recess time to concentrate on the work that lies ahead of them. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. You rightly informed the House that committeesNo. 1 and 3 have their own reporting framework. I was a little bit concerned that hon. Wadri was almost complaining. I thought he was indicting the Business Committee when he complains about business completed but it cannot find space on the Order Paper, especially business involving issues of graft. I am also aware, for example, that their committee has a lot of backlog. 

Therefore, we have backlog and we have immediate business not moving. How can we be helped to have this business come on the Floor? That members complete business but it does not come to the Floor effectively indicting the Business Committee in their manner of prioritisation. I need your help, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is part of trying to clean up. Wherever there is a clog, we want to bring it out and see how to clean it up really. That is what we are doing now. 

5.32
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank you for bringing this cleaning up process. But for the three accountability committees including the IGG, there are Constitutional provisions that we are all aware of - the timeframe. 

My request to the Chairperson and your office and the Office of the Clerk is that we need to reform the way the Auditor-General writes the report. We need to reform the way the committee handles the report and we need to reform the way the report is presented to this House. Otherwise, our report will be null and void because we do not comply with the Constitutional requirement of six months. I hope that after this discussion, we shall sit down and think and come up with the necessary reforms to move the process forward. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is part of why we need these kinds of discussions. 

MR WADRI: Hon. Geofrey Ekanya has raised a very pertinent issue. There are times when work is referred to these committees and a timeframe is given by the Speaker. For example, in November, when Parliament received the forensic report on financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister, it is on record, the Public Accounts Committee was given one week within which to accomplish the task and yet, the task was so enormous that the committee in reality at the end of the day had to interface with over 100 witnesses to get to the root-cause so that we are able to report appropriately and so that the right recommendations can be made. So, we need to differentiate. Thereis time when you expect the committees to do a lot within too short a time.

Secondly, the article in the Constitution that hon. Ekanya has mentioned, that is Article 163(5), commands that the Public Accounts Committee and accountability committees must dispose of the Auditor-General’s report within six months, which is impossible. You cannot dream about it. Even not only that; you remember the three accountability committees had a meeting with the Auditor-General in Entebbe where the Speaker even came and opened and later closed. These issues were raised that can they try as much as possible to make their reports user-friendly?

But at the same time, hon. Colleagues, we are operating in a regional environment. Colleagues who went to the accountability conference in Namibia will agree with me that this was an issue, which was discussed at length and the Auditors-Generals from the member countries all stood up and talked in one voice that they cannot compromise their professionalism. They have got to write their reports in a professional manner that conforms to international standards. That was what they said. 

So, the onus is on us. At an appropriate time and when you see yourself, as the Chairperson constrained, then you have no option but to inform the Rt Hon. Speaker and Parliament and that is what we have been doing and that is how we have gone outside the six months;otherwise, it is very difficult to limit it within six months. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For example, specifically, on the special audits, we have been able to give extensional time but I am not very sure whether we can extend that one because that one is a constitutional provision. For the special forensic audits that came midway or in between, we have been able to extend. So, these are things we need to understand. But the committees are doing their best and we should, as Parliament, also respond by quickly dealing with these issues and finish them. 

5.36
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I actually do agree entirely with your interpretation that once time has been stated by statute in this matter by the Constitution, neither the Speaker nor the entire Parliament has the authority to change that time. So, there is only one solution because from the experience of the chairpersons of the accountability committees - and I am privileged to have served as one of the chairpersons in the last Parliament, it is not possible to conclude these reports within six months; it is absolutely not possible. 

So, as we go towards maybe the process of amending the Constitution, this is one of the issues that should be addressed. If the Minister in charge of Justice and Constitutional Affairs under whose mandate this falls was in the House, I am sure he would have taken note. Some of us this side who hold those roles I am sure have taken note. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Essentially, the Public Accounts Committee acts on things that have passed and when things are behind, you cannot put a timeframe; that makes it impossible for them to analyse it. If it was something front loaded, then you could say you could do things to stop any - but these things have already happened, so, you need a proper timeframe to deal with them comprehensively.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

5.38
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, the business transacted by the Committee on Science and Technology from 18 May 2011 to date: 

From 16 to 22 September 2012, a delegation comprising six Members of Parliament and two staff visited Oklahoma and Missouri in the US on a fact finding mission at Danforth Science Centre and the report was tabled in this House.  

In August 2012 the committee held meetings, visited the African Space Research Project and the report and the same was presented and adopted by this House.

On the 1 and 2 November 2012, the committee attended a Joint Agricultural Sector Annual Review at Speke Resort Hotel Munyonyo. 

In November 2012, the committee was granted leave by this House to present a Private Members’ Bill on the National Bio-Technology and Bio-Safety Bill.

From 28 November - December 9 2012 and 15 – 23 December 2012, the entire committee on Science and Technology held consultations with agricultural, science and technology institutions in Kampala, Kajjansi, Entebbe, Mulago, Kawanda, Namulonge, Buloba, Kabale, Mbarara, Kasese, Fort Portal, Hoima, Kyenjojo, Jinja, Mukono, Tororo and Mbale.

On 26 February 2013, the committee moved a motion for the resolution of Parliament urging the government of the Republic of Uganda to establish a Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation; up to now, we are waiting.

A report on the status of science and technology in Technical Colleges in Uganda was presented and adopted by this House. A report on the status of science and technology in public universities in Uganda was presented and adopted by this House.

From 24 – 28 March 2013, 17 committee members and four members of staff travelled to Pretoria in South Africa to benchmark on modern bio-technology. A report was laid on Table in this House.

From 27 – 31 May 2013, four members of the committee and two staff had a benchmarking study in Kenya Bio-Safety Authority and a report is yet to find space on the Order Paper.

From 4 – 9 August 2013, 23 members of the committee and three staff attended the Second Annual Bio-Safety Conference held in Nairobi, Kenya and a report is yet to find space on the Order Paper.

On 7 November 2013, the committee ably presented a report on the National Bio-Technology and Bio-Safety Bill, 2012. The debate was deferred to a month later pending consultations. 

From the 17 November 2013 up to 27, six members and two staff will be on attachment to the Parliamentary Office on Science and Technology of the United Kingdom. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we now go back to the sectoral committees?

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

5.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Huda Oleru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has the following business to report on:

The committee presented a report on the policy statement of financial years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 in this House. They were considered, debated and adopted by the House.

The committee made a report on the petition by tobacco farmers and it was considered and adopted by the House.

The committee has the following pending business:
    • A report on the petition by farmers from Northern Uganda on cotton. The report is ready and we are waiting for your indulgence to put it on the Order Paper.
    • A report on East Coast Fever, which was also a petition from farmers from the West. We have finished the report and it is ready. We are also waiting to appear on the Order Paper.

We are working on the following Bills:
    • The Planned and Protection Bill is under consideration and we hope to table it in this House before the end of this session.
    • The Plant Health Bill. We are considering these two reports together and we hope when we are reporting on them, we shall also do so concurrently, if given the opportunity. Because we are almost completing the report, we hope we shall table them before the end of the session.
    • We have a petition from farmers from Amolatar. We are also considering the report.

Mr Speaker, my committee had trips both externally and internally. We are waiting for the reports and we shall table them here for the House to consider. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson.

COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

5.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here to present a summary of the achievements by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

The committee handled ministerial policy statements for three financial years, that is 2011/2012, 2012/2013 and 2013/2014. Reports were tabled to Parliament, debated and adopted.

The committee carried out investigations into the National ID Project. The report was presented to Parliament, debated and adopted.

The committee also handled the amendment of the Amnesty Act. The report was presented to Parliament and adopted. Part D of the Amnesty Act was reinstated.

The committee has had several field trips in and out of the country. These trips were to look into the accommodation of Prisons and Police specifically considering both office space, the barracks and prison cells.

The committee also carried out oversight on border posts around the country to assess the security situation over there and also to assess how tight our border posts are.

We also travelled for international benchmarking. We had members who visited South Africa and Zambia to share good practices on how to carry out oversight roles for uniformed personnel. We also had members go to Rwanda to do the same and to the USA and Somalia to oversee the activities of UPDF in Mogadishu. 

Mr Speaker, the committee is handling the following petitions. 
    1. We have a petition on ethnic tensions in Rwenzori sub region. The report is ready.We looked into this exhaustively and we are just waiting for space on the Order paper to present our report. 

    2. We have a petition by the orphans and survivors of the Kanungu inferno. The committee has interfaced with the petitioners. We also interfaced with the leadership of Kanungu District. We interfaced with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we are in the final stages of producing the final copy of the report. This report will be ready for presentation within two weeks’ time. 
    3. The committee also has a petition by the Revolutionary Freedom Fighters of 1979 from Masindi Port. This petition was saved from the Eighth Parliament and we have not yet started handling it. We shall start handling it beginning December this year. 

    4. The committee handled a petition on the National Identity Card Project. This petition was over taken by events. We are sorry that we did not come back to the House to inform you that we were still handling it. But according to information gathered this afternoon, we shall come back to give it a decent burial. We have to give it a decent burial because the petition had only one prayer, to reallocate funds from the Capital Budget of Ministry of Internal Affairs to the ID project. We came up with a report as a committee halting the whole process. So, there was no need of reallocating the funds to a project, which we found we could not pursue any further until it is redesigned. So, we shall come back here and inform the House on how the petition was overtaken by events.

    5. The committee has only one Bill before it; that is the Narcotic Drugs and Psycho-trophic Substances Control Bill, 2007. This Bill was saved from the Eighth Parliament. The committee is handling it. We have held public hearings with various stakeholders. We have been able to carry out a benchmarking visit to the Parliament of German. We still have to carry out some visits within the country especially to the areas where Mira is being grown. After that, we shall be able to report to Parliament. We request for two months to exhaustively handle all the inputs and then we will be ready to present to the House. 

Mr Speaker, that is a summary of the business of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Thank you, very much. 

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Mr Speaker, this is the report on the business before the committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this session. We confined ourselves to only the financial years, 2012, 2013 and this financial year ending 2014. 

First of all, I thank the Business Committee for deciding that we as management of committees do update Parliament on what we are doing and I hope it becomes an annual event so that we can try to expedite work within the committees. This is the Committee on Finance, which handles Bills, which either make or break this country and we are very grateful to the members who always participate in these meetings. The comments about the budget process – I want to say that the budget process drags on for so long and I want to apologise on behalf of all the other committees; it takes almost half a year and the committees are not able to process all the work in their docket. 

The following business was done by the Committee on Finance in this session: The Finance Bill, 2013; the Income Tax Bill, 2013; the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013; The East African Excise Management Bill, 2013; the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013; the Anti-money Laundering Bill, 2008 – it was 10 years in the committee; the Treasons Bill, 2010; the Public Finance Bill, 2010; The Retirements Benefits Labialisation Bill, 2012 – the clerk has not put the date; the petition by workers on the proposed liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector, which came in February, 2013 and another petition on the official receiver of UCB and UEB Bill – liquidation for non-payment of gratuity, which came in December, 2012. 

The committee discussed and reported to the House the following business: the Finance Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill; the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill; the East African Excise Management Bill; the Excise Tariff, 2013 and the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, which passed through Parliament. I thank the Speaker and the House for enabling us process that Bill. 

The other business pending is the Free Zones Bill for which we have a draft and tomorrow, we are sitting to finalise that Bill. The best practices were picked from Thika in Kenya and I would like to thank Parliament for allowing us go by Bus to Thika. The other Bill pending in the committee, which is very important, is the Public Finance Bill. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, you directed the committees of Natural Resources and Budget to join the Committee on Finance in deliberating on the Bill. The committee has drawn an elaborate programme to meet stakeholders on the Bill. The programme including meeting – we advertise them - the Bank of Uganda, the Auditor-General, the Secretary Institution of Public Accountants Uganda, the Leader of the Opposition - he comes with the Shadow Minister of Finance; URA should also come because they are stakeholders. 

The following civil society organisations also have expressed interest to appear in the committee, they include, Budget Advocacy Group; the Civil Society Coalition on Oil and Gas and the Forum for Women in Democracy and Equal Opportunities. 

The committee has also received petitions from the Omukama of Bunyoro and we are scheduling to travel as instructed by the Speaker to the Omukama to hear on this Bill. I have mentioned this because everybody wants this Bill out of the committee and yet, we still have some work we are processing. So, we are asking Parliament to at least accord us some more time and we shall put it in writing.

We have the Public Private Partnership Bill. Mr Speaker, we also intend to meet in January to finalise on this Bill. Members have travelled to Malaysia and soon to South Africa to get best practices. After they have done those travels, they will come back with drafts from which we shall make the final report on the Floor of Parliament. The other Bill that has come recently is the Retirement Benefits SectorLiberalisation Bill.

The Bill is with us and the committee has already started discussing it and with your indulgence, we will be concluding discussion on the Bill during the recess and we also promise to report on the Bill immediately after the recess because members have travelled to Namibia and they will come back and give us a draft that we shall use to process the Bill.

A petition was lodged by the workers on the proposed liberalisation of the Retirement BenefitsSector Liberalisation Bill on 7th February. The committee intends to handle this petition together with the Bill itself because their prayers are to do with the Bill itself and so, we shall engage them during that time in the near future.

Also, the other petition is the petition on the official receiver of UCB and UEB in liquidation for non-payment of gratuity, which we received in December. I would like to apologise.  I will seek information from my clerk because I had not seen this petition. It is a simple petition and we need to expedite it. We shall sit in the near future because there are two stakeholders; the Ministry of Finance and in particular, the Privatisation Unit and that will be all - and maybe the petitioners themselves. So, I pray that we present this in time.

Mr Speaker, I am aware of the urgency that the public has on Parliament to discuss these Bills but it is also important for the committee to carry out thorough consultation on some of the matters on these Bills. I beg that the House authorises us more time to have these reports ready. 

On behalf of the committee, we pledge total commitment at processing this Bill.  

I would also like to say that the committee can use this opportunity and the Ministry of Finance that there are many urgent issues that they may bring to the committee in terms of Bills or to Parliament and not necessarily the Committee on Finance.

In as far as non-banking institutions are concerned, we need a Bill and we have talked about it for many times – the Tier 4 - SACCOS and whatever because there is no law as far as those matters are concerned. There is no law on mobile money, which is almost becoming a bank in itself. Many people are being fleeced and their money has been taken without them having anything to appeal to in terms of legislation. 

We have the gambling and betting, which is also becoming a big industry and everybody is complaining about the manner in which our youths are being made redundant thinking that they will get rich faster and the amendment with Bank of Uganda. We are giving them other assignments in terms of oil revenues and  we should amend that Act to make sure that  it encompasses those other issues.  So, without wasting more time, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you are asking for more work.

MR SSEBUNYA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you are asking for more work but the little that you have has taken you very long. Maybe, we should clear the table and then we see how we can take in more because we do not want to build up on the backlogs.

Hon. Members, you now notice the importance of this particular brief from the committees as it shows us where we are and what we need to do to clear what we have. We really need to double our efforts if we are to achieve the targets that have been set by the rules and also our own commitments to the people of this country.

We now have Education and Sports, Foreign Affairs, Gender, Labour and Social Development and Natural Resources. Those committees have not reported and so, the chairpersons should take note and should be notified that they need to clear with this tomorrow because we want to complete this process so that it guides us on how to structure. We can set aside one week to just clear petitions so that we finish with all petitions that are still relevant and we notify the petitioners that we have gone this far with their matters that they raised with Parliament; so that we are in the good books with the people who brought the petitions. It is important that we do that.

6.05
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One thing when we were listening to the reports from these committees, which we have not really looked at closely is the timing – how long these committees take to consider some of these reports or petitions.  I am a member of the rules committee and we had one time discussed time limits. Mr Speaker, we realise that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you are on the committee that did not report today.

MR SSEMPIJJA: No, it did not but I am just seeking your guidance because –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. It is because I had forgotten it from my list. The committee on rules is also pending for tomorrow. (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA:You may realise that some petitions have been overtaken by events – you get a petition on Nubians, interest rates – things have really changed and gone. Now, what are they going to report on? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, you should really be strict on the time limits on the committees when working on reports. 

The other thing is on the relationship - it is a general thing between the Budget Committee and the other committees. There was a recent scenario where the Chairperson of the Budget Committee reversed what the Committee on Agriculture had decided without consulting the members of that committee. So, really we are going to get an antagonistic relationship between that committee and the other committees. Do they have powers to just overturn things the way the chairperson or members of that committee really want even without consulting the chairperson of the committee who was there? So, to me, on those two points, you need to know and advise accordingly. I thank you very much.

6.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank your office for this innovative approach to self-appraisal or monitoring that we are doing today.

You recall that there was a time in this House that each committee wrote its report on its own terms and template and consumption was a little difficult. Listening to the presentations today, it is more or less the same thing. Maybe, given that we have now got to this point, is it possible that we can request that some work be done to guide committees and to put in place a kind of basic guideline in which committees will be making these  reports whether mid-session or mid whatever  for ease of consumption. You noted, probably, like I did that at some point, we were even trying to report purely on field visits perse. 

That is not the intention of these field visits. They are tagged to some outcome in the committee, maybe a Bill that is before a committee, maybe a petition. Otherwise, we do not want to be seen as people who board a bus and just go to a place without thinking of the final outcome. So, I want to propose that maybe, the Clerk’s office helps us arrive at a template that will guide our reporting in the next session so that we have a standardised form which helps and makes consumption of these reports clear.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there are Bills that are almost becoming an embarrassment to this Parliament because they have spent time; they are shifting from one Parliament to the next one and about to go the third one. For instance, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill; either we fail to process the thing or we process it and get it out. Otherwise, people will not take us serious. At one point, it is a x-mas gift, at another point, we must get it out and at another point we threaten to have it withdrawn. We really have to face the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in the face and decide its fate.

Mr Speaker, I was once on the HIV/AIDS committee; the HIV/AIDS Bill has been before this Parliament for over five years and I do not know whether again, we have failed. If we have failed, we better come here and say we cannot get this Bill done and we get it out of the way. The Marriage and Divorce Bill for the last 40 years! So, those are two thoughts I have over these.

I also want to propose that this House puts in place a Bill or a business tracking mechanism. Is there some place I can go to, maybe now that we are very computerised and ICT friendly, I want to be able to press some button somewhere and I know that before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, there are public hearings going on in regard to a particular Bill. I hear chairpersons saying, “we are handling.” What is “we are handling?” If I were a lay woman listening to the broadcast now and they say, “We are handling,” is it that I can now go to Parliament and make a submission on the Bill? Is it that they are writing a report? Can we put in place a Bill-tracking mechanism that updates instantly and people get to know what a particular committee is doing?

Finally, there are reports that are sent to committees from those visits and they say that one goes to the Committee on Internal Affairs. Those ones now go this way, including petitions. Before the Committee on Health was put in place, I had a petition submitted by a Pharmacy student. It just disappeared and nobody knows its whereabouts. And then, for Internal Affairs, we presented a report here on the Arms Trade Treaty, it is a discussion. 

The Uganda Government was one of those that sponsored – wanted the Arms Trade Treaty adopted. Now, we do not even know whether the government is interested anymore in ratifying this Treaty.

So, I do not know what happens to those reports. Do we just bring them and they are sent to committees and they are not consumed or? I thought I would share these thoughts because we need to help the process move forward from here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am sure the Clerk’s office has taken note of this Bill-tracking system that was proposed over a year ago, and it should have already been up and running and there is some bureaucratic delay, which displeases many people, including me. That thing should be handled so that we know exactly  knowwhat we are doing. (Mr Kasibante rose_) I know your issue -

MR KASIBANTE: No, it is different, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it different?

MR KASIBANTE: Yes. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In May 2013, a select committee was set up to handle issues concerning a report on KCCA. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We did not list those ones.

MR KASIBANTE: Yes, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to seek guidance from you –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, they are all coming up tomorrow because we are still dealing with sectoral committees and standing committees. We will come to those ones so that we finish with them. 

6.15
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, just to guide the future. For us to move forward, your office is giving iPads and that is the direction we are moving to. We need to integrate report writing, report management into our ICT department like in other parliaments. We need electronic boards all over here that could help in Bill-tracking so that you know which report, who is handling it and where so that it can remind us. It will save us next time instead of consuming time like we have done today. Each committee would be having electronic boards running so that we know what is on and the progress so that we can keep questioning ourselves and monitoring one another. This happens in other parliaments.

Secondly, since our role as Members of Parliament is representation and legislation, on the issue of public hearing that I have heard all committee chairpersons talk about, how do we make sure that the voters are presenting petitions and they are engaging with us during legislative work? In other parliaments, what happens is that whenever any business is up in the House, it goes on the radio on a daily basis informing the public about the progress so that the public can in turn engage Parliament and there are systems up to the constituency. In Zambia, for example, there are offices of Parliament in the constituency and the radio relays the progress on who was met, the decisions taken and if you need help, where you need to go.

We need this system, Mr Speaker. We can have our TV, a radio station or we can have newspapers or we can have our internet system publishing progress so that with phones nowadays, people in the villages are able to follow. This will enhance the Bill-tracking issues that we have talked about and also the format in which we present reports.

In other countries - you are well-travelled, Mr Speaker - you can no longer have big volumes of reports. The main report must be posted to the website and members read - you are given time, may be within five or six hours and the executive summary will be presented so that you only come to discuss the executive summary. This will help us to move faster. 

We have talked about the post legislative scrutiny. We may not need to amend the Constitution but you have the power under the Constitution to even create ad hoc committees, to really handle this post-legislative scrutiny so that work can really move forward and we find out where the problem is.A colleague said here that what we have done here should have been handled from the Business Committee.

But some of us do not sit on the business committee. So, you opted to bring it here but if we had a post- legislative scrutiny, we would help the Government Chief Whip to know if Ekanya wants to become a committee chairperson or vice chairperson. We would assess based on our input and output. So, really, these are some of the proposals that I hope will help us.

So, unless we reform, the population will be questioning us. And when we go to look for votes, they will ask, “What have you done?” I was in Zambia and when Parliament resumes, Members of Parliament are given one week to come up with business that they want to see achieved at the end of the five years and each Member of Parliament says, “In my constituency, I want a road, I want a school, I want a health centre, I want employment for the youth.” And that constitutes part of the parliamentary business so that when Members of Parliament are debating the budget and they are passing new laws, they know that the issue of my constituency has been taken care of in this legislation or in this Budget.

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya. In the case where you said that in the first week, members are allowed to bring the issues to form business for the ruling party or Parliament for the five years, what about the manifesto? This is because when you are going around campaigning, you have a manifesto that you show to the people and I thought when you come, it is the time for implementing the manifesto. How do you make the two go together?

MR EKANYA: My sister, you need to understand the role of Members of Parliament. Once a government has been constituted, it is teamwork to deliver results of that manifesto whether you are in Opposition or not. If I need a road in my constituency, I should push Government. So, Members of Parliament come up with what we call a “parliamentary business document” and Members of Parliament, stop waiting for only Government to bring business.And during the budget process, if you miss a road in your constituency this year, then you engage Government to ensure that that road is done in your constituency next year. And these are some of the positive reforms that through this dialogue, we can have and then improve on the services of this country. 

6.21
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. Very briefly, this specific matter was talked over by hon. Kasibante relating to the said committee because I am a member of one. Now that you have given leeway to talk over it, we shall do it tomorrow. But the general issue was that for the big part, I have had a problem with petitions and reporting on petitions because for the few that I have followed, the public is seeking for equitable prerogatives over issues that they complain about. When we delay, we actually look as though we were unable to help our people and this is where committee chairpersons and clerks of committees have to be useful to Parliament because Parliament cannot be petitioned in vain. That somebody petitions Parliament for an equitable remedy and he is unable to get justice, somehow we continue lamenting about these issues. 

This evaluation is supposed to help us reflect on our duty to our people to make sure that their petitions are not in vain. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, is a matter briefly talked about by hon. Ekanya about reporting on performance of Acts; what he has called “post-legislative scrutiny.” I have not participated – maybe, I missed a sitting - in any sitting of Parliament in the few years I have been here, where the issue was debating a post-legislative scrutiny report. And I have seen amendment Bills without an attendant scrutiny over the performance of an Act and this is wrong. We need to use this occasion to remind the Executive that for the better part they bring these amendments that are almost sacrilegious for you to bring us a Bill for amendment without an attendant report that explains the performance of that particular Act. So, I believe this is a good occasion for us to reflect on how we are going to move to make these particular amendments and new Acts relevant in the way of the people we are supposed to serve. That is what I wanted to raise, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Post-legislative scrutiny is basically a new concept; it was not there before and if you studied all the Commonwealth things you will not find any concept of post-legislative scrutiny. But it is something that has been developed because a lot of legislation has been enacted in vain. They do it at the heat of the moment, then it sits there, gathers dust and it cannot walk off the shelves to perform the task for which it was meant. So, they need to do a critical assessment of what happened after you have passed the law. It is a new concept that we are trying to now bring here so that we can understand what we can do after the law is passed. 

6.25
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, the issue that I would want to raise is related to what you have just said; post-legislative scrutiny. Today, we have seen the status of all the committees in terms of their work and I would want to believe that these reports that we submit here and are adopted by Parliament should not be in vain. If we continue the way we are, it looks like it is a ritual that the committees must do A, B, C, D, present their report, the members will say “Aye” on it and that is the end.
 
And yet in this country, we have got provisions in our law volumes, which put some sort of obligation on the Executive to furnish us periodically with how far they have implemented the recommendations that have been adopted by Parliament. We are aware that these recommendations that Parliament adopts are not mandatory but any caring Government; any Government that is sensitive to the needs of its people will care to implement some of them. And we will appreciate if the Executive could also be tasked to periodically report to Parliament on the attempts they have made to implement the recommendations of Parliament. If you have not implemented anything, come to us and tell us, “Yes, we received these recommendations of Parliament and for these reasons, we have refused or we have failed to implement” and we will take that as a report under the treasury memorandum. But if that is not done to us and year-in, year-out, reports are made, recommendations are adopted but we do not hear anything from the Executive in terms of the efforts that they are also making to implement these recommendations - Without that, we members of the backbench will be wasting our time; it kills our morale to work. Why should I have sleepless nights reading reports of the Auditor-General, extracting issues and we come up with a sieved recommendation but at the end of the day, there is nothing implemented? It frustrates us, Mr Speaker. If only your office could assist us to make sure that the Executive will also be put on their toes to implement what we recommend -

6.27
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First,  the “Iron Lady’ from Serere spoke on behalf of all of us regarding fast-tracking the Bills and especially, those that really affect the future of our children and I hope that we should be able to make these conclusions on some of these Bills. 

Secondly, she raised an important point: Can we institutionalise this process? Maybe, the committees should give a status of their work on a quarterly basis or half a year so that we are sure that something is being done. And also that one puts pressure on the chairpersons and members of committees to fast-track the work that is in their committees. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this process will not be complete – I agree with hon. Wadri – that we should complete this process by requesting the Executive to brief us on the status of the treasury memorandum, at least for the work that we have done. This is because by law, we are supposed to report to this House every three or six months. So, for the last year that we have been here, we want to know how many treasury memoranda have been presented to this House and why they have not been presented to this House. 

This is because, you remember, Mr Speaker, we even have a sub-committee on the Committee on Finance that is supposed to audit the reports on the treasury memoranda but it is redundant for the last two and a half years. So, can we request you, Mr Speaker that you ensure that this process is concluded by getting the other side of the Executive, especially on those mandatory reports, for example, the Treasury Memoranda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.30
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is related to other issues that have been raised, but this is in respect to the lethargy of the front bench of Government. Many times, we have raised issues, especially Questions for Oral Answer, which take ages to come back. Many times, they are overtaken by events and sometimes, those people who raise questions will not even be around to get those answers. Sometimes, these questions are raised in the context of the prevailing circumstances and they would need to be handled urgently. 

Many times, Mr Speaker, when you prevail on the Leader of Government Business they usually give those lethargic answers: we shall consider that; we shall give a report next week; we shall do this next and so forth. So, you do not feel that Government is in charge to answer these questions.

We need to get commitment and a mechanism by which Parliament can extract answers from the government side always when we ask these questions, or Members will cease to be vigilant, which destroys their morale and certainly, the representative role will be also washed away, thank you very much. 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would want to comment on this issue of post-legislative scrutiny. I think it is not new. Maybe, we have been doing it in a form that was not structured in such a way that we knew it was post-legislative scrutiny; because once a law is passed, naturally, the sector ministry is supposed to implement that law. There is always a minister. We even define the minister in the Bill: “Responsible minister” means the minister responsible for justice; the minister responsible for finance, - the minister who will implement that law.

The sessional committees are supposed to always hold their sector ministers to account as far as the laws we pass here are concerned. In the policy statements we present to this House, they are supposed to review every particular activity in a ministry including the laws they implement; and the sessional committees are supposed to put the ministers to task in their committees as to why, for instance, certain  provisions are not implemented and others are redundant, while others may be obsolete. “Why don’t you repeal these provisions?” and so forth. So, we should put more emphasis on the work of the sessional committees of Parliament. 

When the Executive thinks of amendments to any particular law - I agree with hon. Mpuuga but it is always done because by the time the proposed amendments are taken to Cabinet, they go with a full Cabinet memoranda explaining the performance of the existing legislation vis-à-vis the proposed amendments.  That is No.1

No.2, when the Bill comes here, the Bill always carries a short memorandum. But when the minister puts that on second reading, debate ensues and normally, the ministers always explain over and above what is encapsulated in the memorandum of the Bill, thus giving the background and the performance of the existing Act vis-à-vis the proposed amendments. 

But the system can be improved. Sometimes, it is a question of drafting style. We have the Commonwealth legislative way of drafting our laws. For instance, although we are supposed to be together with the UK in drafting legislation, they have a different system because every clause is introduced by an explanatory clause. Maybe, since they are using their own language, they find it much easier than what we do but that is also a different matter altogether.  

So, Mr Speaker, we need to see – to me, there is nothing new. We need to note these things and make sure we follow them up in our respective existing working infrastructure.

6.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for this good work. In our rules, we have the Prime Minister’s Question time. I do not remember the rule very well. But since the Ninth Parliament began, the Prime Minister has never appeared here on any single Thursday to answer or to be questioned and this is very serious. 

This is Rule 34. “The Prime Minister’s time, questions to ministers and other members.” This has never been done and I do not know what the Prime Minister is thinking. I can see him here. I hope he is following and he knows.

Two, Mr Speaker, the issue of questions raised by Members: the committees have presented; now, we also want the Clerk to present all the questions Members have raised - that this question was raised by so and so - because you go to the constituency and they  say, “The Member of Parliament is quiet. He never -” yet the Member of Parliament raised a question and it was not answered because we just take it to the Clerk and it is the Clerk to send it to the minister. So, tomorrow, we want the Clerk to read all the questions which have been asked by the Members of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): I thank Members for the issues raised and I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this sitting because it is the first of its kind. I want to begin by commenting on what I have heard. Every committee was talking of, “we travelled,” “we went to benchmark.” But Mr Speaker, I want to inform you that quite a number of parliaments are tired of Parliament of Uganda for reasons - (Interjections) - I will not mention them for diplomatic reasons - but you find that while members of one committee are getting out of the exit gate from Parliament of Uganda, another team of Members of Parliament from Uganda are entering the entry gate. 

So, I would really suggest that it would be better for us as an institution to schedule these travels. If the different committees are going to travel, it would be better to have one delegation led by one Chair of a committee and we have perhaps four committees travelling, say, to the Parliament of Ghana and they are going to benchmark different things with different committees and it is one delegation going to that parliament in one quarter; while there is another team also travelling to another Parliament instead of having - as one team is in or out.

I have heard even from Members saying that at one time, in Nairobi, they asked, “When do Members of Parliament sit to do work?” That is not good for us as an institution. I want to suggest that the Parliamentary Commission takes this up, schedules these travels abroad so that we do not have to inconvenience our hosts as a country. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of post-legislative scrutiny, which my colleagues have talked about, I want to thank those who have raised it - hon. Ekanya. What the Deputy Attorney-General has said,  what usually happens is that the details are given to only the committee where this amendment Bill has been presented. We should have a mechanism as Parliament where we all benefit as a team. If it means somebody making even a small presentation - even if it is a half-page document- for the benefit of all of us, let us have it structured so that we all benefit and we all answer to the people we lead.

But still, I want to say that as Parliament, it is our responsibility to have the oversight role. Can the Parliamentary Commission also come up with a method of how this can be fast-tracked and in a simplified manner for all Members of Parliament to also make us more accountable to the country as the Executive on issues to do with post-legislation? 

On the issue of questions for oral answer, Mr Speaker, it is not good to praise yourself but I want to say this. When I was appointed Chief Whip, I remember even at one time there are members who had raised questions which we had not really answered as the Executive. The questions had become matters of national importance on the Floor because Members had become desperate and they had to find a way of getting the questions answered. I took it upon myself as part of my work and wrote to every minister where questions for oral answer had been raised and all these questions were answered except questions that have been raised in the last two months - (Interjections) - Yes. The answers are with the Clerk but the issue is the questions are many and Parliament business is the - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I always listen attentively to Members; I would request that my colleagues listen to me and we chart a way forward for the good of this country.

Mr Speaker, what I have also noted is that we have a lot of business as Parliament and so, even finding space on the Order Paper for these questions for oral answer is our challenge as Parliament. We should also find a way of following our Rules of Procedure and also marking the time as allocated to these items on the Order Paper.

On the issue of the treasury memoranda, I want to say that as Government Chief Whip, I am going to sit with the Clerk’s Office, we extract all this, I write to all the concerned ministers and I copy to every Member of Parliament - the way I have been doing it; when a Member raises an issue here concerning a ministry, I write to the minister and I give a copy to the Member. This time I will write to all ministers who are concerned and I request that we report back in one month. 

I want to make a special request, Mr Speaker, after one month, I will come and report to you in office and request for time so that we give it special time and ministers come and report on all resolutions that have been passed by this Parliament; whatever has been done and whatever has not been done, how it has been done and why it has not been done.

The issue of the Prime Minister’s time: I am going to report on this. My boss is here but I will also request him to report tomorrow in Cabinet so that it is observed. Thank you very much.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me try to summarise what needs to be done for purposes of our thing. There is need for a template for our reporting framework so that we know what must go in the report. That has been emphasised. 

Bill-tracking, resolution tracking and petition tracking: Any matter that gets onto the Floor of Parliament must have a tracking mechanism that alerts everybody about what is going on and how far something has gone. This has been emphasised.  

The issue of the treasury memoranda and what happens to it, how it is processed and it should even be enlarged to deal with the reporting on implementation of legislation.

Questions - you will recall hon. Members, I one time set aside a whole week for ministers to respond to questions that were outstanding and the results were not good. This goes back to members of the Executive; sometimes, they choose to be absent when they are required. I set the time when we thought we would close the issue of questions and they would all be answered but people did not comply.

And then, there was the issue of the committee trips that we need to harmonise as the Parliamentary Commission so that there is a way that this thing can be captured properly.  

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What surprises me is that there are things happening in this country and there is nobody who comes to this Parliament to tell the House. There were talks being held in Munyonyo between the M23 and the DRC. There was nobody coming on the Floor of Parliament to tell us. The President comes and talks about the ICC and the Members of Parliament do not know anything. So, at times, I sit here and keep wondering. Even on international issues, we have three ministers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and you do not even inform this House. We are seated here and the government side does not come to tell us what is happening.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have respect for the Chief Whip but I raised questions as a Shadow Foreign Affairs minister and they have never been answered up to today. So, this question of saying they came and answered, nothing. We sit here, the whole world is looking at Uganda and nothing comes in at all. So, I keep wondering: do these people know what they are doing?      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, as Speaker, I do not believe that nothing comes out of this House. A lot of things come out of this House;there are some challenges.

Hon. Members, there are four sectoral committees to report tomorrow; there is one standing committee to report tomorrow and all the ad hoc committees - I have already seen one that has a report on the Order Paper, which should be handled tomorrow. There is another ad hoc committee that was appointed that has not yet reported. There was a select committee on the issue of Kampala that is still sitting. All of them should come and update Parliament on progress of their work tomorrow. And please, oblige so that we clear way and we open up a clean slate on which we will proceed to close the year and start the New Year with work that we understand. 

This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 November, 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

