                 	         
Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to Order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. We seem to have many meetings going on. I direct that the meetings of the committees that are ongoing should be adjourned to enable this Parliament proceed. The Clerk should notify the committees and communicate the Speaker’s directive that the meetings should be adjourned for now to allow this Parliament proceed with business before it.

We have already directed the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I think they have responded. The other committees, I am informed, are in for meetings. Those meetings should be deferred to tomorrow because tomorrow after receiving the body of our colleague, we will have time when the committees can meet. It is so directed that the Clerk should notify the committees that are holding meetings right now. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

Clause 72

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert after clause 72 (1) a new sub-clause -  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no sub clause in clause 72. 

MR WERIKHE: The committee proposes to insert a new sub clause to read as follows: “For avoidance of doubt, the applicant for a petroleum production licence shall not enter into any substantial contractual obligations or commence construction work until a field development plan has been approved.”

The justification: To ensure that a licensee does not make any commitments before the field development plan is approved, and to avoid a situation where the government would feel obliged to approve a development plan because of the extent of contractual obligations already entered into by the licensee. This increases the possibility for Government to influence the outcome of the assessment of the field development plan.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, there is need for a consequential amendment because it is still talking about the minister.
 
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we agreed that in all these other clauses, consequential amendments will be made.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those that are directly affected by the past clause 9 are consequentially amended to take care of that change. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

 Clause 73 agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert the word “shall” at the beginning of paragraphs (c) (e) (f) of sub-clause (1). It will read as follows: “(1) A petroleum production licence - (a) shall state the date of the grant of the licence...(c) shall state the conditions on which the licence is granted...(e) shall state the operator; and (f) shall require the licensee to carry out an environmental impact assessment.” This is to complete the provision in order to achieve clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Doesn’t it affect (e)? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, yes, (e) is also affected.

MR NIWAGABA: I thought the best wording would be to have the “shall” immediately after “licence” so that we do not repeat “shall” in each and every paragraph. Let “shall” become operational right from the beginning. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They had proposed that “may” changes to “shall”. So, they will all be “shall”.  What about the last one, (f)? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it is also “shall”, save for (d) which is “may”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, leaving (d) to be “may” will mean the area covered by the licence will be ambiguous. Why can’t it be specific and mandatory in respect of the geographical areas the licence is operating in? If you leave it as “may”, it will be discretional and it may cause confusion.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If the minister has already directed, then the production must now have it.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, (d) is providing for any matters that may arise from (2) and (3). So, it is providing for any other matters that may be determined in subsections (2) and (3).
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the question is, once you have already determined it, should it still be “may”? It is giving you the thing. Once you have determined the list that 1, 2, 3 and 4 are the things, should it still be discretionary? 

MRS MULONI: When you look at (2) and (3), they also have “may”. So, it now depends on what arises out of (2) and (3). 

MR RUHINDI: This is just a drafting matter. I agree with your observation, Mr Chairman, that since (2) and (3) are discretionary, giving powers to the minister to determine such other matters as may be included, once he or she has determined those matters, then why shouldn’t they be mandatorily included under clause 76(1)(d) so that it becomes “shall”. So, it would read, “Shall contain such other matters as the Minister may determine…” 

For the purposes of subsections (2) and (3) the word “may” will still be there but after he or she has determined, then they must be included. Certainly, I agree with the drafting proposed by hon. Niwagaba that the word “shall” should be at the beginning. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the proposal is to insert the word “shall” immediately after “licence” in the opening line of sub clause (1): “A petroleum production license shall…” and then that “shall” will operate through (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) because all those things will have already been determined; the contents of the production licence would be known. I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (3) we propose to insert the words “supply of petroleum produced to a refinery, gas conversion plant or plant for energy generation” immediately before the word “disposal”. So, it will read as follows: “There may be included in a petroleum production licence conditions with respect to the refining, supply of petroleum produced to a refinery, gas conversion plant or plant for energy generation, disposal or sale of petroleum which may be recovered in the development area.” 

The justification is that the new words refer to refining and gas conversion by stating that conditions may require a licensee to provide feedback to a specific refinery or power generation plant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that clear? I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert the following new sub clause immediately after sub clause (3): “(4) The Minister may stipulate as a condition for granting a petroleum production licence that the licensee shall enter into agreements with other licensees on terms specified by the Minister.” 

Justification: To empower the minister to require a licensee to enter into agreements with other licensees since clause 76 also applies to the petroleum production licence and not only the petroleum exploration licence as stated under clause 53(3).

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, looking at the justification for the insertion, why must the minister stipulate as a condition for granting a petroleum production licence that the licensee shall enter into agreements with other licensees? I thought this was a business and once one is a licensee, he or she is at liberty – 

Actually, what we are trying to legislate on here is to make the licensees form a conglomerate for no reason. We are here telling them that they can form a cartel, for no reason. We are here telling them that they should enter agreements amongst themselves and yet the global trend now is anti-conglomeration or anti-cartel. The moment you allow them to form a cartel, it means they will gang up and set terms and conditions because it is provided for in the law. International practice is really against this formation of cartels. The global trend is against this. 

I am surprised because if this is a business venture, what justification do we have to put it as a condition to the licensee? If there is reason for them to cooperate in any legitimate way, must we legislate for this? So, Mr Chairman, I oppose this insertion because it is not in line with the competitive market conditions we have in place in the gas and oil sector.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I agree that much as this is an area we want to regulate, we need to leave some room to promote private business co-operation. Otherwise, we are going to end up having companies which are agents of Government. If co-operation between private entities is going to be guarded and regulated by Government, then we may not promote business. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, this august House has been emphasising the strategic importance of this resource. Also, the investment involved in businesses which want to make agreements to do business together must be known to the owner of the resource. According to the Constitution, the owner of the resource is Government. So, any other stranger who wants to join the licensee in this business should be known to the owner of the resource. Hence, it is very important all over the world where the oil business is taking place that the resource owner should be able to know who is coming in and even to assess the capabilities and the competence in terms of the money and capital to be invested since they are recoverable. That is why every time these agreements are made, the resource owner must agree. 

Even when they are summing up in the upstream business, all the time the resource owner should keep watch on who is coming in.  In the case of Tullow, for example, when they were giving it to Total, in order to avoid monopoly in this business we had to look out and ask which business this is. We had to check their profile and then say, “You can go on with the business.” This does not hamper business practices in the world. That is why somebody should be able to say, “Yes, the person you are admitting can do business with you” for the sake of the people of this country. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find this insertion a bit redundant. When you look at the clause we have just passed, clause 76(1)(c), in granting the licence very many conditions may be stipulated, one of which may be that if you were to enter into a joint venture or an amalgamation or something of the sort, Government must approve. However, if you legislate on how companies are going to clearly enter agreements and execute their contracts, you run into a danger of creating a cartel under this particular insertion. So, I would rather that we abandon that insertion and let any conditions that would be acceptable to both parties and the government be stipulated under clause 76(1) (c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, the submission is that the intended insertion is taken care of under clause 76(1) (c), which we have just passed - “shall state the conditions on which the licence is granted”. That could be one of the conditions in the licence, which the minister is given authority to provide. It might be one of the conditions that you need to do this before you do this. Wouldn’t that be taken care of then? That is the submission.

MR WERIKHE: I think it is agreeable. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is well taken care of, so there is no more amendment on that. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to. 

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, immediately after clause 80 we propose to insert the following new clauses. The numbering will be changed accordingly:

“81. Grant of licence for the placement and operation of a facility.

(1) The Minister may in consultation with the Authority, on application duly made for a licence to install, operate or use a facility to carry out a petroleum activity, grant to the applicant a facility licence in such a manner and on such conditions as the Minister may determine. 

(2) A facility licence may only be granted for the construction, placement, operation or use of a facility not already subject to a petroleum production licence.
(3) The facility licence may be granted for a duration stipulated by the Minister and may, subject to application from the licensee, be renewed by the Minister. 

(4) The applicant shall obtain permission or licence required by the applicable law in respect of a facility licensed. 

(5) The details of the procedure for application, grant and renewal of a facility licence shall be prescribed by regulations.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is a proposed new clause. Does that come after the general provision relating to licences, permits and approval or before? 

MR WERIKHE: That is immediately after clause 80, renewal of petroleum production licence, and before disclosure of cooperation – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a general heading there, “General provisions relating to licences, permits and approvals.” Does it fall under that or before that?

MR WERIKHE: Before that. This is actually after clause 80, and the title is, “Grant of licence for the placement and operation of a facility.” That is the general heading that we have proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the head note for that clause. There is the general heading which says, “General provisions relating to licences, permits and approvals” just above 81. So, does this amendment come after? Is it under that or before?

MR WERIKHE: It is before that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it make sense? So, it comes immediately after clause 80?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, can I deal with this first or we will listen to all the proposed amendments.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, because the justification applies to the next two proposed amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do they go together?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, they go together, Mr Chairman. “Content of a facility...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that 82?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, that is 82 but the renumbering will be done, Mr Chairman. 
“82. Content of a facility licence
Without prejudice to the generality of section 81(5), a facility licence shall, as a minimum, include - 
(a) 	the date of the grant of the licence;
(b) 	the geographical area to which the licence relates;
c) 	the facility or facilities, activities or use to which the licence relates;
(d) 	any conditions on which the licence is granted; and
(e) 	the operator.”

The justification: To provide for the contents enshrined in the facility licence. 

“83. Rights conferred by a facility licence 
A facility licence, while it remains in force shall, subject to any other law and conditions of the licence, confer on the licensee the right to install, place, operate or use a facility.”

Justification: To leave part of the pipelines for transportation of petroleum under the upstream Bill. This is because the owner or operator of the contemplated pipelines from the fields to a refinery or midstream storage facility may not be the same as the licensee under a production sharing agreement. Also, a licence for the installation and operation of a pipeline may be granted for a different period than the period stipulated in a petroleum production licence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee proposes to insert three new clauses immediately after clause 80. That will be a new 81, a new 82 and a new 83. The details of the provisions have been read by the chairperson of the committee.
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the committee chairperson because whereas it was defined in the Bill, it was not captured in the body. Nonetheless, I do not know whether we shall be in tandem because this involves facilities like the pump stations, compressor station, equipment constructed, placed or used in order to carry out petroleum activities. Is it envisaged to be on an ad hoc basis in the process of the extraction or is it like a secondary petroleum activity? I would like this to be clear.  

Must it be regulated under this law? For petrol stations and pump stations that already exist in the country, I thought they are under a different legal regime. Must we have them under this law? I need some clarification. Must we legislate for that within this? Must we insert it at this point in time, bearing in mind that the way you introduce the facility, it is as if it is on a temporary or ad hoc basis to achieve a main objective in the oil extraction or production. Must we put it under this? I need some clarification, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, on that, we are ably guided even by the nomenclature of this Bill we are debating. This is the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill. It has nothing to do with the usual trade. So, definitely it cannot fall under this.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, this is specifically exploration, development and production as alluded to by hon. Sseggona. When it comes to petrol stations, there is a different law, petroleum supply law, which actually applies to what hon. Ssekikubo is raising.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, the honourable member for Lwemiyaga seems to be satisfied now. Are there any other amendments, honourable members, to the three proposed clauses, the new 81, 82 and 83?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, much as we have said that we make consequential amendments, when you look at the proposed 81, it also refers to the minister in consultation with the Authority. I do not know whether this time it is going to be the Authority in consultation with the minister, going by our consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We will adopt this and then it will be cleaned up in the spirit of clause 9, which is passed, so that we do not go back to that debate again. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee to insert new clauses 81, 82 and 83.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81 

MR WERIKHE: This is the current 81 in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Of course, the numbering will be dealt with.

MR WERIKHE: We would rather go with what is in the Bill for ease of reference. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we will go with the clauses in the Bill, but I was just thinking whether I do not need the House to pronounce itself that those provisions now stand part of the Bill. I put the question that the new clauses 81, 82 and 83 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is now the existing clause 81 in the Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to delete clause 81 (2). The justification is that clause 81(1) does not apply to joint petroleum activities or unitisation. The clause relates to two or more applicants who decide to apply for a joint petroleum production licence together. Sub clause (2) deals with coordination of petroleum activities and, therefore, fits better under clause 101. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, that is clear, but before we go to clause 81 (2), I seem to have a problem with 81 (1). As earlier submitted by the honourable member from Lwemiyaga, I think again we are moving so much into the private businesses in terms of the disclosure of co-operation agreements between private individuals, especially when we make it a precondition for the grant of a licence. I have two points in respect to this. 

One, we could give general power to the minister, but not as a precondition. In this case the minister would even have the power to demand for the co-operation agreement even after granting the licence. When you look at the current drafting, it can only be before the licence. I thought, if we want the minister’s guidance, we would just put the clause the way it is but not as a precondition. As long as this co-operation agreement does not offend the laws or the licence, I thought we would let private business people transact.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So what are you proposing?

MR SSEGGONA: To remove the words, “as a condition for granting of the licence.” 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, when you look at the head note of clause 81, “Disclosure of co-operation agreements by applicants”, and the wording under the clause, the two do not seem to tally very well. In my view, the wording should reflect the headnote, to the effect that if there are two or more applicants they should disclose to the Authority the existence of the agreements between them, other than this kind of wording. I do not know whether the draftsman could help us on that. To me, the wording does not seem to tally very well with the marginal note.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, with insight from my senior colleague, when you put the words, “submitted to the Minister and the Minister may require alterations to be made in the agreements as a condition”, it would appear as if the minister would be reviewing the application conditions on a case by case basis. However, my expectation, from what we have so far discussed, is that the conditions are known; whoever wishes to apply for a licence knows them and simply fits within the four corners of those regulations. 

When we say, “the Minister may require alterations”, it is as if the minister is going to be part of the applicants, to help the applicants develop a checklist to ensure that they have complied or not complied before they get the licence. I think there is a serious contradiction with the headnote as well as the content. 

MR LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, I wish to seek clarification from my friend here. You see, there is what we call “rubber stamping”. Even if you see a defect, someone says, “Do not mind”. However, when they put up conditions, it means you have to take due care to look at these joint agreements. Businessmen, in terms of this very strategic resource, can collude if you bring in something frivolous in sanctions in these joint agreements. So, it is better to look at this other than the minister or anybody else responsible becoming a rubberstamp. 

MR SSEGGONA: With respect, Mr Chairman, I think my colleague did not appreciate my point. The point I was making and I am continuing to make, for the benefit of my colleagues, is that  if you are coming to me to apply for a job, for example, I do not have to draft your CV and the application. I set the conditions and once those are set, and I believe this time by way of regulations, every single applicant coming up will look at the conditions in the regulations and fit within those. 

I want to envisage a situation where you have two applicants competing for the same exploration area or well or licence and  you are going to sit down with each of them to develop their application. It is simply not practicable! This is a procurement at the end of the day. So, all you want is to set standard regulations which govern this and all that you need is an applicant who is going to fit within the structure of those regulations. You do not need to look at co-operation agreements and say, “You see, your co-operation agreement with X is not complying in these respects; go back and rectify this”. This is the alteration power seemingly granted in the current proposal.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Assuming there has been a disclosure of this co-operation agreement by the applicant, does it become part and parcel of the licensing conditions? What happens if along the way the parties do wish to change or amend the agreement itself? Do they again have to come to the minister or to the Authority? 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, we have sub clause (1) in which there are two entities that are coming into co-operation. When they come into co-operation, they know how they have joined and what they want to do. However, to grant them a licence, due diligence must be carried out. If that due diligence is carried out, it is not carried out because two entities have to come together. 

Of course, some portfolios – the leverage or the balance sheet of those companies - must be known and if they find them wanting, then the grantor of the licence may say, “You are coming into co-operation but your capacity to do so is not possible.” In those circumstances, the minister may be required to say, “According to the due diligence we have carried out, you will not do the business. So, can you conform to the standards.” 

What I think is intended here is that two private companies can come and have shares together and start doing business but in case it is wanting, what should be done? Should they be told to change by a minister or they should do it themselves without coming to the minister?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, actually my colleague from Kabula has literally said my point. By the way, as a reminder, we are not talking about a minister now but the Authority. To avoid collusion, the option is only one and nothing else - put in place a standard checklist that is in the regulations. Every man or woman who feels that he or she wants to come and fit in, will have to fit into the regulations but not a review on a case by case basis. If someone does not comply or if the co-operation agreement does not comply, it should simply be rejected. So, whoever is applying knows that these are the standards and they must meet the standards.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think with the way sub clause (1) stands, the spirit is welcome that we need to look at the agreement between these two companies before granting them a licence. To capture what the previous speakers are saying, we could amend it to say, “The co-operation agreement shall be submitted to the minister before granting a licence”. The conditions must then be met and if they are not met, the application will be rejected. This can probably help us move forward on this clause.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, can I add onto that, with your permission?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR SSEGGONA: I think hon. Bahati has tickled my other sense. Actually, in resolving this, we could simply ask the minister, in the regulations, to develop a standard co-operation agreement on what he wants. It would bring out hon. Kakooza’s concern where somebody would know what they need to cater for in a standard co-operation agreement that is acceptable as they apply. It could be an appendix to the regulations to be made by the minister.

MS KAMATEEKA: I have been listening in and I am wondering what happens if the right regulations and requirements are in place and the companies are licensed and then something goes wrong along the way. Would the minister not be empowered to review the licenses that had been granted? I beg for that clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would that be reviewing the terms of the licence? 

MR SSEGGONA: There is always a general provision for review of the licences because first of all, there are compliance standards that are supposed to be enshrined in the law and there is a monitoring unit within our structures. So, I think that would different. 

Look at the civil procedure rules, for example; they give different forms. We do not strictly follow those ones - it is not a fill-in - but you know the basic things that you must include. So, for the various forms for the various agreements that we need, the minister may provide those formats that may guide.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. On further reading and listening to the submissions, I tend to agree more with the minister although we need to make some improvements. The essence of this is really to ensure that if there is any cartel or collusion, it must be checked. It is happening around us and if we do not put up deliberate measures, it will not be checked.

I would propose to proceed with hon. Bahati’s amendment.  SO we say, “Where two or more applicants enter into a co-operation agreement with a view of applying for a petroleum exploration licence or a petroleum production licence, the co-operation agreement shall be submitted to the minister as a condition for granting the licence.” Now, if this is fitting well within, so be it, so that we do not necessarily put it on the Authority to require alterations here and there. It would be entering into the private arena. Once the conditions fit within the terms of the licence, so be it, and it could be granted. 

I propose that we delete, “and the minister may require alteration to be made in the agreement or the Authority may require alterations to be made in the agreement.” Let us leave out that part out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we together here? The proposal is that we delete the phrase, “and the minister may require alteration to be made in the agreements” In other words, the full text will now be, “Where two or more applicants enter into a co-operation agreement with a view of applying for a petroleum exploration licence or a petroleum production licence, the co-operation agreement shall be submitted to the Minister as a condition for the granting of the licence.” 

I now put the question to the first amendment proposed by the committee on the deletion of sub clause (2). I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will now put the question to the amendment on sub clause (2) that requires removing the other phrase “and the Minister may require alteration to be made in the agreements.” I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, clause 83 (3) says, “…the Minister may in exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations, change an operator.” When you go back to the meaning of the word “operator”, you realise that operator is defined to mean any entity executing on behalf of a licensee, the day-to-day management of petroleum activities.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Didn’t we amend that? It was amended.

MR SSEGGONA: Okay, whatever the definition – and thank you for that correction – I would propose that we delete sub clause (3) because the Government will be doing too much. 

The operator, going by whatever definition we adopted, is actually working for and on behalf of the licensee. So, when we say that you are going to tell the licensee to change an operator, aren’t we, as Government, assuming too much responsibility? Change this operator; one, for what reason and then two, appoint who as an operator? We might end up doing the day-to-day work of the licensees. I want to treat this operator as an employee or agent. Why would I have to follow up the licensee in doing the day-to-day running of his business?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In exceptional circumstances only.

MR SSEGGONA: What would those exceptional circumstances be? I stand to be guided. These exceptional circumstances you are talking about – (Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for giving way. Let us look at the definition of an “operator”. An operator carries out everyday activities on behalf of a licensee. When the operator comes to request the licensee that he wants to carry out this job, that operator places themselves as being capable of doing that job very well. 

Our ministry and even the Authority monitor what the operator does in the field. They may find that a particular operator may not do the job as expected by the monitors, who may be Government or the Authority or even the minister. If you find that this person is not moving at all, and it has happened, you can advise as a licensee that this person is not meeting this or that or maybe the money is finished and he is incapable. You can advise the licensee that this person will not achieve your objectives or they cannot achieve the pace at which you want to carry out this job. Otherwise, even your licence may expire. That is why you can advise the licensee to say, “take caution” and therefore he must be able to take that precaution.  (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to seek clarification from the minister. In actual fact, when you read clause 83 (3) jointly with sub clause (5), you realise that the minister or the Authority does not have that mandate to remove or change an operator because the operator remains an agent of the licensee.

The only way you could handle this is to redraft it and say, “In exceptional circumstances, the Authority may direct the licensee to change an operator.” You then provide a penalty in the event that that directive is not complied with. Otherwise, from the way it is worded, you become part and parcel of the operation and the management and you expose yourself to unnecessary liability, but you would remain in the power to direct that an operator ceases to operate and a new one is substituted. 

MR SSEGGONA: Actually, Mr Chairman, my colleague wanted to give me information, which I received, but then somebody wanted clarification on that information. 

First of all, how does an operator come into place? Sub clause (1) states, “There shall be appointed for each petroleum exploration licence or a petroleum production licence, an operator nominated by the licensee and approved by the Authority.”

This operator is already approved, but approved as an agent of the licensee. All that Government is interested in is a regulated sector. We have a list of operators that are already licensed. So, we are now authorising you to use that nominee as an operator but the following day you say, “No, exceptional circumstances have arisen”, which are not codified anywhere and are not standard but they are just going to be developed on a case by case basis. So, you fire that one, bring another operator. 

In the end, we may be allowing some form of collusion. An operator’s licence is a business. The operator is doing business because he is paid by the licensee. Now you tell him, “You man, if you do not give me this or that, I am going to strike you off.” My concern, and where I agree with the honourable member for Ndorwa, is that sub clauses (3) and (5) ought to be deleted. This is because the government, through the Authority, has already participated in the act of nominating who the operators are going to be by licensing and approving them upon nomination by the licensee. So, you do not need to do more. Otherwise, you end up doing the day-to-day management.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The relationship between the licensee and the operator is contractual. If the minister or the Authority is given powers to determine that contractual relationship, then it could cause even more legal problems. I can tell you how. If, for example, the operator is not performing according to the law or to the contract, the licensee has powers to change to another operator. However, what you cannot do is to change the operator – (Interjections)- Look at sub clause (3): “Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Minister may in exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations, change an operator.” It is your law, please read it!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can you insert just before “change an operator” the phrase, “require the licensee to change the operator”? Would that take care of that? So it would read, “Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Minister may, in exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations, require the licensee to change an operator.” But that one is in the next clauses.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I think for the first time, I would like to concur with hon. Sseggona because this is business. If I have contracted with you, I have committed resources and there is a timeframe within which I have agreed to operate business. Midway, after committing my resources, you are saying, “I am not sure whether you are doing well; I am terminating your  contract”. You can imagine the resources one would have committed and someone terminates the contract midway. You come and say, “There are some situations I do not understand; I do not understand the way you are doing business, so I am terminating.”  I think in business it is contractual and not until that contractual time limit has ended, you cannot just come and terminate it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. James Kakooza, there are three entities here – the licensee, the Authority and the operator. What are you talking about?

MR KAKOOZA: I am talking about an operator having the wisdom to change the operations. These are business activities. “Notwithstanding subsection (2), the minister may in exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations change an operator -

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I entirely agree with you that we substitute the words “may require the licensee to change an operator”. That would mean sub clause (4) must also be amended by deleting from the words “except” up to “minister” so that it reads, “An operator shall, as a general rule, be one of the licensees” and we stop at that. What will now be covered is if the Authority has required the licensee to change an operator, then the licensee comes in to change under sub clause (5).

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with you entirely that sub clause (3) should be amended by the insertion of your proposal. My argument is reinforced by a further reading of sub clause (1) and (2) together. In sub clause (1), the only requirement is that for an operator to be appointed there must be an approval by the minister or the Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides for a circumstance where the licensee on his own prompting seeks an approval of the minister to change an operator. Sub clause (3) then provides for a circumstance where if exceptional circumstances exist - and I would envisage the operator running bankrupt, for example - the minister then requires the licensee to change the operator. It makes it complete. I thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I need clarification on two entities here. We are talking about the operator under clause 83. However, we legislated a lot under clause 4 when we were looking at compliance with environmental principles, and we kept on referring to any entity who will operate under the licence of the licensee. In my understanding, what came out there was that such an operator or such an entity, maybe working under compliance with the environmental principles in clause 4, will be pre-qualified by NEMA. That is what came to my mind. 

Now, if the person is going to be pre-qualified and that person could as well be called an operator, then when we come to involving a minister - Of course, you have a licensee like hon. Katuntu said, and the relationship between the licensee and the operator is a contractual relationship. This licensee should have been pre-qualified probably by NEMA under the licence of the licensee and then he continues to proceed through their contractual relationship. 

I do not know whether the component of a minister here will exist in relation to clause 54 that we stood over, that where arises exceptional circumstances the Government will come in and they will operate in such a way that the minister will have a final say. Otherwise, the mandate is in the hands of the Authority and NEMA that pre-qualified the operator. So, I think the component of a minister really, to me, is very confusing. That minister component should be removed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is the situation, honourable members. Sub clause (1) says the licensee will appoint an operator with approval of the minister. Sub clause (2) says the licensee, with the approval of the minister, can change an operator. Sub clause (3) says in exceptional circumstances, the minister can ask the licensee to change a particular operator. So, the sequence is like that. 

Sub clause (3) says, “in exceptional circumstances”. Just like the minister has approved in sub clause (1), the minister has approved in (2), the minister is now initiating, in exceptional circumstances, that a particular operator be changed by the licensee for whatever reasons. That is the sequence.

MR ANYWARACH: I would like to seek clarification from you. It seems I do not understand who this operator is. If this is the operator that is an agent of the licensee, the operator who is also involved in the management of the waste and so on as we have been talking of, don’t you think this clause 83 is actually almost in contradiction with clause 4, and therefore, that clause 4 should be reconsidered? That is the question which comes to my mind. 

In clause 4, in management of waste and so on, the minister does not come on board. The issue that comes on board is that for you to be qualified as an operator or a potential operator, you should have been pre-qualified by NEMA. There and then, you can now be contracted by the licensee who was granted a licence by the Authority. This is what-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: With the approval -

MR ANYWARACH: With the approval of the minister. Okay, thank you very much.
	   
MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think we would be assisted by the minister if she gave us these exceptional circumstances, such that we debate with some idea on what she thinks could be exceptional circumstances.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, before the minister comes in, on a closer reading of the whole clause, I think it is more problematic especially with your guidance on the chronology from sub clause (1), (2), and (3). Sub clause (4) is even more problematic and confusing. It says, “An operator shall, as a general rule, be one of the licensees, except in special circumstances as may be determined by the Minister.” The most disturbing thing here is: what are these special circumstances which are not known? Remember, it is power that the Authority is going to use, and judiciously I must emphasise. So, there must be guidelines to the Authority in developing or even applying these special circumstances. That is one.

Secondly, you have an operator who is an agent That agency relationship comes out very well when you read sub clause (4). You have an operator who is an agent appointed by a licensee with the approval of the Authority. There is an option of removing this operator at due instance of the principal, the licensee, and that is based on the business operations and understanding of the licensee who is the owner of the core and principal business. So, why, in sub clause (3), would you bring in the minister or the Authority to change the operator? The only plausible reason I am seeing, which is not intended, is to encourage corruption; the Authority or the officials of the Authority will go and ransom the operator and say, “give me this money; if you do not give it to me, I will remove you from business”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No.

MR SSEGGONA: I am saying it is not intended, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us guide ourselves because these exceptional circumstances are supposed to be prescribed in regulations. So, they are going to be known. It is not like somebody is just going to guess what the exceptional circumstances are. They are supposed to be prescribed by regulations. 

What I also need guidance on is – (Interjections) - and the Speaker is speaking at this moment. You need to help us. Why in sub clause (3) is it exceptional circumstances, in sub clause (4) it is special circumstances and in sub clause (5) it is special circumstances? One is special and the other is exceptional. What is the difference? Can we have some consistency in the language? These are supposed to be prescribed in regulations. Let us first hear what the minister actually intended.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank you because you have guided very well on most of the issues which are arising here, where members are seeking clarification. One thing I need to emphasise is that the operator is very key in the activities of this sector and these activities include proper resource management and also stretch to issues of national content. So, when it comes to compliance, it is important that the operators actually comply with the licensing conditions so that as a state we can benefit.

The exceptional circumstances that we are talking about are going to be detailed in the regulations, and I can give some examples. One is poor environmental management and another is poor or improper resource management. In such circumstances, the licensee will be advised to change the operator. But what happens when the licensee does not change the operator and the circumstances are still pertaining? 

The essence of putting this here, as we saw in the hierarchy, is because the licensee may change, notwithstanding the exceptional circumstances which I have highlighted. The licensee will be required to change an operator if they are not complying with the conditions that are stipulated in the licence. In the event that even after advising the licensee to change the operator the licensee refuses to change the operator, what happens?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you terminate the licensee.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In actual fact, when you take a closer look at sub clause (3) and sub clause (5), you will see two different scenarios. The first scenario in sub clause (3) relates to the change of an operator on exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations. In sub clause (5), you are seeing a change of an operator who is not a licensee on special circumstances, which will not be prescribed anywhere. (Interjections) Yes! Whereas in sub clause (3) the grounds for changing will be exceptional circumstances prescribed in regulations, in sub clause (5) you will change an operator who is not a licensee on special circumstances not known anywhere.

Can we agree and say yes, from (1) to (3), you are changing - , In (3), the Authority requires the licensee to change. In sub clause (5) if the operator is to be changed on special circumstances, then those special circumstances must also be prescribed and known so that there is no room for arbitrariness.
 
MR KATUNTU: I need clarification from the minister. You see, there are two examples the minister has given. One of them is breaching environmental laws; that can never be an exceptional circumstance. It is actually an infringement on the law. Because NEMA has previously licensed this particular operator, it can withdraw the licence and therefore, that cannot be an exceptional circumstance. The only person or authority that has got the right to determine infringement on the environmental regime or law is NEMA; it cannot be the minister or even the Authority. 

Two, if you are talking about resources, this should be within the agreement or within the terms of agreement, then it will be a breach of the agreement or the covenant in the licence. So, it cannot also be a special or exceptional circumstance. I am still waiting for you to give me only one exceptional circumstance and then I will be comfortable with you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. To avoid any ambiguity, I would propose that the honourable chair accepts and we delete that clause. This is because if we are to retain special circumstances, which are only identified and confirmed by the minister, it would raise the problem of whose interest is being served and who is supposed to justify and approve what special circumstances are.

Besides, we are making a law which is supposed to be specific. The circumstances which the minister is trying to project are known circumstances and those can be catered for. For the circumstances that she envisages will not be known, I propose that we delete that clause and make specific laws for known cases.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can somebody think of introducing a clause that talks about exceptional circumstances? We can harmonise the language such that there is consistency. You either agree to use “exceptional” only or agree to use “special” so that there is only word used. Could it be possible? 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, it can only be “exceptional” because when you apply “special”, then it would be in the mind of the person determining whether they are special or not. I implore my colleagues to recognise one thing, that a licensee is a business person and is running a business and very often would not love to conflict with the law. That is the guidance the licensee will and must always give to the operator. That is number one. 

Secondly, we need to distinguish between intervention and interference. If we leave these clauses the way they are, that would be interference in private business. I would like to suggest that we possibly delete sub clause (3) and (5) and draft a general clause that authorises the minister to make regulations governing these exceptional circumstances, and that the exceptional circumstances be approved by Parliament because they are coming from here.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have carefully listened to all views and I find that ordinarily speaking, in business sense and contractual language members are right. However, I would wish to give another view as to why the minister is looking at the other exceptional circumstances. 

In my understanding, this is a new industry altogether where the minister, and maybe the industry at large, seemingly find themselves with a lot to see or to learn in the event of exercising the management of the sector and in trying to protect the sector. So, they have not yet come to understand the would-be exceptional circumstances. The scenario I would agree with maybe is to refine the clauses but cater for their fear of those other events that may happen in the exercise of the companies rendering the service to the country.

MRS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have looked at the definition of “operator” which means an entity executing on behalf of a licensee -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That was amended.

MRS ADONG:  I think instead of using the word “shall”, can’t we use the word “may”? “There may be appointed for each petroleum exploration license...” The reason is that we cannot tie the licensee, unless we are not sure of the capability of the licensee in handling petroleum activities. We cannot tie them. Must we say that they must have operators? What if they have their own structures and their own operators?  

I propose that for sub clauses (4) and (5), why can’t we limit the power of the minister and the Authority to prequalifying? Can’t we have prequalified - (Interruption) 
 
MS KAMATEKA: Thank you. I would like to inform members -
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let her finish. Honourable members, people will read these Hansards and if a member has not even finished their statement and you are giving them information, how do we coordinate it?  (Laughter)  Let her finish and then you can give the information. I could even give you the opportunity to discuss. 

MRS ADONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was trying to say that instead of having the operators approved by the minister, why can’t we have a list of prequalified operators from which the licensees can draw?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is already agreed upon. Let us take the information and then I come to Lwemiyaga. 

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I wanted to give to the member was that although we recognise that this is business, the oil business has national security implications. So, the minister should and must be empowered to make interventions where it becomes necessary. I think we should bear that in mind. 
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With hindsight, this clause 83 emanated from clause 4(2) which, fortunately, we overcame. In clause 4(2), it provides for different entities, and in any case different from those described in sub section (1), in reference to the management of the production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities. This was envisaging different entities. That is why I think, from that drafting, they came to specifically provide for an operator here. 

In view of the fact that we put all the responsibilities to the licensee - If you look at clause 83 (1), for instance, it says, “There shall be appointed for each petroleum exploration licence or a petroleum production licence, an operator nominated by the licensee and approved by the Authority.” Now, that “shall” commands us. In view of the fact that we overcame that hurdle, I would go further and propose that we delete the entire clause 83 because it now remains more or less redundant. 

The fears that were being catered for under clause 83 are already covered and were overcome in these previous provisions. So, let us delete instead of adding or subtracting. An operator’s relationship with the licensee, by our amended definition of an operator, is solely between the two, which this Parliament must not venture into defining and giving terms and conditions. I would, therefore, propose that we delete the entire clause 83.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we are deleting clause 83; what do you have to say? 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, what hon. Ssekikubo is referring to in clause 4, which we handled earlier, is focusing specifically on waste management, and that is where NEMA comes in. Here, we are looking at the special circumstances which, as I said, are going to be detailed in the regulations. 

If I could share further examples; there is a method you use while extracting oil from the ground, which varies. In some of these countries, they have even gone up to 60 per cent, depending on the method that they use and if the operator has a key role in the extraction of this resource from the ground.
  
The other issue I can share with you is the under declaration of production and also inflating of costs. For the other provisions we are going to share with agencies like NEMA, which deal with environmental concerns etcetera. There is also the other issue I talked about on the national content, where there is a requirement for them to observe that priority is given to the local companies or local individuals from this country. This is really to make a provision for those circumstances where there has to be intervention.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clearer now?
 
MR SSEGGONA: No. It is actually worse, Mr Chairman. This is because the examples given by the minister are even more problematic. If there is under declaration, for example, that is fraud. Definitely, fraud is not an exceptional circumstance. It is concealment which is fraudulent, and once the operator does that it must be in collusion with the licensee. That is ordinarily a ground for revoking the licence. 

If you are talking about environmental concerns or non-compliance with environmental stipulations, this is a ground for NEMA to withdraw the operator’s licence on environmental grounds. I think, Mr Chairman, let us just agree with colleagues across that we stick to those provisions that are not going to remain idle and not susceptible to abuse. Let us agree on the need to appoint an operator under sub c1ause (1) and the approval of Government, because basically it is the licensing authority. Let us agree in sub-clause (2) that the licensee may, with the approval of the minister – we said the Authority - change an operator. 

I am very uncomfortable with sub clauses (3), (4) and (5). I am uncomfortable with sub-clause (3) because of interference as opposed to intervention. I am uncomfortable with sub-clause (4) because of the prescription that an operator shall, as a general rule, be one of the licensees except in special circumstances as may be determined by the minister; that is, in all honesty,  redundant. Finally, I am uncomfortable with sub-clause (5) for the reasons we have given. Mr Chairman, with that we shall be able to make progress.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I do not intend to draft but let me get the principle. If the operator is acting in breach of this law or any other law, or if he is acting in breach of the conditions given under the licence, then you could have the right under this section to require the change of that operator. Would you be comfortable with those sorts of proposals, and then we could just have one clause to replace the entire six clauses?  We can redraft it in a short time. 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I propose we stand over this. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we should know the purpose for which we are standing over this. Is it for redrafting?

MS MULONI: We have to go back and look at the circumstances that we are describing here so that maybe if we bring in more information, it may give further clarification.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, clause 83 stood over. Please, carry out consultations and look at those proposed drafts and we see how they come out, so that when we return to them we can move quickly.

Clause 84

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 85 (4) the committee proposes to substitute the words “one hundred” with the words “two hundred”. So, it will read as follows: “A licensee who fails or neglects to comply with a requirement of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand currency points.” The justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is a clear proposal to increase from one to two hundred thousand currency points. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose to amend clause 87 by inserting immediately after sub clause (3) (b) the following sub clause: “(c) Where the licensee fails to comply with environmental safeguards or is found by a competent court or tribunal to be responsible for gross violation of human rights.” 

The justification for this insertion is because of clause 2(d) and (e) of our Bill, which will require any licensee to have not only the environmental concerns of our people in mind but also their human rights. We would not want to have a situation that occurred in the Ogun State in Nigeria.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Was that handled? I had marked here that there was supposed to be an amendment on clause 87. There are the harmonised amendments to the Petroleum Bill, which were circulated by the chairperson. Is it in this document?

MR WERIKHE: No. It is here but the element of human rights is not actually there. We need to have a look at it again. We can look at it with hon. Niwagaba and then come back to report.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, if you are standing over it, it is not because it was not circulated. Please, let us get rid of this business. If you have not read it, that does not mean you do not have it. I received my copy last week.

MR WERIKHE: I have it but we have not harmonised on this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you are saying that, then that is different from saying you do not know about it.
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, when we circulated this, there were clauses that we had to harmonise where we had some differences in opinion and indeed, we reached a conclusion. But on this, the chairman and the minister were agreeable only that it is turning out that – (Interruption)

MRS MULONI: No, Mr Chairman. I do not agree with what hon. Ssekikubo is saying. We have not looked at this and we have not harmonised. We have not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we shall be getting back to this matter shortly. You had better look at it now because we shall soon require you to report on it. This is a matter that is straightforward. If you need to consult, you had better do it now and then we move on.  Clause 87 is stood over. 
 
MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, if we are standing over a matter, we must know what we are going to do when we come back.  We cannot just say, “Stood over; we shall look at it.” We must commit ourselves by either looking at the clause when we come back or something like that, and then we move forward. Otherwise, if we just gloss over the issue when it is not understood well by members, then there is nothing that will come out.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, this particular harmonised amendment was circulated last week. I received my copy last week and went through the amendments. We are not going to be held down because people have not gone through documents.
 
Clause 88

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 88 stands part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute clause 95 to read as follows: 
“(1) The minister may, by regulations, stipulate the equipment, methods and standards to be applied for measurement of petroleum produced, processed or transported for resource management, operational, economic and fiscal purposes. 

(2) The Minister may stipulate in regulations that there shall be multiple measurement points.” 

The justification is that the details relating to the measurement of petroleum shall be prescribed by regulations under the current clause 95 (1). The sub clauses proposed for substitution attempt to stipulate the manner in which petroleum will be measured and yet they are not exhaustive enough. It is better to leave it for regulations for more specific details.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? Is the amendment clear? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 95, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97

MR WERIKHE:  Mr Chairman, under clause 97 (6), the committee proposes to substitute the words “one hundred” with the words “five hundred”. So, it will read as follows: “A person who contravenes subsection (5) commits an offence and on conviction shall be liable to pay a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand currency points.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is just an enhancement of that penalty. Do we agree to it? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 97, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we need to look at clause 99 more closely. My recommendation is that we should delete sub clauses (3) and (4). When you look at them, they seem in a way to impede on planning on the part of Government as well as the investors. 

First of all, the government approves licences and plans as well as budgets before. Now, when you read sub clause (3), it says, “Where petroleum is being recovered in a development area, the Authority may, by notice in writing served on a licensee, direct the licensee to take all necessary and practicable steps to increase the rate at which the petroleum is being recovered to a rate not exceeding the capacity of the existing production facilities, as the Authority may specify in the notice.” 

I thought this is already catered for in the approved plans and budgets. So, under what circumstances would the Authority come up to make variations? I thought they would be enforcing the existing contract based on the approved plans. Of course, sub clause (4) is only enforcing sub clause (3). Maybe the minister could clarify the circumstances under which they would make the variations.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I was analysing this because it is a new observation that he is making. So, I needed to look at the details in order to establish why we have provided for this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, of course, it is a new situation. Can we look at it properly? Let us stand over clause 99. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think there is no reason we should stand over this issue. The committee did not recommend to amend, and it is clear why this was provided for - to control the rate at which we churn out the oil. So, I am suggesting that we pass this clause because it is not dangerous. 

MR SSEGGONA: Okay, Mr Chairman, I can concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute clause 101 with the following: “Unit development” – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The whole of clause 101?

MR WERIKHE: Instead of the head note being “Coordination of activities across licensees” it will now be “Unit development”. (Interjections) Yes, that one is also going to change but it will come later but here we are substituting this current clause for the following: - (Interjections) - Yes, the entire clause 101. 

The head note will read, “Unit development” and the clause will read as follows:
“(1) A reservoir extending from one licence area into another shall be subject to a unit development. 
(2) The affected licensees shall agree within a reasonable time on how to co-ordinate the development of a reservoir to achieve optimal recovery of petroleum. 

(3) A unit development agreement shall include principles for apportionment of petroleum from the reservoir. 

(4) The terms and conditions of the agreement referred to in subsection (1) shall be subject to approval by the Authority. 

(5) Where consensus on a unit development agreement in subsection (1) is not reached by the licensee within a reasonable time, the Authority may determine how the unit development shall be conducted, including the apportionment of the petroleum from the reservoir.”

The justification: To require licensees to enter into unit development agreements in cases where the reservoir extends beyond one licence area.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification for deleting “co-ordination of activities across licence boundaries”, which is the current headnote of clause 101?

MR WERIKHE: As a committee, we brought in the element of unit development because this is a new term which transcends the boundary which the licensee gives permission to - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal of the committee is clear, that we should delete the existing clause 101 and replace it with what the chairperson has just proposed. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, my only proposal is that we transfer the definition of unit development to the definition clause and remove it from here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want us to remove it from here? You think that whole thing will fit in the definition section?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean the whole of the proposed clause 101?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: No, the earlier “unit development”, that is clause 102(2), the definition – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet gone there; you are jumping the gun.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. To me, clause 101 in its original form was taking care of the scenario the committee chairperson is proposing to cure. Read sub-clauses (1), (2), (3) up to even where there are agreements on joint production and transportation that shall be approved by the Authority. So, why are we re-casting this since it is well captured here? Are there any lacunas in the original proposal that the chairperson wants to cure?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, as a committee we have given our justification, which is to require the licensees to enter into unit development agreements in cases where the reservoir extends beyond one licence area.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that particular one is covered under clause 102.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Ssekikubo. When you look at clause 101, co-ordination of activities across licence boundaries, this is in respect of reservoirs extending from one licence area to another. Clause 102, on unit development, tends to restrict itself to one reservoir. So, I think it would not be justified to substitute clause 101 with the clause proposed by the committee. Otherwise, you will even lose caption of the importance of clause 102. Therefore, I propose that we maintain the two clauses as they are in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal, that we retain -

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification I want to make is that the term “unit development” augurs well with a licence that transcends boundaries. However, in clause 102, we amended it as a committee to read “joint petroleum activity” and that augurs well with what hon. Niwagaba is proposing. So, really, there is no difference. We should be comfortable. I think we should wait for the chairman to read us the amendment on clause 102.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Structuring is equally important, Mr Chairman and committee members. The reader or the user of the Bill should be able to see how it is flowing. Unless there is a something specific but if it is really the mere nomenclature of “unit development”, that you want to give it another name, let us know why. Otherwise, if you read through 101 on the co-ordination of activities across licensed boundaries, indeed all the four sub-clauses give you such cross boundaries. It is under clause 101,  and clause 102 on unit development goes all the way to sub clause (3) on page 78 and it covers all this. Mr Chairman, I propose that we retain the original formulation in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, what value addition do you bring to this Bill by replacing these two clauses? What is the value you are adding? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking further clarification as he comes to clarify on the question as guided by you. I would like the minister to also clarify on the issue of the boundaries because when we are talking about activities across the boundaries, we are assuming that these are activities within Uganda only. However, there can be circumstances where the boundaries go into reservoirs in another country and this should be made clear and we see how to handle that.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, please, let us understand why we have these new proposals, so that we can move.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, when we invited technical people, we discussed this with them. They explained the element here of a unit development specifically with regard to the apportionment of petroleum from a reservoir. Where licensees would find themselves in a situation where they are drawing from one reservoir, this situation would be covered under what unit development would be apportioned to licensee A and what unit development could be apportioned to licensee B. So, it was under these circumstances that we then had this provision. Perhaps the minister could elucidate on this and then we move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you changing your position on the Bill now?

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, clause 101 talks about activities across licensed boundaries and clause 102 talks about unit development. The issue that hon. Anywar wanted me to comment on, the possibility of having activities across even national boundaries, is also possible. As you realise, the Albertine is shared between Uganda and the Congo. So, that possibility is there. Of course, that will need co-ordination because if you have a field which traverses across boundaries, then we have to co-ordinate with the other parties across the boundaries on how best we can carry out petroleum extraction activities. 

The clarification I can give in relation to unit development is that we need to understand that joint petroleum activities need to be regulated. So, that is why this is being brought out in this clause. There is “across boundaries” and then there is “unit development”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I thought the boundary you are talking about is the licensed boundary. 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, there is the licensed boundary and then there is also the geographical boundary that we are talking about, where the reservoir traverses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, which one now captures this better?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have two points. One, when you look at the headnotes of these two clauses, they have nothing to do with cross border issues in terms of geographical areas, not even in terms of content. I remember somewhere when we were talking about creating offences across borders; our conclusion on that clause was by some consensus but it was about the decriminalisation. 

I advised that Government could go back and look at a possibility of guiding the minister on the cross-boundary bilateral negotiations, because at the end of the day we are going to issue licenses that have implications across the border. Now, these two clauses do not cater for such situations. I wish the minister could look at it again, other than giving an explanation for the sake of convincing us to leave this clause and we go to the next one. She is going to be in more practical difficulty. We need provisions that are going to cater for that situation.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, there is unitisation within the country; that is where licences overlap on a reservoir. You are trying to work and you say, “What do we do with these adjacent licences?” and then we agree on how to exploit the resource maximally. However, there is also cross-border unitisation across countries, and this is dealt with in the agreements, negotiations and international law on how you can transport gas across borders and how you can transport oil across borders. There is extensive writing on that matter.

When we get to that matter, we contact the neighbouring countries, following the laws stipulated, on how we would want to jointly exploit the resources near each other, like in the case of Congo; there is also oil across the other side. What we are discussing is: how do we economically take our oil across to your side so that you transport it to the point of exit? So, here you negotiate and make fresh agreements between countries on how you do this. When you read the international laws on cross-border boundaries and unitisation, they are there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, there is an amendment proposed by the committee to replace 101 and 102; do you support it or not? Let me have the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: First of all, Mr Chairman, hon. Medard Sseggona is bringing out something interesting. However, I think we can look at it on its own merit and it should not be seen to be stopping progress on this particular clause. This one is actually talking about where a reservoir extends to more than one licensed area with different licences. 

Having said that, I have read through 101 in the Bill and I have read the proposal for amendment. I have failed to see any value added. Maybe the minister accepted it simply because it stated the same thing, but let the chairperson come out strongly and tell us what they have amended. I have looked at the consensus and it is there; I have looked at the agreement going to the minister for one reason or another, it is the same. So, I do not see anything different – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: They had actually deleted the definition of unit development in the proposed amendment.


MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to withdraw the proposal on 101.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no proposed amendment on 101. I put the question that clause 101 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101, agreed to.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hearing from the Attorney-General on the issue of the activities across the national borders, I seek guidance on whether it is going to be considered so that we make a specific provision to cater for that. I am not sure whether we shall have it incorporated in this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please propose a draft and come back, because this one is talking about “across licence boundaries”. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I seek your indulgence just on the spelling, where they say “the licences”; shouldn’t we capture it as “licensees”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those are editorial issues. I put the question that clause 102 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we did propose to amend clause 110(7) by adding the following words after the word “Government”: “and shall be transferred to the Petroleum Fund in accordance with the laws governing petroleum revenues.” The justification is that we will definitely have a role to manage petroleum revenues and we would want the revenue related to petroleum to include this particular fund not to be transferred to another fund.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that particular amendment – 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the petroleum fund is going to be handled in a separate Bill; it is going to be handled under revenue management. So I am uncomfortable with that being including here because we have not considered that revenue management Bill as yet and we do not know whether it is going to be called the petroleum fund or not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If that is the only concern, you can say, “shall be transferred to a fund for petroleum”

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think the problem starts earlier. Clause 110(4) says, “For every subsequent calendar quarter in which petroleum is produced or a facility operated, the Authority shall charge the licensee a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of facilities to be deposited in the fund.”  First of all, I understand that by this clause only, a specific decommissioning fund is created. So I would be much more comfortable if this money is directly paid into the decommissioning fund and not to the Authority. In which case, even the language would have to change whereby the responsibility of the Authority would be to ensure that the money is paid directly into the fund. 

Actually, sub clause (5) brings out my point: “The amount deposited in the decommissioning fund shall be charged as operating costs subject to the cost recovery limitations stipulated in the petroleum agreements or as may be provided by regulations.” My understanding is that this particular money is intended to achieve a particular purpose and nothing else. So, it is better that it is paid directly into that fund and it is used for nothing else but that. 

It states here, “Where the decommissioning fund is not sufficient to cover the implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee, and where applicable, the owner of the facilities shall cover the costs and expenses.” I think this is a disincentive to investment. If you do not plan properly and you ask me to deposit a specific amount of money, why would you tell me to pay more the following day on account that the money I paid was not enough? If you are technical enough, tell me the amount and you must be satisfied as an investor that it is enough. 

Correspondingly, in sub-clause (8) it says, “The management of the decommissioning fund shall be done by a committee consisting…” Just before that, (7) says that where the amount is more, then it shall accrue to Government. You cannot have your cake and eat it. You are telling me that where it is not enough, you will come back to me and where it is more than enough because you charged me more, it will go to Government. I think that we need to harmonise this and make sure that we are sure. If we made a loss as a Government, we own up because it is owing to our own poor assessment. 

For emphasis, Mr Chairman; one, there must be certainty for me as an investor because this money is part of my investment programme. If you tell me that this is the amount of money that I should pay to the decommissioning fund, it should be sufficient. If you have made a profit somewhere and this money is not enough, you top up. Two, if you get more than you would ordinarily have wanted, take your money; I have no business with it. Three, pay the money directly into the decommissioning fund and the authority has only one responsibility, to ensure that this money is paid.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, there is a fund actually in this Bill. 

MR KATUNTU: One of the most important processes in the oil industry is decommissioning, because you are putting the land back to the position that it was in before – (Interjection) - You cannot afford it. After the extraction of the oil, this land should be utilised and returned as much as possible to the state it was in for purposes of normal living. 

Yes, it is true and it is a practice the world over to have a separate fund for decommissioning. You cannot have exact figures that decommissioning will cost US$ 1 million, for example. It is possible to estimate US$ 1 million and the process of decommissioning and putting back costs US$ 2 million. So, what do you do? Let us not say, “Well, it was a bad deal; we did not negotiate properly.” I think that was the reason why the minister provided for clause 110 (6), for which I think I do support.

About where the funds should go, I think eventually we have another law coming. What is missing actually in that law is if there is this revenue accruing. We should provide for it as one of the sources of revenue to be part of the petroleum fund under the Public Finance Act. We can provide for it, assuming that the committee dealing with this particular Bill now realises that there is some money here. If we do not provide for it, then it will accrue to Government like any other revenue and yet it specifically came from this sector.

MS MULONI: I thank you. I agree entirely with what hon. Katuntu has just said, and I would like to give further clarification. When you look at sub clause (4), the Authority is the one that is actually going to manage this fund. It is the one that charges the licensee when it comes to the decommissioning. In the event that the amount that the licensee has been charged is insufficient, then additional money has to be paid. The issue is that it is not possible to actually establish how much in advance, and so that is why the provision is made in that manner. But from the provision that we have in sub-clause (4), the Authority is in charge of that fund.

MS AKOL: I thank you. Section 110 (6) and (7) I think should be read together. In (6), we are saying that where the fund is not sufficient to cover the decommissioning plan, then the licensee or the owner shall cover the costs and expenses. In fact, we are trying to say that the cost of decommissioning in full must be borne by the licensee. 

In (7), we are saying that where any amount remains in the decommissioning fund after the decommissioning plan has been implemented such funds should accrue to Government. I want to say that this is not fair. If in (6) we are saying that the licensee should bear full costs, any balance should automatically revert to that licensee who has over estimated or overpaid and not Government. We should be consistent in framing these clauses. 

MR SEBUNYA: I do not know whether the committee also interrogated the statement in 110 that, “There shall be established a decommissioning fund for each development area.” How many decommissioning funds shall we have? It means that every decommissioning area shall get a vote and create a fund and then there shall be 10 or 15 decommissioning funds. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what it means because you cannot use the decommissioning fund from the plan in Omoro in Busiro. 
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, my colleague has proposed that we read the two sub clauses, (6) and (7), together. My reading of sub clause (6) is that where the decommissioning fund is not sufficient to cover the implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee, and where applicable the owner of the facilities, shall cover the cost and expenses. This one puts it into two categories. 

First of all, there must be a decommissioning fund. Also, within this same sub-clause, probably where the cost of reclamation and all that is higher this is when the licensee comes in to augment. Therefore, we should make it categorical if we are to go by what the honourable member is proposing. Are we saying that this decommissioning fund is the responsibility of the licensee? Certainly not! I think that from the production licence, from the revenues there has to be provided a specific account and amount for the decommissioning once that times comes. 

What is proposed here is that once that fund is not enough, then that is when the licensee comes in to foot the bill. We have to harmonise this. At what stage must the licensee come in? If the licensee is taking it from the word go, then any remaining funds must surely revert to the licensee. But where there is public money in form of a decommissioning fund, it cannot be given to the licensee and that is why I stood to support the amendment because the wording is clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: According to (6), who is the owner? It says, “The licensee, and where applicable the owner…” So, the licensee is not the owner. Who is the owner?

MR NIWAGABA: When you look at the Bill entirely, although it defines “facility” it does not define the owner of the facility in respect of sub clause (6). 

I had stood up to give my colleague information that the payments into the decommissioning fund are prescribed under sub clause (3). They have a specific timeframe, one of them being five years before the expiry of the licence. So, if a person has had a licence for 20 years and pays in the 15th year, the likelihood is that actually it may not be adequate. That is why I am suggesting that we, as Government, retain the balance on this fund. Other damages may occur after, which might have not been known at the time the decommissioning was completed, especially on matters to do with the environment.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, let me clarify to honourable members. This decommissioning fund we are talking about comprises costs that are already categorised as operational costs; therefore, they are recoverable. So, even if you have a licensee depositing more than what the plan actually takes, this is reconciled because it is a recoverable cost. You do not have to give it back to the licensee because that licensee will have recovered these costs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable minister, who is the owner? Are you trying to hide Government as the owner? Who is the owner of the facility? Isn’t it Government? 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the minister’s explanation was good at the beginning but more confusing at the end. I am saying this because when you read sub clause (5), which she has referred us to, it states thus: “The amount deposited in the decommissioning fund shall be charged as operating costs subject to the cost recovery limitations stipulated in the petroleum agreements or as may be provided by regulations.” As we speak, we do not know the stipulations in the agreements because those agreements are not in place, to which this provision is now subject, and also the regulations. 

We have a clear wording in sub clause (7), which reads thus: “Where any amount remains in the decommissioning fund after the decommissioning plan has been implemented, such funds shall accrue to the Government.” I think that is clear. The other one is actually a bit ambiguous. For this one, once some money remains, it goes to Government, and this is not subordinated to any other thing. Remember sub clause (5) is subordinated to the agreements, stipulations as well as the regulations. This one is not.

Let me ask the minister: what happens to somebody after doing his excavation of oil? What security do you have? Once my business in Uganda is over, the next thing will be to get my money and jump onto the plane. You have envisaged a situation where the amount in the fund is insufficient but I have already taken off; what security do you have? Of course, notwithstanding my earlier observations on this clause, you must also have plan B because I will do my business and go.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My understanding is that we are dealing with a number of instruments here. The first one is the decommissioning plan. I suppose this is submitted to the minister at the time of making an application for a licence. I also suppose the decommissioning plan must have a timeline, activities and estimates for those activities. That is the first instrument we are dealing with. 

My understanding also is to the effect that against the checked activities, there must be an amount deducted and paid to the decommissioning fund for that purpose. These are just estimates but I also understand that they must be estimates based on some best practices occurring elsewhere.

The third one is what is contained in sub clause (5) - what amount is charged and deposited on the decommissioning fund. Sub clause (5) specifically says that it shall be charged as operating costs subject to the cost recovery limitations stipulated in the petroleum agreements. This introduces a second instrument, the PSA. We are also dealing with what is contained in the PSA as recoverable costs and the limitations imposed therein.

The minister is right when she says that the licensee will already have recovered the costs he paid to the fund as recoverable costs at the time of decommissioning. So, whatever balances are left should be taken back to Government. It cannot again go to a person who has already recovered. That is my submission, Mr Chairman.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am looking at the decommissioning plan under sub section (1) and like my colleague has said, I think it comes with a budget. That budget can be lower as in the case of sub clause (6), or higher as in the case of sub clause (7). 

At the time of implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee may go to work around his budget and the activity plan and may actually incur less as has already been suggested in (7), but this is just a budget. If it is Shs 100,000 and he has implemented a decommissioning plan at Shs 70,000, the Shs 30,000 is just part of the budget. So, I am wondering why sub clause (7) should still remain in this law because this money is not physical; it is just a budget. Are we to have a provision for the remaining amount to be taken to the government coffers?

MR BAHATI: I just want to make a comment on what hon. Fox Odoi has said. You cannot talk about a balance when there is no difference. If it is a recoverable cost and it has been recovered, then you cannot talk about a balance. I think the spirit of this is that there should be some money remaining to cater for incidental costs on things that can actually come in after the plan has been implemented. So, I thought that if we are to maintain this sub clause the way it is, we should be talking about the amount that remains in the decommissioning fund and where we want to transfer it, whether to Government or the revenue. 

However, if we mention the implementation plan, then the question that was raised by hon. Rose Akol becomes valid. If you have implemented the plan and this money has been borne by the licensee, why should you transfer it to the government? In the first place, the government is not in the business of decommissioning; this is not business. 

The safer way would be to talk about what remains in the decommissioning fund and where they are going to be implemented without referring to the fact about after implementing the decommissioning plan. This is because the plan might never be implemented fully because there are some things that come up after we have engaged with these companies.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In my opinion or understanding, whatever cost these oil companies meet in their operations is deducted from the oil revenue. That is why they are saying that after submitting the work plan, even for the cost which is stipulated in the work plan, that money is recovered from petroleum funds. This means that after decommissioning, even if any money remains they will have already recovered their costs and so this money should go back to Government. If you give it to them, you will be adding more money to them. 

They explained to us, if you attended all those workshops that where organised, that they include all the costs, even those for digging the trenches and things like that. So, when the revenue from oil comes, they first deduct all their costs before even giving Government money. So, that cost for decommissioning is part of that money that they get from the oil revenue. I beg to submit.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have understood the argument she is bringing out but what I was raising was from the fact that as far as we know, decommissioning costs should not be a cost to Government. So, it should not be a recoverable cost. It should be a cost to be borne by the licensee, or for that matter the so-called owner. As of now, we have not got an explanation as to who this owner is. Decommissioning costs are normally borne by the licensee or the contractor. In accounting standards, that is what it is. Now - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the so-called recoverable costs should be the initial costs where the investor is not sure whether he will be able to break even or even to hit the oil. After the business of drilling has been undertaken and the well is profitable, the so-called decommissioning costs, like in any other countries, involve reclamation, restoration, re-vegetation and that should really be a cost to the licensee. 

The minister says that this is a recoverable cost but it should not be. Recoverable costs stop once it has been assured and the licensee has reached the breakeven stage. The decommissioning costs should be borne by the licensee because at the end of the day, leaving this to Government is going to be very expensive and for no reason. The recoverable costs should help the licensee at the point of getting the assurance that indeed the venture is profitable. After that, Government should withdraw, and I stand to support what my colleague in saying that we should reconsider this.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, my argument therefore holds. Since decommissioning costs are supposed to be borne by the licensee and are not a recoverable cost from Government, sub clause (6) should remain as it is. However, in (7), in case the licensee has provided monies over and above the actual costs of the decommissioning plan, that money should revert to the licensee. Assuming the two were one, that in this area the decommissioning plan had less money provided for and you were therefore supposed to top up, why should the same licensee, assuming he was operating in another area II, be made to lose when the provision was over and above the actual cost of decommissioning? 

That is why I am saying that in (7), the monies should actually accrue to the licensee not to Government. In any case, in the PSAs, decommissioning costs should not be a recoverable cost to the licensee. It should be a full cost that the licensee should plan to bear, not Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sub clause (4) says, “…the Authority shall charge the licensee a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of facilities to be deposited…” If it is a future cost being estimated, how can it be a recoverable cost at that stage?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, may I add that actually by providing for this as a future cost, do you also realise that you are depriving this investor of the money that he would otherwise put to use, and you are putting him at a further disadvantage? You have kept deducting and therefore keeping his money away from him. Time comes and you tell him, “Actually, what you deposited is less, bring more”, but you when you find it is more, you keep it. 

I want to agree with the hon. Akol and hon. Ssekikubo to the extent that there should be nothing like what you call “recoverable cost”. If it is recoverable, then actually the responsibility is lifted from the licensee back to Government because he has recovered his money. Therefore, it means he has not shouldered the responsibility of decommissioning. After all, he has recovered his money, how do you say it is a recoverable cost? 

I want to suggest that it should not be recoverable. Two, if you find that the money is in excess, give him his money. My fear is that when I emphasise this some people may think I have crossed to join those who overstate the word “investors” but it is a disincentive to investment. I think we need to look at it again.

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to get this very clear in my mind. For as long as the licensee knows that the work of decommissioning is the work of Government, from the environmental point of view the licensee will not take precautions in his activities to make sure there is little damage and interference in the work place. Once we have agreed that the work of decommissioning should be the responsibility of the licensee, recovery does not come in and, therefore, sub clause (5) should be deleted because it is talking of recovery.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are processes which are always followed internationally in the oil and gas industry. They start from exploration, go to production and then cessation, which is decommissioning. In all instances, decommissioning is treated specially because of the effects which are caused to the environment. Therefore, you need to handle it very seriously.

I would like to explain that when you produce, the first thing will be for you to deduct royalties, and then secondly, you deduct cost oil, and then you continue and share the profits. What this section presupposes is that you know in your mind that one time you will cease operations. That is definite. So, when you cease these operations, what do you do with all the mess that you have done there? You have to recover the area for utilisation of the people who own it.

What they do usually is to provide for these funds in advance. We are saying where should it be and how do we find these funds? Usually in the cost oil recovery, there are things itemised like drilling, purchases, including the food we talked about. One of the items there, which we should ensure that it goes to the fund, is the money for decommissioning. You accumulate it over a number of years. You do not just get it now; it is a colossal sum of money. What countries do is that you accumulate the money and you use the idea of recoverable costs. You put the money aside and it is spread over a number of years then you look at what should be done.

Now, the matter is, where should this money that has been recovered go? It is not for these other items; it is for this very item, and that is why we say it should to Government. We cannot say that the company should pay out of its profits. Government is getting profits and the company is also getting profits, so it is better for you to provide it there. It should be accumulated; otherwise, you are in danger of tomorrow having no money and your environment will be in danger. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposed amendment in sub clause (7) that after the word “Government” you open that up and say, “and shall be transferred from the decommissioning fund to…” – The proposal is that this should be transferred from the decommissioning fund to some other fund.  

That is what is being proposed by the honourable member in (7). That is what he has proposed, that the money which remained after the decommissioning should now be transferred to the petroleum fund. That is the only amendment which was brought here. The rest was just general discussions. I am going to deal with this amendment first. Can the honourable member restate the amendment for clarity so that we know what we are dealing with?

NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, my proposed amendment is, “…such funds shall be transferred to the petroleum fund in accordance with the laws governing petroleum revenues.” – (Interjections) - Okay, I can amend it and say “shall be transferred to the Consolidated Fund.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Once it accrues to Government, it is at the Consolidated Fund. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I would really support the original amendment, “shall be transferred to the petroleum fund in accordance with the laws governing petroleum revenues.” Whatever laws, it will apply.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I seek to be guided on procedure. I thought I had suggested a small amendment in 110(4). First and foremost, before you transfer the balance, where should the money be? I suggest that we put the money directly into the decommissioning fund. It is subsequent to that that you would go to the next step and say that should we have that balance taken to the petroleum fund as my colleague suggested.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I thought that is here under 110.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, when you look at 110(4), it provides, “For every subsequent calendar quarter in which petroleum is produced or a facility operated, the Authority shall charge the licensee a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of facilities to be deposited in the fund.”

“(5) The amount deposited in the decommissioning fund shall be charged as operating costs subject to the cost recovery limitations stipulated in the petroleum agreements or as may be provided by regulations.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the amount is deposited in the decommissioning fund –

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, in (4) –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In (5), the amount is deposited in the decommissioning fund.

MR SSEGGONA: If I am assured that it goes directly, I would not have a problem. Mine was, “The Authority will ensure that the licensee pays a portion of the estimated future costs for decommissioning of facilities directly to the decommissioning fund.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under what sub clause is that?

MR SSEGGONA: Mine was directly into the fund.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under what sub clause?

MR SSEGGONA: Sub Clause (4). I have an amendment to put the words, “to ensure the licensee pays a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of facilities directly to the decommissioning fund”. If it is paid to the Authority, the Authority may use it here and there. That is why I am saying it should be put directly. The Authority has only one responsibility to ensure that it is deposited.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you now reread the draft.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, “For every subsequent calendar quarter in which petroleum is produced or a facility operated, the Authority will ensure that the licensee pays a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of facilities directly to the decommissioning fund.” –(Interjections) – Okay, “…shall charge and ensure that the licensee deposits directly…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “The Authority shall charge the licensee a portion of the estimated future cost for decommissioning of the facility, and shall ensure the funds…”

MR SSEGGONA: That will be a contradiction, Mr Chairman. If it has charged then how does it ensure? I thought it would ensure that the licensee deposits directly because when it charges, it is as if it is going to collect and then ensure. Mine is that it ensures that the licensee deposits directly to the fund. That is the difference.
 
MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the way this clause stands reads better than what my colleague, hon. Sseggona, is proposing because it explains who is responsible for collecting this money and where this money is going to be deposited. So, it really cuts out responsibilities and it is drafted very well. 

I would like to convince my colleague to leave this clause the way it is because it is clear. Much as yours is appreciated, it is similar to this but this one is superior because it shows the responsible person charging and where the money is going to be deposited. I can see the Attorney-General; are you giving me information? (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Bahati. The concerns of hon. Sseggona are taken care of by this sub-clause. His concerns are to avoid co-mingling of funds, which creates problems in the financial management of an institution. This is well catered for in this sub-clause because it says,  “to be deposited in the fund.” Even with the use of the definitive article “the”, it means the fund which is already defined in the previous sub clauses, meaning the decommissioning fund. So, what value are you adding by your amendment? 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I shall concede.     

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you concede. Now, we are left with the amendment proposed by the hon. Niwagaba. Can we deal with that amendment and then we move? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on this one we are just anticipating because there is no petroleum fund as yet. This is in another law yet to come. As of now, there is no such fund called the “petroleum fund”. So, I think if my brother, hon. Niwagaba wishes to – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I amended it further and said, “Consolidated Fund.”
 
MR WERIKHE: I do not know whether that changes anything because the Consolidated Fund is still in Government. I do not know whether there is a difference because the money under the Consolidated Fund is Government money.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the complication that comes with that, as we have been told before, is that this oil money is going to be treated differently from the ordinary money that accrues to Government. I need clarification as to whether this one will have to go back in the economy.  The justification that was put before, I remember from the many discussions we have had, was that if you just pour this money directly into the economy, it may even cause inflation. So, if you are saying you are going to throw it back into the economy, it causes complications. 

Let me agree with the hon. Niwagaba before he amended his position. Let us provide for this. This is the same Parliament that is going to pass the next Bill. We shall create that fund and deposit this money there. There is nothing that stops us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Attorney-General on this. Can you anticipate the creation of a fund and make provisions for it now in this law?
 
MR RUHINDI: I think that is creating a mouthful of things. We are making so many assumptions and presumptions under this Bill. I do not know what we are trying to cure because we are talking about a decommissioning fund and it is already in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a balance from the decommissioning fund. What do you do with the balance? 

MR RUHINDI: You take it to the Consolidated Fund.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The way to deal with this would be that we leave this “shall accrue to Government” and when the revenue Bill comes, you will extend it to say, “Funds generated under sub clause (1) of this section of the Petroleum Bill shall be transferred to this....”

MR NIWAGABA: I concede, Mr Chairman.
 
MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, during the debate on this clause, there was a general feeling that decommissioning should be the work of the licensee who should meet the costs of decommissioning. If I have put it well, wouldn’t it be better that sub clause (5) is deleted? After it is deleted, I would move another amendment to say, “The decommissioning costs shall be borne by the licensee for avoidance of doubt.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the minister keeps referring to this issue of recoverable costs; where is it provided for in this Bill? 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, recoverable costs are part of the agreements that are signed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is it provided for in this Bill because we need to be specific about what we are talking about? If there are recoverable costs, then mention it in the Bill so that we are comfortable with it.
 
MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, it is in (5).
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sub clause (5)? 

MS MULONI: Yes. It is a recoverable cost. “The amount deposited in the decommissioning fund shall be charged as operating costs subject to the cost recovery limitations stipulated in the petroleum agreements or as may be provided by regulations.” So, it is a recoverable cost.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, it is clear.
  
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think one of the concerns raised by hon. Dr Kasirivu was that if you make this a recoverable cost, like I said earlier it will not be a cost on the licensee because it is as if he is lending and then recouping this money. That will not provide an incentive to the licensee to operate consciously and cautiously in his operations because he knows that the money for decommissioning is actually recoverable. 

Two, if in principle we are stating, as hon. Kasirivu is suggesting and I agree, that the cost shall be borne by the licensee, we will have defeated that intention by providing for the cost as a recoverable one. Who does he recover from? He recovers from us. He will put it there and then recover it. So, he will not have borne the responsibility.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, this same sub clause (6) says, “Where the decommissioning fund is not sufficient to cover the implementation of the decommissioning plan….” This in itself tells you that actually as far as decommissioning is concerned, the licensee submits a decommissioning plan, which has to be approved because of the recoverable costs. It is just like we have the field development plan, which must be approved in advance before the licensee embarks on the work because of the recoverable nature of the investment. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, in the course of our debate, we have looked at the pros and cons of bearing the responsibility by Government. What the minister is trying to say is provided for in sub clause (4). Once we leave sub clause (4) and move to sub clause (5), and allow the licensee just because a portion of his income is given for the decommissioning, it has far reaching implications to even the environment because after all the reference made by hon. Sseggona earlier on that once he has finished his business and packed his bags, he will jump on a plane well knowing that he had catered for the subsequent costs.
  
In this particular reference, Mr Chairman, bearing in mind the environmental implications and the usage of the environment -because at the end of the day it is not as simple as it seems; reclamation is such a long process. The moment you allow this licensee to use the environment and use the production as they wish, you are causing a problem. 

Therefore, I wholly support hon. Kasirivu that once this is catered for under sub clause (4), it means that sub clause (5) goes because we have placed this responsibility, and for the purpose of the record, the decommissioning shouldn’t be a recoverable cost. It should fall squarely on the shoulders of the licensee and that is where it should remain. I so submit. 

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, I think we need to understand the oil business and should not take issues of recoverable costs in the literally meaning. I think recoverable costs are incurred in the course of the business. These are run away investors. Once they finish evacuating the oil, they have no business here. So, this is like our security - our insurance. They have already recovered their money and they are on their way out – they are decommissioning – they have already been paid in advance. So, if we pay them again, it will be double payment. This is already our money that we are using to decommission. So, this is Government money and there is no business in us giving it back to the investors. Let us take a decision and move on. We need to understand this.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that doesn’t make it very clear. My understanding, though I may not have been following this very well, is that there is a cost which is projected for decommissioning. And that cost is accumulated over time, okay. But that money which is accumulated over time is like money deducted in advance for a purpose. So, once that purpose is fulfilled, that entire money, therefore, should belong to the person who paid it there in the first place.
 
If I have been paying money in advance to make sure that by the time I am done with my business I have done everything properly - let us take the case that the licensee finishes even the decommissioning and restores the situation properly using his own money. That means the entire money that was deposited as advance becomes his money? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give some information. Maybe it could help the debate.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He couldn’t have recovered it because that activity hadn’t taken place. How could he have recovered it? 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, it is termed as a recoverable cost and that is why there is a decommissioning plan that has to be approved in advance because it is anticipated, and then this becomes part of the money invested by the licensee. This money which is invested by the licensee is recovered from what we call the oil cost. It is recovered over a period depending on what has been agreed upon in the agreement.
 
It could be after the first three or five years and yet the process will continue. So, there are these recoverable costs. So, the decommissioning cost is actually a recoverable cost. It is lumped together with the other recoverable costs that this licensee –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, who does the decommissioning? 

MS MULONI: The licensee, but having paid in advance.
 
MR KAFEERO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the position of the minister. Within the formula of the Production Sharing Agreements, the recoverable costs include the costs of decommissioning. And, these people anticipate a particular amount they build it within that formula and they charge it on us, when and whenever they produce oil; they first take it away before we, as Government, even get ours. So, giving them again this money as a balance, which they have already recovered, will be giving them double. I, therefore, agree with the minister that they have already recovered this money and the balance should be ours and should be transferred to one of our accounts or funds.   

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I only stand to add my voice to what the honourable member from Nakifuma and the minister have said. Take, for example, in other contracts there could be performance guarantees, and there could be other things that you could be able to recover in an agreement. Just in the same way, there is a recoverable here, and we should support the minister. I was just thinking that the debate be closed and the question be put and we move on. 

But, Mr Chairman, as even further explained by this honourable mechanical engineer –(Laughter)– I would really support that the position of the minister be supported by all of us. 
MS ANYWAR: Clarification, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clarification from who?
 
MS ANYWAR: From the minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the minister is not holding the Floor in the course of this debate. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, I think we are getting derailed from the facts. One, we needed the minister to come out clearly and tell us as a country who is supposed to bear the costs of the activities of oil at the end of the day. That should come out clearly so that we know on whom to apportion this responsibility. 

Two, what I am hearing from colleagues is because there are some clauses in the agreement that some of us don’t know and that is why it has been a contentious issue. The minister would come out and clarify whether in the agreement they signed they ensured that as a country we are going to bear the cost of decommissioning. Otherwise, I do not see this becoming a recoverable cost.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, honourable minister, hold on. If these matters are recoverable in advance then how do you foresee a situation where the money is insufficient? The issue is that they have already gone in and they are bearing the costs. How do the funds become insufficient again?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, in any production process, there are costs, and these costs are charged on the revenue. In this case, the investor is putting money forward and this money must be paid back to him when the revenues are generated. It is that simple logic. 

So, it is obvious that the investor is advancing money and the government or whoever is paying back this money through the revenues. So, it is part of the business – part of the package. This surplus, Mr Chairman, that you are asking about accrues because the investor is advancing this money – he is putting this money ahead of the operation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the problem is that whatever money he is putting ahead, he is recovering it already. So, he is not really putting anything ahead.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I thank the honourable member for giving further information; maybe it will help all of us understand this issue better. The production sharing agreement – the model which our country decided to take – means that when you enter into petroleum business, all the costs involved in producing the oil are going to be charged on the resource –(Interjections)- Yes, because I am now building from what he is saying; it is charged on the resource. 

So, we have this investor coming in to invest his or her own money in advance to produce petroleum. And you agree that based on the petroleum produced, a certain percentage will go towards royalties; a certain percentage will be for state participation; and a certain percentage for recoverable costs – the costs which the investor has sunk into the process. Whatever remains is the profit oil, which is now shared between Government and the investor, also based on the percentage agreed upon before. And then whatever the investor takes is taxed. That is the arrangement and it is what the production sharing arrangement implies.

Now, in the entire work plan, right from the field exploration to the field development plan up to the decommissioning plan – why the plans are put there is to enable Government assess how much money is going to cost developing a certain field or decommissioning. That is why in each of these areas you see the word “plan” because you cannot be 100 percent certain that this is the exact cost it will take; you leave the provision that “we estimate that the decommissioning plan will cost this amount of money”, and the investor deposits this money. 

When the actual decommissioning – because this plan is submitted to Government through the authority and the authority has to accept that it is a reasonable decommissioning plan. So, all these process are within the approvals of Government. So, the investor deposits money in advance, anticipating to spend a certain amount of money for decommissioning. 

In the actual decommissioning plan, should the amount of money that was deposited in advance be insufficient – because it is incumbent upon the investor to decommission; to make sure that he restores the area as it was before. But now this is counted as part of recoverable costs because they are part of the investment you are going to remove this oil from the ground; you must restore the situation as it was before. And all costs which are going into this extraction process have to be recovered by the investor. That is what the production sharing model is all about. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When I had a second look at this clause 110(5), there are three or four aspects: There is the aspect of recoverable costs and secondly, there is the aspect of limitations in respect of those recoverable costs. And by the way, none of these has already been explained in the Bill. What are the recoverable costs and what are the limitations to these recoverable costs? Then the other aspect that makes it even more dangerous is that the limitations to the recoverable costs are speculated in the petroleum sharing agreements, which we do not have, “…or as may be provided in the regulations.”

Now, if you want us to pass this particular clause as it is, and we are talking of recoverable costs and , limitations to these recoverable costs as stipulated in the agreements, which agreements we will never become party to or even scrutinise before they are made, it worries me more. Maybe, if we had clearly stipulated as to the exact recoverable costs or provided that, “The recoverable costs and limitations to recoverable costs will be stipulated in regulations to be laid before Parliament,” for us to approve that indeed such recoverable costs are necessary to be recovered. 

What we have seen previously, especially in the last audit we got, you will talk of telephone calls to girlfriends and wives and you make them part of recoverable costs. And here you are talking of “decommissioning”. Now, what guarantee do we have that this investor will not use obsolete technology, and at the end of the day, after you have approved decommissioning - 10 years after the site has been abandoned, you will start seeing the after-effects of negative environmental concern? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, all of you who are speaking are saying, “These are very simple things.” So, if they are simple things, it is either you are not explaining properly or it simply does not make sense. If it is that simple, why do we have all these arguments? And these are thinking human beings; it means it is not properly fitting in the – 

So, you might need to explain it better. So, do not say, “It is obvious; it is very simple.” If it was that simple, it would have been completed a long time ago. Either you are not explaining properly or your explanation simply can never make sense.

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to give a simple example in support of the minister. We normally enter into tenancy agreements with landlords, and where I used to work before, in missions abroad, the landlord will say, “Pay a deposit of six months’ rent for purposes of restoring my building to the condition in which you found it.” And before I entered the House, we would inspect it together with the landlord before I took possession. When I am leaving at the end of the tour, I go to the landlord and say, “I am now leaving. Can I have my deposit back?’” He will go with me and check the house and if it is not in the condition it was, some of the money will be used to restore the building to its original condition. 

So, this is the sense of recoverable costs I think the minister is talking about. The money paid as a deposit is kept there and once the investor has restored, after the decommissioning you go back and inspect. If he has any money owed to him, you give it to him. If not, use that money to restore the place together with him. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I think let us face facts. Whereas parliamentary etiquette requires us not to say certain words, parliamentary etiquette also requires us to be honest with each other.  Why this seemingly simple thing is turning ugly is because of suspicions. We have made a recommendation and resolution in this Parliament before that people should not sign these oil agreements before we pass these laws, and because of this, there is information to which some of our colleagues are privy, which they are not revealing to us. They want us to read between the lines and we are finding it extremely difficult. The difference with the scenario put across by the Minister for Internal Affairs is that as a tenant, you are looking at your own money, which is going to be spent on repair, and if there is a balance, you get it back. Therefore, the issue of recoverable costs will not arise.

From the minister’s explanation, this is what I gather, and I agree to an extent that one, this is a partnership we are entering into in this PSA. On the part of Government we have the resource, but we do not have the money or we are not putting across the money. On the part of the investor, he is bringing in the money, and both of us do not have the technical capacity to know how much the investor is going to put in with exactness. And because of that, we have a plan, but it is only an estimate. We are only estimating that after the investor sinking in his money there is going to be a profit shared. What I invite the honourable minister not to forget is that there is a process over which the licensee has absolute control over and that is in his excavation, which is going to lead to the decommissioning fund. Therefore, the investor must be put to caution in whatever he or she does that there is a cost at the end of the day. 

In the Ad Hoc Committee on Energy, without the risk of leaking a report which we have already submitted to Parliament but not yet debated, we discovered that there was something called an investment plan or programme, but that this was not properly defined. It would include furniture, telephones etc. This is an area which we must control through legislation; that we must define what is recoverable as a cost and what is not recoverable. 

In my humble submission and view, decommissioning must fall in the latter category of the non-recoverables because if you do not do that, you will not have control over the conduct of the licensee in terms of his activity relating to wastage. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I give the example of the Escrow account in the Ministry of Energy. In 2016, I will be making 10 years in this House, but each report of the Committee of Natural Resources, every year, questions the issue of the Escrow account. 

When Umeme came to Uganda they were supposed, as by the law signed, to have reduced on the energy losses and all those other costs. But what happened is that they fail to manage the better process and they dip their hands each year to recover what they have put in. Even when they put little effort to minimise energy losses, they keep on dipping their hands into our accounts and pay themselves off and all that remains to Government and all of us. 

In this instance, I am wondering why the minister is very protective of the investors at the expense of Ugandans. We are talking about recovery limitations as stipulated in the petroleum agreements. We do not have these agreements on the table. Why are we talking about recoverable costs and yet we are not privy to all this other information? You keep on saying the agreements are here, but I have been in the Committee of Natural Resources - this is my seventh year - but I have never gotten a chance to look at those agreements; they keep on claiming they are here. 

So, Mr Chairman, unless we are aware of the limitations and the petroleum agreements as stipulated, we can’t as Parliament go ahead and give these people the marginal latitude. It is like dipping their hands into our Escrow account and we have suffered and choked with Umeme. We cannot buy ourselves out; we can’t pay them off. We are supposed to be suffocated with this bad agreement. So, at the end of the day it is the country bleeding and suffering. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, the information I would like to pass to Kaberamaido is that owing largely to the challenges we have experienced as a House, first of all, in scrutinising the production sharing agreements, this House made a proposal at the initial stages of this debate that the hon. Karuhanga comes with an amendment proposing a model production sharing agreement, and subsequently, if it is adopted as a schedule to this House, the minister will be bringing all those type of things for the approval of Parliament. I think it was largely because of such fears that we would get committed to things that we cannot uphold at the end. 

That prompts me to propose, if it were possible, maybe we should stand over this. Besides, apart from giving information, I have also been asking myself, if we put these as recoverable costs, what happens if it is at exploration stage that this investor does not strike and there is trouble - say quantities that are not good enough - so what do you recover from? Really, those questions will need to be answered. How do you finance decommissioning in a situation where you have nothing even to recover from?

So, Mr Chairman, I would like to propose to my sister by way of information that she takes note of the need for that production sharing agreement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we finish with Kaberamaido and then -

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, as I wind up, knowing that oil deals are very sensitive and lucrative – we saw what happened in the earlier debates when we were handling oil the other time. So, on this one honestly, we would only do justice to Ugandans by not allowing, for a single moment, for decommissioning to be part of recoverable costs. Otherwise, they will make the process very expensive without care. At the end of the day, they know they are going to recover whatever they have sunk.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, when these matters arose, we took effort – I have a copy here of a correspondence. This was on 4 May 2012; there is a grey area regarding the agreement to which we are not party, and which they want us to take a decision on. We have written to the minister saying: Tabling of Tullow/Government of Uganda Production Sharing Agreement (PSA); signed on 3 February 2012. It reads:

“Reference is made to the Tullow Oil Uganda PTY/Government of Uganda agreements which were signed on 3 February 2012. As you are aware, the abovementioned agreements have never been tabled in Parliament of the Republic of Uganda by you. This has limited our efforts in carrying out our oversight role as a constitutional mandate for the legislature on this sector. 

The purpose of this communication is to request you to avail us the abovementioned PSAs in the spirit of resolution no.3 Parliament passed on 11 November, 2011. In addition, you are requested to provide any further related information such as signature bonuses paid, if any. We once again thank you for your usual co-operation”.

Mr Chairman, this letter was received, but to date, no response has been received. 

Now, if this has been the trend, to the extent that the matters which would have been settled in our minds and hearts are still outstanding, it is now almost a year, what more faith can we blindly have to proceed with such a clause? And it is not that we have been slumbering on our rights and duties, we have moved; we went and sought this early enough. But up to date, this information has never been availed and this causes suspicion. We do not know what is behind the agreements. 

These agreements have tied our hands; this is the right time for us to be informed as the peoples’ representatives. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I accept all the information; it is well received. 

DR AJEDRA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Robert Einstein, once said, things should be made as simple as possible, but not any simpler. I think what we are running into is the danger to oversimplify what has been said, and in the process we are going to lose what was originally intended. 

I think we need to sit back and see whether the original intent was as a performance currency or it is as part of doing business. If the intent is that we want performance, then I think we need to adjourn and consult again. We stand over this and consult and then come back because there is a danger for us to oversimplify and then run into problems. 

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, hon. Sseggona brought out an issue, which I want the minister to categorically clarify to this Parliament, and it is captured in the Hansard. First and foremost, the impression I am getting from sub clause (5) is that we are making a law that will retrospectively apply to the agreements which are existing, which should not be the case. That is why it states, “As stipulated in the petroleum agreements”. 

If there are going to be agreements which we are going to look at, because we said, they are going to be signed after – we shall not agree for the decommissioning to be a responsibility of Government, it should be the responsibility of the licensee. So, why is the minister trying to tie us onto this clause?

Mr Chairman, the way I understand decommissioning – and I stand to be corrected – decommissioning includes clearing and cleaning the site. And we have said that in order to make sure that the licensee performs with caution, knowing that he or she is going to bear the cost and responsibility, then the decommissioning should be the responsibility of the licensee. 

Now, once we have agreed that clearing of the site – clearing involves many issues, some of which substances may be harmful. That is why we said in clause 4 that waste management should be the responsibility of the licensee. 

So, to me, decommissioning is part of the end-game of waste management. And if that is the case, why are we saying, therefore, that any cost that will be incurred by the licensee in clearing the site and restoring it will be borne by 
Government? It should be by the licensee and, therefore, it should not be a recoverable cost. I am sure that for every agreement that is going to be brought here, I will not be party to those who say that Government should be in charge of decommissioning; it should be the responsibility of the licensee. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is some information that I would like this House to benefit from. In one of the petroleum seminars, I was meant to understand that whereas the licensee is going to bear the cost of decommissioning, the actual decommissioning is not going to be done by him; it is going to be done by an agent who is prequalified by NEMA. This agent will be another interested group of professionals who will keep monitoring. So, even this issue of maybe a balance on the account of the decommissioning fund may not arise. These people will keep on advising Government professionally on whether this fund is enough or not. They are the interested party, and will do the actual work while the licensee pays for it.

MR KASULE: The information I am adding is that, operational costs are part of the recoverable costs –(Interjections)– yes, to the extent that as we are selling the oil, we are also apportioning money to the decommissioning fund. So, this money is already shared and there is no need for us to again advance it to the person who has recovered it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I want to remind the Member that this is a production sharing agreement. It is a partnership and so there is no way you can impose costs on one party and not the other. We know that these decommissioning costs are actually costs to the business and the partnership. How on earth do we say that this should go to the investor? I think that is impunity of the first order and we should not do it. 

I think the problem here is that we are worried that maybe in preparing the decommissioning plan, there will be issues in there, but it is not a scientific argument that we are trying to put forward. The scientific argument is that this is a cost that has to be borne by the partnership; and it is that simple.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I know where we are coming from on this particular matter, but we must actually face the reality. This matter concerns international business. We are trying to galvanise our economy through international transactions and appropriate negotiations to attract those that can. We must bear in mind that certainly this is not a matter of, for instance, I want to sell my cow and I am sure that I will get a buyer from within the same locality where I have my cows. We are talking about international business where we are trying to attract investors who can invest here in oil and gas. 

We want to know and this is why I may actually agree with the idea of standing over it. What happens in other countries or jurisdictions? Most of these PSAs and agreements and so and so forth that I have read, the decommissioning costs are recoverable costs. If we want to make a law only for Uganda, then you will not have investors coming to this particular industry. Therefore, Mr Chairman, let us stand over it and get examples – 

MR SSEGGONA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Procedure. 

MR SSEGGONA: I need to be guided on whether we are proceeding well. The Attorney-General who perhaps has never looked at these agreements is again assisting the state to hide. We want to look at these agreements so that we can see what you are hiding behind this debate; whether you made these agreements part of the recoverables or irrecoverables in this agreement. 

Mr Chairman, may I, under Rule 50(1)(h) of our Rules of Procedure move a motion that the minister responsible for Energy produces and tenders the PSAs they have so far signed before this House before we proceed with further debate?  

MS ANYWAR: Seconded. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I am surprised –

MR SSEGGONA: Procedure, Mr Chairman, before she gets surprised.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman –

MR SSEGGONA: Procedure, Mr Chairman. I have moved a motion and it has been seconded by hon. Beatrice Anywar. Is it procedurally correct for the minister to come up and say that she is surprised without following the procedure? At least I was not ruled on a procedural matter. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought that the minister was going to say that she is surprised that you had not brought this motion earlier. (Laughter) I first wanted to listen because I cannot jump to conclusions as to what the minister is going to say, and that is why I was allowing her to say, and then we can determine, because a motion has been moved, and the cure to that motion is if we can agree on what is contentious here. What is causing the moving of this motion is what is in these provisions, which seem to bring things that are not clear. 

I have engaged all sections of my brain to process this thing –(Laughter)- and it is still not fitting very well. Even when they brought the issue of rent and security deposit, it still did not fit very well. 

So, can we stand over this matter as a way forward so that we do not go into this motion, but the issue that we are standing over is this issue of recoverable costs that are taken earlier and then somebody is going to decommission. 

You need to make us understand so that all the suspicions – you know they say, “once bitten, twice shy” -(Applause)- and that seems to be what is creating this discussion in this particular issue. When you are burnt by a hot iron, you even fear a cold one. Now, it is your responsibility, honourable minister, to demonstrate to us that this time, this iron is cold, and not as hot as the one that burnt you the other time. So, that is the purpose for which we are standing over this clause. Clause stood over. 

Clause 111

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 111 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 112

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 112 stands part of the Bill -

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, clause 112 of the Bill in its current form particularly (7) reads, “Where the direction is to the effect that the facility shall continue to be used in the petroleum activities or for other purposes, the licensee, owner and user are jointly obliged to ensure that future directions on disposal are carried out, unless otherwise directed by the authority.”

The licensee is defined in the Bill, but we are now already talking about a situation where the licensee has already handed over the facility. How is the Government going to ensure that the licensee conforms to the directives after handing over the facility? 

I think, in my humble view, that this is problematic because already the facility has been transferred and now you are saying that the “licensee, owner and user.” I thought that the proper language or principle should have been that the person to whom the facility has been transferred is the one to ensure that future directions on disposal are carried out, unless otherwise directed by the authority. 

The second segment is that “…unless otherwise directed by the authority.” I would like to be educated by the minister on the circumstances under which the authority would direct otherwise because we are dealing with a core principle or disposal. So, how else would the authority exempt somebody from complying with directives on disposal? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it still the same one on (7)? Can we deal with (7)? Okay, let us deal with (7).

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, actually sub clause 7 introduces other terms that are not defined in the Bill. We have already handled sub clause (4), which squarely lays the responsibility of disposal of waste on the licensee. But this sub clause (7) now introduces an owner and user. Sub clause (8) makes it even worse; it introduces other responsible parties. 

This creates ambiguity and at the end of the day, we may fail to locate a specific person responsible for this. My proposal is that we delete any allusion to other persons other than the licensee. In that case I move that we delete “owner, user and responsible parties” and maintain squarely, the “licensee.”

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I move that we stand over this as well –(Interjections)– yes, because we will get back to you with clarifications on the three areas that have been raised.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason I am going to allow is that in my initial notes, there was no indication to any proposed amendment of clause 112; it was supposed to be a clean clause. Now that it is coming up, I order that clause 112 be stood over so that it is done properly. 

Clause 113

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute in sub clause (1)(a) for the word “operations” the words “petroleum activities.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We already took an earlier decision on the words “operations” and “petroleum activities.”

MR WERIKHE: It is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not consequential. We just want to be consistent with our language of legislation. Is that clear, honourable members. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (1)(b), the committee proposes that we substitute for the word “made” the word “drilled” so as to read thus: “to plug or close off, to the satisfaction of the authority, all wells drilled in that area by any person engaged or concerned in petroleum activities.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is proposing to delete the word “made” and replace it with the word “drilled.” But I am also seeing the word “operations.” Is that wording okay, or will it also require to be changed in the spirit of (a)?

MR WERIKHE: No, that is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, So, the amendment in (b) is to replace the word “made” with “drilled”.

I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (3), the committee proposes to substitute the words “one thousand” with the words “ten thousand,” in the last line.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable members? Okay, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to move that we amend clause 113(1). My proposal is that instead of having the phrase “the minister may” we have “the minister shall.” 

Justification: To make it mandatory because we have seen on several occasions, whereby after an activity has taken place, Government properties just remain there without being removed and yet the community continues suffering. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to make it a mandatory obligation for the minister to issue that notice once those circumstances occur. I now put the question to replace the word “may” with “shall” in sub clause (1). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 113, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 114, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to.

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is another of those new ones.

MR SSEGGONA: That is true, Mr Chairman, but I hope it is not as contentious. I will easily concede if the minister thinks she needs time to consult.

With respect to clause 118, where the minister, “may direct the licensee to make deliveries from licensee’s production to cover Uganda requirements and may further direct to whom such petroleum shall be delivered”, I notice that there is a problem with that. One, is because the minister’s discretion in this case is not guarded and guided. It cannot be open-ended in terms of quantities. Because, one, it threatens investment because investors must have a degree of certainty if we want.

Two, how do you even know? I mean, what informs the minister’s mind in determining this question of Uganda’s requirements? Is it in terms of our domestic consumptions, direct Government sales, etcetera? That is not clear.

My view is that, we could maintain the principle because this is a strategic resource, as the minister informed us – for many reasons. So, the discretion must be guided and guarded in terms of quantities. Also, people must know under what circumstances the minister will come up with such directions. Remember, this is now a partnership, from what the minister has told us. The investor has expectations –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sseggona, I wish you could state your proposal for us to understand.

MR SSEGGONA: May I suggest that we put a capping that in quantities not exceeding say, “20 percent of the licensee’s share of production”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In which sub clause?

MR SSEGGONA: That should be in sub clause 118(1) and it should read thus: “Deliveries shall be prorated to the licensee’s share of the total production in Uganda; licensee’s obligation to supply the domestic market shall not exceed 20 percent of the licensee’s share of production, provided such requirement does not render the licensee in breach of the long-term gas sales and purchase agreements.” 

Justification: These licensees, when they come to Uganda, they also have international obligations. 
They incur obligations by reason of agreements. Now, if you allow the minister to direct that you deliver such a document to such and such a place -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Is hon. Sseggona taking into consideration the provisions of clause 119? We are talking about extreme situations. I think, clause 119 qualifies clause 118 in the case of war, threat of war, natural disaster or other extraordinary crisis. That is when I thought you apply clause 118.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. You will also realise that if clause 119 is to apply then you should subject the operations of clause 118 to it. Secondly, leaving it open to whom such a petroleum shall be delivered; there is a danger of appointing specific individuals to whom the operation of this clause can work. I would then suggest that we amend. If it is to be delivered, it must be delivered to state organisations not private individuals, to avoid it being abused by arbitrariness.

MR SSEGGONA: I actually take all the information with gratitude. In that case, you would not need clause 118. Why? Because those special circumstances are already catered for in clause 119 in a sense that they are state related. But the way clause 118 appears here, it is too wide and susceptible to abuse, because it does not distinguish whether the minister’s directive is to deliver to commercial agents, people who are selling in their ordinary course of business etcetera. When you read 119, it is self-contained in so far as it tells you under what circumstances, and the procedural aspect caters for Cabinet approval -(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much for giving way. You may want to revisit clause 118 to read again, “Ugandan demands.” The other one is giving special circumstances. The demands are of course projections of what Uganda needs and, therefore, it cannot be 20 percent the way you are saying. We know what quantities we need and that is what is supposed to be available for the country instead of getting some arbitrary figure where we shall create deficits in the country.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, clause 118 is providing for our local requirements as the heading states, “Supplies to cover Uganda’s requirements” and we are looking at instances like the refinery, which we are going to construct; and we are looking at power generation using our crude oil. Those are the circumstances that this clause is actually providing for; our own local requirements.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, may I take this opportunity to thank the two ministers for the information. But I want to imagine that we are legislating for people who will not be in Parliament or who are not in Parliament, and will not be privy to this kind of information. It is for that reason that we want to be clear.

Clause 119 caters for, “In case of war, threat of war, natural disaster or other extraordinary crisis, the minister may with the approval of Cabinet direct a licensee to place petroleum at disposal of the state” Now, if the minister is talking about those other situations, those are the ones I would invite the minister or this House to stipulate, but not to leave it open to the minister tomorrow to direct. I am sure she has given us a list which is not exhaustive. Tomorrow, she may think of others, and now those others are the ones that we want clarified.

I have also not lost track of the international obligations that I talked about. As a commercial lawyer, I know that once you license somebody to operate here, he incurs certain contractual obligations elsewhere. In a bid to do all this, you are inciting some breach of contract somewhere. It may be said that yes, the minister may provide for this by regulations, but once there is no capping here, it remains the same. The minister has open-ended powers over this -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I think it is pretty difficult now to come out and specify the circumstances you are envisaging under clause 118. I think the best would be to amend and state, “The minister may, under circumstances to be prescribed in the regulations, direct the licensee...” and so forth. After all, those regulations will be coming here in Parliament for the necessary action.

MR SSEGGONA: I would quickly concede to that if you provided for Cabinet approval the same way you have provided for it in clause 119.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, would you like to put it properly now? Propose the amendment properly with Cabinet approval. So, you would be comfortable with the Cabinet approval other than regulation or the regulation should be -

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, but I will have something to do with sub clause (2), again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable minister.

MR RUHINDI: “The minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, direct the licensee to make deliveries from licensee’s production to cover Uganda’s requirement and may further direct to whom such petroleum shall be delivered.”

MR NIWAGABA: I would not have a problem, but to whom would such petroleum be delivered? I would be comfortable if the delivery is to a state agency. Because, there is a danger we are trying to cure. The minister may have a brother-in-law with a depot or petrol station and try to circumvent the law -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But with this Cabinet approval, it will be the in-law of Cabinet. It will have to be the brother-in-law of the whole Cabinet. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: The challenge, Mr Chairman, is that other than the ministers themselves, nobody knows what transpires in Cabinet.

MR SSEGGONA: May I seek clarification from the minister, Mr Chairman. We need not necessarily specify the reason for which this oil is delivered to certain entities, because we have seen money channelled through state agencies for the benefit of private individuals in this country. Supposing oil is channelled through an agency of the state as hon. Niwagaba suggests - and I agree with him - for the benefit of an individual and it ends up again going back to the in-laws of Cabinet?

MS LILLY ADONG: Yes, Mr Chairman, I am wondering why we are bothering ourselves to find out where we should deliver this oil yet we have the National Oil Company.

MR KAKOOZA: I cannot imagine that a national oil company which will be looking for profits – be in business - as a majority shareholder will be delivering free oil to the Government. When you say that it will deliver oil to other agents, this national oil company will be for business etiquettes. The moment it delivers free oil to some state agents it will not be making profits, and, therefore, it will not do it. That is self-explanatory! When you say the deliveries -(Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: Clarification, after reading clause 118 in its entirety reveals to hon. Kakooza and the people of Kabula that we are not talking about free oil; there is some pricing mechanism provided for in sub-section 3. I have a problem with it and I will come to that.  However, what has led to the collapse of many of our state companies or corporations is actually political interference and this is what we are guarding against.

MR KAKOOZA: This is why, Mr Sseggona –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Excuse me, who has allowed you to proceed? You were giving information.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, let us resolve this matter positively. Assuming that the other amendment I made in clause 118 will be sustained, “The minister may, with approval of Cabinet, direct ...”
When we come to power to make regulations - this is under clause 180 - they have provided for so many areas. But I would propose that we state at the end, “...providing for circumstances under which the minister may direct a licensee to make deliveries from the licensees’ production to cover Uganda’s requirements.” -(Interjection)- Yes that is it.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, may I seek clarification from the Attorney-General. What would be wrong with providing a ceiling or capping in terms of how much?

MS MULONI: The capping would be a problem because if you consider the situation of a refinery where we were saying we start off with smaller capacity so that it can be online quickly for us to use and then step it up in the subsequent years; it would be difficult to cap.

MR SSEGONA: Let me concede on the issue of capping, but then subject it to the agreements, because again my fear is that, we may be held in breach at one point. Her explanation sounds very good if practically we can get there.

My fear is what happens to the agreements, some of which we have not seen - I hope we are about to see them - which place obligations on us in terms of quantities.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I was thinking about how to make known to the public how much oil has been used under clauses 118 and 119, and I thought that besides providing for regulations and Cabinet approval, I would like at the end of this, if you so allow, to propose that we include a new sub clause that requires the minister to lay before Parliament how she has exercised that function under sub clause 1, every financial year. Maybe it could help to cause an explanation on where the oil went and who benefited from it.

MR KATOTO: I wanted to get clarification from my learned friends. According to what I know, deliveries in most cases - since it is production - will depend on how much is required to be delivered.
Now, if you say 20 percent, what if what is required is above the 20 percent, what will you do in that scenario?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to amend sub clause 1 and insert immediately after the word “may” - 

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, why not “licensees”, because again, I am looking at a situation where we have several licensees and the minister’s directive must be protected, in that it applies to all licensees. Yes, -(Interjection)- because we are two licensees, Abdul Katuntu and I, and  the minister does it to my disadvantage to enable some other person do business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but the construction of the word “licensee” in that particular clause includes the plural. They could be a hundred but deal with them as one, each time.

So, “the minister may with the approval of Cabinet direct...” and the rest of the sub clause remains. Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General had brought another amendment to cover the circumstances under which this power will be exercised. Can I request that you put a question on this jointly, with a question to amend by including that other amendment under clause 180 of the regulations?

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, it could have a problem in terms of drafting. May I suggest that we specifically provide for that in another sub-clause? Also, look at the current sub clause (2), in terms of the 45 days. I need to be advised by the minister, on whether – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put a question to the first amendment so that we confirm one part?

I put the question to the insertion “with the approval of Cabinet” immediately after the phrase, “the minister may”. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGONA: Under clause 118, I would suggest, “the minister may by regulations prescribe for the circumstances under which sub clause 1 shall apply.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will be standing alone as a new tool, inserted immediately after sub clause (1)? Can you state it again now?

MR SSEGONA: That, “The minister may by regulations prescribe the circumstances under which sub clause (1) above shall apply.” I am actually advised that we should make it mandatory that the minister has a duty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, is it clear now? Do you think it is clear for the Hansard? Please, read it again. 

MR RUHINDI: “The minister may by regulations prescribe the circumstances under which sub-clause (1) shall apply.” So, “shall” comes at the end. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, is that clear? I put the question to the insertion of that new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause 1. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGGONA: Just before that, Mr Chairman. The former sub-clause (2), if we are to retain it, which is now sub-clause (3); “The Minister shall give the licensee 45 days notice before the delivery is made.” I look at 45 days notice as being too short in terms of planning to any serious investor. Making diversions within 45 days – which is one and a half months - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is a very long time. 

MR SSEGGONA: It is a long time? Okay, I concede.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 118 as amended stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

       (Clause 118, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 119

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose deletion of sub clause (2), because section 120, which is referred to provides for pricing of petroleum generally and yet under sub clause (2), the particular situation which warrants special consideration is defined in sub-clause (1), which is extraordinary crisis, disasters, war and so forth.   

When you look at sub clause (3), the manner in which the price shall be determined under those particular circumstances is defined there. So, for me sub clause 2 becomes redundant and I propose it be deleted. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I wish my colleague would hold on because there is an amendment in regard to the pricing of petroleum in clause 120. There is a proposal that the pricing of petroleum   shall be in accordance with the method prescribed by regulations and shall take into account international oil and gas prices. I wish he could first look at our proposal; maybe that would cure his concern.

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, Mr Chairman, but for information of the House, when I look at copies of the harmonised document – the words are “Harmonised amendments to the Bill.” This shows me that clause 119 has a proposed amendment on page 24 of that document. I don’t know whether the committee is in agreement with it. I can see it states, “In case of war, threat or natural disaster, as extraordinary crisis, the Cabinet  may with the approval of Parliament direct a licensee to place petroleum at the disposal of the State...”  which is a replica of clause 118 which we have just handled, though it states specific circumstances. Yet we seem to be leaving it out. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I just referred to 120 because the concern of pricing was raised. But we hadn’t gotten there. However, there is no harm in clause 119 because if we actually go by what has happened in clause 118, then the proposed amendment under clause 119 is not tenable.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yeah, so we have passed clause 118 and we are now on clause 119. I put the question. 

MS ADONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose the deletion of the abbreviation “etc.” at the end of the head note. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to delete the abbreviation “etc.” at the end of the head note. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am raising this and draw it to the attention of honourable members and let me read it; that is, clause 119(1): “In case of war, threat of war, natural disaster, or other extraordinary crisis, the minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, direct a licensee to place petroleum at the disposal of the State.” 

Mr Chairman, this situation needs to be further clarified because, one, what would be the meaning of placing the petroleum at the disposal of the State? Is it for protection, or for use? 
Two, we are talking of cases of war and threats of war plus natural disasters. As we had earlier on expressed some fear that during such a crisis, if you are going to have the approval by Cabinet, the public or Ugandans at such, might not know the reason for placing petroleum in the hands of the State.

Three, when we talk of circumstances like natural disasters; it could be landslides; –[HON. MEMBER: “Nodding disease.”]- These circumstances need to be clearly described and what is precisely meant by placing the petroleum at the disposal of the State, mindful that this could be one of the avenues through which petroleum will be channelled without the knowledge of the people. And I would like the minister to come out clearly on what she meant or what is envisaged.  

Otherwise, Mr Chairman, I propose that this vague statement should be deleted and we precisely describe that in the case of a serious war, it is placed in the custody of the State. And as a by the way, is it an internal war or an external one? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is “war.”

MS ANYWAR: That means that in case everybody in the country is in disarray, are we inserting this phrase for protection so that the licensee should not channel the oil outside the country without our knowledge? Or is it to allow the government to siphon it out, and for what purpose would it be? I seek that clarification.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In the previous sub clause 118 which we have passed, and in sub clause 119, I would like the minister to explain to me how budgeting comes in here. Are these monies from oil you are directing to be deposited here and there part of the budget? Or are they outside the budget because it is not clear to me? 
If we are budgeting for disaster, for instance, and we have a fund for disaster, how will the oil be accounted for in terms of budgeting?  

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose a new sub clause (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you first wait.  Let us hear from Busiro.  

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is a bit more complicated. First of all, when you read clause 119 in its entirety, it even has constitutional issues. One, we are talking about war and threat of war. Threat of war is actually speculative and subjective because war means there is an attack on us and, therefore, the House is on fire.  It is easily understandable.

What amounts to threat of war and who determines it? Remember the minister responsible for Energy is not the minister responsible for Security, and is not the minister responsible for Security. That is number one.  

Natural disaster etcetera, I can understand. We have a ministry for Disaster Preparedness - I was looking at Prof. Kabwegyere and then I remembered he is not there anymore. (Laughter)  But  what would stop Government from buying this petroleum resource even in times of war or threat of war? That is number one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is in sub clause (3).

MR SSEGGONA: I agree, and I am coming to the pricing issue, Mr Chairman. Because remember, while there is a mechanism for determining prices under normal circumstances or ordinarily, we are pegging this pricing in this section or in this clause to a particular situation. In that, when the government wants to acquire this petroleum, under this section, it comes up with a pricing mechanism. 

Now, first of all, the quantities are not determined and the proposed buyer of the petroleum is the same person coming up with the pricing. I would like to compare this situation with the compulsory acquisition of other property or land. Now, if you want to relate it to the constitutional provision on compulsory acquisition, then this would infringe on the Constitution because you are not paying somebody the prevailing market price. 

You are determining a price based on your suitability to acquire the resource and remember you have entered into a partnership with some other person, and it has an implication on the profit.  
I would like to suggest to Mr Chairman and to my colleagues, that we delete the entirety of 119. When we have the need to acquire petroleum even for those situations we pay for it at the prevailing market rates. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let us look at the whole thing together because in sub clause (3) there is a decision taken in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance and the licensee. 

MR SSEGGONA: I am aware of the consultation with the licensee, but this is somebody you are only consulting in principle since you already have the power. And when you consult somebody, they may say, “yes or no” or may even disagree, but you still retain the power and you have consulted.  

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am at pain to try to disagree with my very good friend that we have always moved together in this aspect of deleting. [HON. MEMBER: “Where?”] The details of where we move is a preserve of our own. 

I think this is a very good provision of the law and, Mr Chairman, I would love to get more guidance. These are the situations that Government finds itself, and if they are not provided for, it can be very difficult. I think the word that one honourable member said, “Disposal,” placing it at the disposal of the state. I would like to inquire whether disposal means “for free.” In my little Japadhola understanding, even in our laws, we have “disposal”; it is a purchase. 

I don’t see the harm or the injury that we are providing for it - fuel or petroleum products being so strategic at a time of war, threat of war or natural disaster. I think any Ugandan would support this. This is the only thing that we can have pride in; that if other investors come, when they know we have this in our laws, it is so protective. But probably there are some other things that I am missing out, and I would love to know why would we oppose this? 
I know that my learned friend, every one refers to hon. Sseggona as “Learned Friend,” whether you are a lawyer or not, but I now use it carefully. The other Attorney-General wants to support me; please.  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. You see, compulsory acquisition for public good will always be there, especially in circumstances of war or natural disaster. And, I will give you an example; we have seen petroleum producing countries like Nigeria; they sometimes have a crisis of fuel for local consumption, when they are actually producing and exporting. So, in circumstances of war and natural disaster, there could even be a worse crisis. Any suggestion that you delete this would not have my support. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Obviously I have to disagree with my Minister of Justice because I don’t think this is justice at all. (Laughter) When you look at sub clause 3, it is not that the State is taking away this particular petroleum without payment; but there should be consultation between the Minister of Finance - since he is the one going to pay - and the licensee. 

We could even stretch it the other way round that they can agree to pay a higher price than the market price depending on the circumstances after consultations. It is possible. It is like I had already committed this petroleum to so and so, and I will be in breach of supply and that sort of thing; that is why they are providing for this consultation. I would pray that my learned colleague -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu for giving way. I entirely agree with you in respect of compulsory acquisition, but what if we subjected the wording of this clause to the provisions in the Constitution, particularly Article 26, which not only widens the circumstances under which this can be done, but also provides the remedy for the licensee in case he is aggrieved. What would be your position, as a Shadow Attorney-General whom I respect very much?

MR KATUNTU: You see, every law is subject to the Constitution, in the first place, whether you mention it or not - even this particular one, whether you put it here or not, it will be subject to the Constitution. 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members. I will take two more submissions then we shall take a decision on this matter. 

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with the position of the Shadow Attorney-General. Generally speaking, in business, it is a known principle that war is one of the factors that terminate and make it hard for business to proceed. In doing business and more so here where we are talking about a strategic resource; there is no way you could put the state in such a fertile and wild risk of it being denied its own resource which is strategic enough to give peace and security. Whatever the case, even if the company is saying other things, it is one of the conditions it is considered when the investor was coming to invest in the country. So, I would support that we maintain that clause.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support that we have to retain this sub clause 119, only that I want us to re-formulate it. I do not know whether it can capture what she envisages because once you see - it gives wide discretion: “In case of war, state of war, natural disaster or any other extraordinary crisis.” I would like us to try to capture something there and recast it as, “In case of war, state of war, natural disaster or any other extraordinary crisis as determined by Parliament.” (Interjection) Why? Because, essentially on matters – under Article 124, even with the declaration of war, it is this House -(Interjection)- Yes, look at Article 124. So, my proposal is that if indeed we are uneasy about the abstract “extraordinary crisis” it could be determined by Parliament or –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to hon. Ssekikubo is this: Why is he then lumping the two together? If the other one is declaration of war, we are not talking about declaration of war in this Bill. We are saying, “…in case there is war or there is a state of war…” So, there should be no involvement of Parliament.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, as we speak, we are at war; there is Joseph Kony who we are pursuing and there is something called ADF and others. The information I am giving my colleague is that; it is in the hands of the person stating the situation to be a war situation. Secondly, it is true that every law is subject to the Constitution. Then, by providing for compulsory acquisition, which I agree with the Shadow Attorney-General, who is defying a ministerial policy directive from me now –(Laughter)– is that much as there is always compulsory acquisition, it is subject to prior and adequate compensation. 

What we are dealing with here – the oil – is somebody’s property. And the person we are talking about is joint ownership between Government and the licensee. If my colleague were to allow me, I would adopt the proposal by hon. Niwagaba, to redraft to say, “Subject to Article 26 of the Constitution…” 

When it comes to the pricing in sub clause (3) we would delete it because in that case, the government would have retained, in principle, the power to acquire the petroleum it needs to cater for the situation without infringing on the right of another owner. That is the information I wish to share with you, my brother. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I do not envisage any situation where Government would take over the rights and property of an investor without addressing the equilibrium; meaning that, of course, that person has got to be compensated. And I have a few questions in my mind. 

In principle, I agree that every law we make here is subject to the Constitution. Article 26 of the Constitution is trite knowledge; the question is whether clause 120 is necessary. 

Mr Chairman, I am the Attorney-General or the Deputy Attorney-General, to be precise. This Bill belongs to the Minister of Energy, who is the sector minister. I am seeking your small indulgence; let us stand over this provision as I get proper clarification, and then I will get back a little bit later. But in principle, the legal provisions are very clear. But I want to know the rationale why this was put the way it was – clause 120.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But there is a proposed amendment on clause 120. 

MR RUHINDI: They are related; clauses 120 and 119 are related.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is that there is a proposed amendment by the committee on clause 120. So, by the time you are going to consult while we move to the next clause that issue may have been overtaken by events.

MR RUHINDI: Then let me hear the committee chairperson’s proposal?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over this very briefly; after clause 120 we will come back to it.

Clause 120

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute for the provision under clause 120 with the following: “The pricing of petroleum shall be in accordance with the method prescribed by the regulations and shall take into account international oil and gas prices.” 

Justification: To provide for petroleum prices while taking into account international oil and gas prices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, that is the proposal for clause 120.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when you access the microphone before I have allowed you, it creates a lot of interference with the recording of the Hansard. That is the reason I said you should wait to be allowed before you access the microphone. Otherwise, it goes straight to the people who are editing the Hansard and it brings confusion because, for example, it will now be as if I am speaking and at the same time I am saying, “Mr Chairman.” That is where the problem is. The people recording the Hansard will be recording that sound saying, “I was trying to guide, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, I am - “ It will not make a lot of sense. So, that is why you should not access the microphone before you are allowed by the Speaker, so that the Hansard can hear us properly. 

So, we were on the amendment of clause 120. We have consulted clause 119, but we are on clause 120 now. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I apologise for the inconsistency. I have a proposal by the chairperson of the committee, but he has tactfully left out “as stipulated in the petroleum agreement” and I suppose those are PSAs, and I think the drafters took into consideration that these provisions about pricing are also stipulated in the PSAs. So, once he leaves out the PSAs I think he will have not done us a good service. Or he has to give reasons as to why he has skipped the petroleum agreements.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you in tandem with this amendment by the committee? 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I accept. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I rise to help my colleague the learned Attorney-General. This one clarifies clause 119. The amendment by the committee which I have no problem with, or which I accept, modifies clause 119 in as far as when you read clause 119(2), it provides that clause 120 shall apply to the pricing of petroleum supplied under sub-section (1) unless a particular situation warrants otherwise. 

If I could have the indulgence of my colleagues because we have agreed that every law is subject to the Constitution and my concern with clause 119(3) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put a question on clause 120?

MR SSEGGONA: If we could have clause 119 in mind, the point I am developing -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but if you agree on clause 120, why should we leave it hanging?

MR SSEGGONA: Much obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We agree on clause 120. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee on clause 120. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 120, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we go back to clause 119.

Clause 119

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, I have addressed my mind to this because at first I had not cited sub clause (3) of clause 119. Sub clause (3) states, “In case a situation under sub clause (2) occurs, the minister shall in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance and the licensee to determine the price.” This pre-supposes that there will be agreement, and that it will not be compulsory acquisition of somebody’s rights and properties because they would have sat and agreed. That is my submission, Mr Chairperson. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I beg to differ. There is a difference between consultation and consent. First of all, why do we need to provide a different pricing mechanism? (Interjections) Wait a minute. Under clause 120 there is a clear pricing mechanism; under clause 119 it is a different situation and the ministers are only consulting the licensee. That is, I guess, the licensee in issue. Why is it important to have consultations because you want a different price? Otherwise, you would go to the price determined in clause 120? 

Because Consultation is not synonymous with consent, that is why I wanted us to subject this to Article 26 of the Constitution. But having agreed unanimously, apparently, on the contents of clause 120, why wouldn’t Government go with the price already determined in accordance with clause 120? But if you are going to say the minister is going to determine the price of necessity, you are implying a power to provide for a price different from the market price. And now you are calling upon a person who is already interested in my product to determine my price, but only cosmetically consult me. Whether I accept or not is an entirely different matter. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If it will benefit my young learned brother, who also happens to be my MP, we would make reference to Article 244 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Article 244(1) states “Subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under any land or waters in Uganda, are vested in the government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.” This answers the question, where does the property in petroleum lie? It is the property of Government. 

So, in a state of war, it does no harm to ask any person licensed to deal with that property in any way to put it at the disposal of the state. Absolutely no harm, and it does not conflict with any article of the Constitution. Mr Chairman I beg to submit and to move that we put this matter to rest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, shadow Attorney-General, would you like to agree between the Justice Shadow Minister and the -

MR KATUNTU: I think the worry of hon. Sseggona is noted. He is being cautious of the fact that some other person might determine the price to the disadvantage of the owner of the petroleum and we all agreed that whatever we provide for should be subject to Article 26. If we clearly indicated that it is subject to Article 26, would you have any problem, hon. Sseggona? I think we can clearly provide for it that it is subject to Article 26 because that is what it is anyway. (Hon. Niwagaba rose_)

MR RUHINDI: But for purposes of the record, before hon. Niwagaba interrupts me because I am on the podium, let us say it because even if we do not say it we are saying it. So, let us say it; “Subject to Article 26...” because every law we make here is subject to the Constitution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment. Now, propose that clause 119(1). How would you draft it?

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, I propose, clause 119(1) reads: “Subject to Article 26 of the Constitution, in case of war, threat of war, natural disaster or other extraordinary crisis, the minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, direct a licensee to place petroleum at the disposal of the state.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is the amendment; I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGONA: Okay, in that case, Mr Chairman, sub clause (3) would have to go.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, in section 2, we refer to clause 120 – “Shall apply to the pricing of petroleum supplied under sub section (1) unless the particular situation warrants otherwise.” Now, sub clause (3) is addressing this particular situation. “In case a situation under sub clause (2) occurs, the minister shall in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance and the licensee determine the price”. So, it is addressing the particular situation.
MR SSEGONA: Then, Mr Chairman, may I suggest so that we do not take much time on this. When it come to the licensee, we say, “With the consent of the licensee” –(Interjections)– yes, because the difference between “consent” and “consultation” is what will bring out that idea –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have already brought out the provision of adequate compensation under Article 26; so why would that be a problem? I put the question to Article 119 as amended – sorry, sub clause (1) as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to introduce another sub clause under clause 119 to be sub clause (4) to read as follows: “The minister shall lay before Parliament within a period of six months, a report on the exercise of the functions in clauses 118 and 119”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To report to Parliament about the exercise of the authority given in clauses 118 and 119 within six months. I put the question to that amendment –
MR RUHINDI: Well, Mr Chairman, I know this is a revolutionary Parliament, but when we are in war –(Interjections)– you would know that we are in war. It is our duty and responsibility as the Executive to report to Parliament, and we have always done so when there are such occurrences in this country. But if you want it specifically, I have no problem with it; even today, we are reporting to Parliament; so let it be there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Alice Alaso to introduce a new sub clause after sub clause 3, to introduce the provision that, “The minister shall report on the performance of the functions given to the minister under clauses 118 and 119 to Parliament within six months.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The discussion centres more on the price given to the licensee. I want to propose an amendment to sub clause (3) that, “The minister responsible for Finance and the licensee determine the price which should not be to the detriment of the licensee” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is taken care of by Article 26; it has to be adequate compensation.

MR KABAJO: Ideally it should be even higher than the normal price – but if it is taken care of, then it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that Article 119 as amendment be part of the Bill.

Question put and agreed to.

Article 119, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 121

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 121 as follows: In sub clause (1), insert the words, “With the approval of Cabinet directly or through an entity designated”, immediately after the word, “may”. To read as follows: “The Government may with the approval of Cabinet directly or through an entity designated to participate in petroleum activities under this Act.” etcetera.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That means there is an entity which is equivalent to Cabinet? What you are saying is that there is an entity which is equivalent to Cabinet, and so, it can act in the place of Cabinet - alternatively - Where Cabinet cannot act the other one will act. Is that what you are proposing, Mr Chairman? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman that one is withdrawn. Substitute for sub clause (2) the following: “When announcing areas for granting of petroleum exploration licences according to this Act, the minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet specify the maximum Government share which may be exercised by the Government under sub section (1)”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? Let the chairperson state it again. This is under?

MR WERIKHE: Sub clause (2)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing to replace the existing sub clause (2)?

MR WERIKHE: Yes. “When announcing areas for granting of petroleum exploration licences according to this Act, the minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet specify the maximum Government share which may be exercised by the Government under sub section (1)”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maximum shares to be exercised or retained?

MR WERIKHE: Justification: To empower the Government to stipulate its participating interest either at the time of award of petroleum exploration licence or petroleum production licence share either directly or indirectly through a designated entity and ensure transparency and predictability for investors.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal. Can I propose that we finish up to part 10, and we stop?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, as you can see, the chairman of the committee is the practical example of what is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member for Busiro, please!

MR SSEGGONA: Of how much we have worked today. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us see if we can move up to – because some of these are simple and we could make progress and stop after we finish with part 10, and then we can move the rest another time. So, can we deal with – 

MR KATUNTU: The following provisions are actually very important and they might require a thorough scrutiny; like clause 123 on training and employment of Ugandans and so forth. It is my prayer that if it may please you, Chair, we really end at this particular point and we start when we are a little fresh. This time we should be able to conclude this Bill in one sitting. So, if it may please you, Chair, I beg you that we stop at this point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On this occasion, it does not please me. (Laughter) Why I am saying so is that we could adopt the procedure of where we stand over those that will require amendments because there are several that have no amendments, so that we can stand over those particular ones and then we stop after Chapter 10.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chair, even the process of determining which clause we should stand over consumes energy, time and is also contentious. Between this clause and the clause where you invite us to stop, if we are to do quality, I would support hon. Katuntu.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why I am saying so is because previously, we went through this and we marked those ones that do not have amendments. Okay, the learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, that proposal as you put it may be possible if only we stuck to what you think we agreed upon the other day. But as you notice, every other minute, there is a new amendment coming up on every clause, which is of course healthy if allowed by the Chair. But under those circumstances, I would certainly support the proposal made by hon. Katuntu and seconded by hon. Sseggona that we adjourn at this moment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The member for Serere.

MS ALASO: I thank you very much.  I am one of those who had an amendment for 122 and it is something that we harmonised and we agreed upon with the committee, the minister and everybody. If it would please my colleagues, we could adjourn after clause 122. Let them move that amendment, please.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members – you are saying that you are tired and now you want me to guide you. (Laughter) We have finished with clause 121 at least. Haven’t we?

HON. MEMBERS: “We have finished.” “Not yet.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Not yet?

HON. MEMBERS: Not yet. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can we now conclude clause 121.  At least let us do clause 121 since we have spent a lot of time on it.

MRS ADONG: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to amend the amendment of the committee because Government and Cabinet is the same thing, and we have already provided for Parliament’s participation under other clauses that we have passed. So, I want to propose that it should be, “Government may with the approval of Parliament participate in the petroleum activities under this Act.” We have already provided for clause 121(1). The committee proposed that, “Government may with the approval of Cabinet……” But Cabinet and Government were the same and so it should be “……with the approval of Parliament….” 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, on the amendment which the honourable member is bringing up, I think she is recalling the earlier amendment that had been proposed for parliamentary participation, that was withdrawn. Here, we are talking about Government, and Parliament is part of Government. [HON. MEMBER: “No. No.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please. It looks like we cannot even move on this one. Can I propose that we suspend for one hour and then we come back?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, can we at least do the one more hour and then we go home?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I stand to be guided whether somebody prescribed a deadline for us to finish this thing irrespective of the quality of work. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is that for, honourable member? 

MR SSEGGONA: I sought your guidance on whether somebody prescribed a deadline for us irrespective -(Interjections)- I am seeking guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sseggona, it is you who prescribed it.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the point that I am making is, let us agree to do a good deal for Ugandans. We have sat here from 10.00 a.m. and actually, some of us have been sitting here since 8.00 O’clock and we have not had water, or soda and not even tea. We are human beings -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am sure that you have been observing the Chair and you know that he is the only one who has not stepped out since and yet the honourable member for Busiro has been up and down. But in the circumstances - 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the most popular motion of the day –(Laughter)- is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.02
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2010” and has considered clauses 72 to 120. It passed some with amendments and stood over clauses 83, 87, 110 and 112. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware,  tomorrow, there will be a special sitting in honour of the late John Odit, former Member of Parliament for Erute County North who passed away. We have agreed that his body be brought here tomorrow before we do the usual necessary recognition that we do for our distinguished fallen colleagues. 

So, there will be no other business tomorrow. Normal business of the House will resume on Thursday, and can we agree that we start at 10.00 a.m on that day? Okay we will deal with that on that day.

4.05
MR LUBEGA SSEGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of great national importance. This matter was in the news last week and continues to be in the news even today. 

I have a copy of The Daily Monitor newspaper of today in which there is a picture. In this picture there is a group of policemen and women brutalising and undressing a woman who participated in a demonstration by wives of our gallant Police officers.
In my own photographic interpretation, I see a man holding a woman’s skirt, lifting it up and literally undressing her. The picture also shows the role of fellow women as holding batons and clobbering this woman. This is not strange in the practice of our Police in Uganda. It has happened before and we have had statements delivered on the Floor of Parliament.

Secondly, we also heard a comment by one of the Police officers - is he called Laban Muhairwe?  - saying that the issue over which these women were demonstrating was to do with their husbands’ salaries and that they had no business over such issues.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, women have everything to do with their husbands’ salaries in this country, because food is bought using that money. But worse still, these women were demonstrating over lack of power and water in their residences, and this is largely an asset used by women in our houses.

Every year, Parliament appropriates money to pay water and electricity bills for our Police men and women, and now there is no electricity and water in these barracks; and the women who are the primary consumers of these services chose to get onto the streets to demonstrate. However, the best that Government did was to direct their husbands to go and undress them in public.

In view of that, Mr Speaker, can we have a statement from the minister responsible for Internal Affairs? Now that he is here, can the minister tell us: One, what his ministry or the Police authorities have done in terms of disciplining these officers? Two, if there are any disciplinary proceedings, to assure us that these proceedings are going to be public because we have seen enough of these torturous activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Internal Affairs.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is true there was a demonstration by the Police officers’ wives in the barracks of Ntinda, Kireka and Naguru. The main object of the demonstration was lack of electricity.

It is also true that the Police leadership, in collaboration with Umeme, disconnected power for the safety of the people living in these barracks. This was after it was discovered that most of the connections in the barracks had been illegally done. And, a number of children and other people including wives of Police officers had suffered electrocution as a result of lose wires hanging all over. 

It was against that background that the Police leadership decided that Umeme disconnects this power and does the right connections. What was not done properly is the fact that the wives of these Police officers and other people in those barracks were not consulted. The decision was made arbitrarily, which caused the demonstration.

But thereafter, the Police leadership addressed these women and electricity has been restored. That means the issues that led to the demonstration have also been resolved. What is appearing in the Daily Monitor newspaper of today is a recycling of an event whose issues have been resolved.

I appeal to the House and public that this is a resolved issue. As I talk, there is peace in the barracks as we address other issues. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, in view of the issue being discussed, as a mother of this nation, and a woman for that matter, is of grave concern and painful. The minister concerned has been asked to come and fully inform this House what the undertaking is. We also want the minister to tell us where the money that we usually appropriate for the Police services goes. I am saying this because the problem might not only be affecting Police officers within Naguru Barracks. 

In the circumstances, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister goes to consolidate this information before coming to the House with a full statement that will enable Members to inform Government what happens in the Police barracks outside Kampala? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will rule on that later after taking the order from the Member of Serere. 

On what point do you rise, Member from Lira?

MS ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The issue raised is about the brutality - especially how the wife of the Police officer was handled. The picture in the newspaper shows that she was undressed. But here is the Minister of Internal Affairs saying that this is a matter that was resolved and that the situation is now calm. He does not talk about the brutality and the shame that the woman has gone through.

So, is it in order for the minister to just say that the situation is now normal and that women should now forget about these issues that we are seeing in this newspaper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I listened to the minister quite carefully because I am not yet exhausted. He said that the situation that led to that demonstration has been resolved and peace has returned to those barracks. That is what I heard. But he also said that the picture in The Daily Monitor newspaper is not a current one; it is an old picture that is being recycled. So, was the honourable minister out of order? Given the facts I have just stated, I do not find any breach of any order by the minister.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You know, they talked about the situation being calm, and history repeats itself. We want these issues to be addressed comprehensively because tampering with women did not start today. It has always been there; Ingird and even I in Gulu, in the Eighth Parliament. The escorts of the RDC tampered with me. It is wrong for men to undress women in public. 

So, the Minister of Internal Affairs has a role to play in this one. For us to just rubbish it off that things have already been improved is wrong. Other than that, you know, Police barracks and Police is about being organised. They deal with rules and policies, and for Police barracks to be as disorganised as to have illegal connections, what kind of anarchy are we living in if we can hear that Police barracks have illegal connections?  Then what do you expect of other barracks and communities? What do you expect? 

Minister of Internal Affairs, you actually have to explain to this nation how you are organised in your dockets to the extent of even having illegal connections in the Police barracks, not Army barracks. At least if you mentioned Army barracks we would understand a little; but Police barracks! 

So, when we complain, you think we are over doing it; we are not over doing it. You really need to comprehensively address that; the issue of women and illegal connections which you clearly said here - crystal clear. Why should there be illegal connections in the barracks?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I stand to be guided. First, I put specific points and questions about disciplinary action and the minister has said nothing. Secondly, the government has a responsibility under Article 126(2)(c) to compensate all victims of wrongs. Have you compensated this woman who was undressed in public? Thirdly, what have you done as Government, because who is responsible for the illegal connections in a Police barracks? The government is responsible. 

These women do not connect electricity in the barracks. Why this illegal connection? Is it criminal to have an illegal connection? Have you prosecuted anyone before you declare that the connection is illegal? You are simply saying the situation is now calm; of course it must be calm. After this brutality, what do you expect? 

How much have you done to compensate this victim of a wrong, to deter other Police men, women and officers from continuing; because we seem to be operating with impunity? I think the minister must answer those specific questions, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Mr Speaker, I think the Police has developed a script, and I think the script is to subject the women of this country to torture, cruelty, degrading and inhumane treatment. Unfortunately, the minister is not even listening; maybe you can cause him to pay attention to me, Mr Speaker. 

The Police have developed a pattern: When they attacked and molested Ingrid, we thought maybe they molested her because she is an Opposition politician. So, may be it seemed okay for them and Government to do that. Now, look at these women; they go on empty stomachs; they are suffering and salaries for their husbands are not paid in time and the minister attempts to come here to circumvent the issue.  What we are saying is, what is it that the Police enjoy in our breasts and in exposing our nakedness? Is it the way policing should be done in Uganda? Why is it that when they are arresting men, they do not remove your belts and pull down your trousers? Why? 

It hurts us as women; whichever woman they do it to; it is unacceptable and I think this Parliament should condemn fully this behaviour and the way in which women are arrested in this country. I think the minister owes the women of Uganda an apology. He cannot be defending this whether it was because of illegal connections or because they broke the law or anything. This cannot be defended. You should arrest with dignity of person. That is all we are asking for; then you prosecute us. Thank you.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I think it will be proper and right that I come to this House with a report on the issues hon. Sseggona has raised and on what action has been taken following the demonstration. I undertake to do that.

However, it is precisely because the illegal connections were causing problems, and that is why the Police leadership took proactive action to correct the disconnections and -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for the minister to continue telling the public that the women were rightly harassed in that kind of nature simply because they were involved in illegal connections, not taking into consideration the circumstances, because they were not the ones who connected the electricity? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said he will come back with a report on what happened, and what actions have been taken to take care of the big picture. Then he was going on to explain that the power was disconnected after the Police authority discussed with Umeme that there are too many problems with lines, which were hurting people in the barracks. So, they agreed with Umeme that it should be disconnected until those issues were corrected. So, is the minister in order to say that or not in order to say that?  It is not about justification. He was just explaining the reason why power was disconnected. It was what he was explaining about; Umeme and Police authority. 

On the issue of what happened and what actions have been taken, he has said he is going to come back with a comprehensive statement to this House to explain what happened and what steps have been taken. Can we have a timeframe?

MR BABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will come back with a statement to give full briefing to the House on what exactly happened. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When?

MR BABA: On Thursday, next week.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I had actually wanted to move a motion because I thought the minister was continuing to dwell on objectionable things according to my ears, and I was very unhappy. I wanted to move under Rule 70 that he no longer be heard, but I have been overtaken by events.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when I am in the chair just be in peace.

MR MAWANDA: I am seeking guidance from you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you directed that the minister of Finance comes here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not even have to finish honourable member. Finance, we said that we need a statement today on this OIC issue. 
4.24
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, regarding the matter of financing the OIC and the statement on the IPO, we had been informed that our minister requested that they be presented tomorrow.  That is the information I got from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is, has that money been paid? There is no explanation about this. Has that money been paid, that is all; because the meeting is taking place tomorrow? That is the issue.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker I am not aware that the money has been paid.

MR MAWANDA: The clarification I am seeking from the minister is whether he knows that the meeting is taking place on Thursday this week? There is no way we can participate in this meeting unless we have paid. Do we really need a substantive statement from the minister?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am really surprised and let down by the minister to state that he is not aware of whether our subscription has been paid; yet he is aware that automatically this post was created to specifically cater for this country is being missed and he looks so remorseless. After talking he falls back to his bench and he wants us to take it kindly like that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo the rules allow only one Member to speak at a time; that means that only one Member can stand. The minister could not remain standing while you were speaking; so he had to sit.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged Mr Speaker, but really we are not at ease; it is a matter of national importance which I thought the minister would have taken with all the fervour and strength so that we who are backbenchers know the country is in good hands.
But when such an opportunity lapses when the minister is with us and he does not tell us what next, or what steps they are making even at the last, to ensure that we pay up our subscription. Can we take this business as usual or the minister must tell us exactly what is happening to this country, is he in charge? Is Government in charge, why are they coming out selectively? Yet on such matters for the goodness of this country, for the projection of our image, for indeed playing our rightful role in world politics, the Government is shying away. Are we really on the right course?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does seem that the Ministry of Finance is beginning to take this Parliament for granted and that is sad. This is the third, fourth, fifth time we are making this request. Each time they send a different minister to say what the other minister of state said previously, but cannot be held responsible because he was not there when the other minister made those statements.

This is disrespectful and honourable minister you do not know anything about whether money has been paid, but let me make you know something about what you should do tomorrow by 10 o’clock. 
I would like a specific statement from the Minister of Finance delivered to the Speaker’s office, stating whether or not that money has been paid, a letter not a statement; to my office by 10.00 o’clock tomorrow. If this does not happen, then you will have demonstrated great disrespect for the chair of this Parliament. At an appropriate time, a proper response will be made from the Chair.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I happened to be in Gulu yesterday and I checked on Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. Reaching the gate, I met with staffs who were demanding for their salary. That means service delivery in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is at stake. Up to 103 staff members have not been paid.

This can actually cause a big problem in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I asked the responsible people for this payment. I know right now it is not Ministry of Finance, and it is Ministry of Public Service, and we demand explanation from the Minister of Public Service. 

In case of any delay of payment, why don’t you inform staff in advance? In this case, can you do something to rescue the situation in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital? Mothers are not being attended to; and people are not being attended to in the hospitals. At least for schools they can tolerate because even some teachers have approached me to say that they have not received their salaries for October.

We really demand for an explanation from the Minister of Public Service. Can we really get an explanation on this delay of salaries? We are happy here, but staff who should deliver services to our people are not happy.

4.31
THE STATE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you Rt Hon. Speaker I must really say that this is concern for us as a ministry because as you are aware once the health workers lay down their tools, it will really be very bad and very sad for our people.

This is a matter we have raised with Public Service and we have not yet got an answer from them, and I do not see the minister here. If you can accept, maybe tomorrow we could ask the minister to come and explain to this House because it is beyond our control. I was in Mbarara and we have a similar situation or even worse; and other areas as well.

The teachers in other areas are also complaining; so it is not only in the health sector; it is crosscutting. (Hon. Kasirivu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this same thing? No you know the rules hon. Kasirivu; you need to alert me if you are going to raise some matter. Today, I will apply the rules; I need to know the subject so that I can deal with it. That is what the rules say; we cannot just rise. All these people who are raising these concerns approached me.

This House is adjourned for a normal sitting to Thursday 10.00 o’clock, but honourable Members, please come tomorrow to pay respects to the late hon. John Odit.

(The House rose at 4.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

