Thursday, 12 November 2015

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. When we enacted the Public Finance Management Act, we set a timeframe for the budget process and the way it will be handled; unfortunately, the timetable falls during a critical period for us. We had originally planned that we would have committee hearings between 17th and 26th of January 2016 but we do not have that time because it is a bit close to the elections. 

So today the Business Committee sat and we reviewed the business before Parliament, taking into account the Public Finance Management Act and we have agreed as follows: That the House be adjourned today Thursday, 12 November 2015 to Wednesday, 18 November 2015 and sit continuously thereafter until 26th November just before the Pope’s visit. 

We propose that on the 26th November we adjourn until 15th of December when we shall receive the Budget Framework Paper. It should have come on the 17th but we have brought it forward. So I would like to give advance notice to the finance minister and all the sector ministries that we shall require that paper by 15th of December. We shall then sit continuously from 15th to 23rd December when we expect to approve the budget and then after that we free Members until after the general elections. So, the timetable has moved forward and we would like the cooperation of Government because we cannot just keep Members here when they have elections. 

We have also agreed that between 18th and 26th November, we accomplish the following business:

    i. The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015
    ii. The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011
    iii. The Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013
    iv. The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015
    v. The Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2015
    vi. The Immunisations Bill, 2014
    vii. The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015; and 
    viii. The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No. 2), Bill 2015

We have also agreed that we handle the following reports during this period:

Reports by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on -
    a) Mbarara By-Pass, Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna roads and Mitaano and Ntungwa bridges in Kanungu District
    b) Kapchorwa-Suam Road and roads in Bukwo and Kween districts
    c) Tororo-Mbale-Soroti and Jinja-Kamuli–Bukungu roads

One report of COSASE and one report by the Public Accounts Committee on the Uganda National Roads Authority for the year ended 2013.

We also expect to handle a report by the Committee on Local Government Accounts on-
    a) A value-for-money audit on roads maintenance
    b) Auditor-General’s report on Kampala region for 2008/2009 and 2009/2010
    c) Auditor-General’s report on Soroti and Arua regions for 2010/2011

I think that if we able to do that, we shall be able to finish by 26 November 2015. Honourable members, that is the new programme. I would like to appeal for your cooperation so that we can handle both our constitutional responsibility and also our issues in the constituencies. I thank you very much. 

3.07
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You sent the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to Mbale twice because we had problems but they have not come up with a report and the people of Mbale are up in arms and want to know what Parliament has done. They even brought a petition here, which I read on the Floor of Parliament.

It would be very unfair for this Ninth Parliament to close without the people of Mbale’s issues concerning roads and building in the roads being addressed. So I request that the committee that went to Mbale comes up with a report so that we finish it in this Ninth Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We are not closing the Ninth Parliament. This Parliament will close in May 2016. We are just trying to do our work before the elections so that we adjourn for the elections and as soon as they are over, we come back. However, we have noted that the people of Mbale want answers to their petition. 

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I take the concerns of the Member with due respect. The committee has done everything possible but due to the challenges we have owing to time constraints as Parliament, we have not been able to go back to Mbale to wrap up with the leadership. Otherwise, the major part of the report is finished. We are just waiting for the final notes from the wrap-up meeting with the residents and leaders of Mbale Municipality. Nevertheless, the report is very close to the end and we shall get time to return to Mbale and wrap up before finalising the report.

MS SARAH KAYAGI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the chair. The Kanungu Road and the Lwakhakha-Bumbo Road came under one loan. Now I am hearing about a report for Kanungu; I would like the chairperson to explain to me what happened to the Lwakhakha-Bumbo Road. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about a loan request? If they came together under the same loan request, it should be with the Committee on National Economy. Are you doing some work on Lwakhakha-Bumbo Road? 

MS KAYAGI: They did go there, Madam Speaker.

MR BIRAARO: Rt Hon. Speaker, the two issues are not related. What is being talked about in Kanungu is the breakdown of Mitaano Bridge. These were oversight committee reports that we are talking about; the loan does not fall under the same committee.

THE SPEAKER: I still think that her point is valid. Where is our Committee on National Economy? I think this committee needs to speed up because we were looking at business that is ready and that is what we prioritised. Chairperson of the Committee on National, those loan requests are pending.

3.10
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have given us the programme but according to the Electoral Commission, we are supposed to be nominated on 2nd and 3rd of December and usually after nomination, we go to canvass for votes. How can we be coming to Parliament when other members will be canvassing for votes? How will it be possible? I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We have been made to understand that the final electoral programme will be issued by the Electoral Commission in January and the campaigns will start then. That is what we have been made to understand. So, you get nominated and organise other things while we wait for the Electoral Commission.

3.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Sironko County West, Sironko): I thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the programme.

As Secretary-General for the Forum for Democratic Change, I want to say that we are now conducting our primaries. When NRM were conducting theirs, we had to keep quiet and give them opportunity to finish. Even when they postponed, we had to keep quite. We are now going through our process, which will be extending up to the end of next week. Therefore, we want to ask for your indulgence, Madam Speaker; we pray that you give us an opportunity because we are already in a multi-party system and it would be better that you allowed us to do it.

On the issue of reports, the reports we are talking about are very many but there are those that if they are delayed, the country would be finished. There is the issue of Mbale where I come from. You cannot believe it, even me, Nandala, the MP, they can allocate my land which I bought with cash. Therefore, it is better that we facilitate that committee to go and bring that report quickly and we handle Mbale issues and other places. They can even allocate a lorry park. They can even give away a road with tarmac in Mbale. It is very dangerous! That report should be handled before we go for nominations.

Madam Speaker, I am sure you travel and you know that our foreign missions are in a bad state. I recall that the Minister of Foreign Affairs one time came here and he said that in one month, a full report about our missions would be here. You know, missions are our image outside there; we have forgotten that and now it is more than a year - that was hon. Okello Oryem – and we have never seen his report up to now. He knows that Parliament tends to forget. I would request that we include the foreign affairs report among the reports which we want to handle because it is very important.

Finally, I have been to the Electoral Commission and I have got guidelines for nomination of candidates especially those at local government. They mention the laws that are applicable to the local council: the Constitution of Uganda; Presidential Elections Act, 2005; Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 (as amended); Local Governments, Cap 243; Electoral Commission Act, Cap 140; Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005; and they also mention the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010. 

That means that under the local governments all these nominations start on Monday. This was issued on 1st October but I can see that the Government is bringing in an amendment to the KCCA Act in the middle of an election period. People have already picked nomination forms and they know what they are standing for. I can see that one of the proposed clauses says that in order for you to be Lord Mayor, it is the councillors to vote for you and you must be a councillor. Councillors from all the areas have already picked forms but now if I want to be the Lord Mayor, I have nowhere to stand. What is this, Madam Speaker? Is it being fair? 

I would also be happy if the Prime Minister came and explained to us why, after they have issued the road map and the guidelines and nomination forms have been pick, they have come to change the rules in the middle of the game. 

It is like you are playing football, the rule says the first half is 45 minutes and the second half is 45 minutes, which makes 90 minutes but in the middle of the game, you say “no, I have changed to 120 minutes”. Surely, you came knowing that the game was 90 minutes, how can it be changed suddenly to 120 minutes? 

Let us be fair; this country is ours and it would be logical that if the amendments are to be brought, they should come after the election process but not in the middle of the game. I just plead with you, Madam Speaker. This country belongs to us and I want to quote one statement again –(Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member. The information I want to give to the House is that the Chairman of the Electoral Commission anticipates a law because he was saying that the nominations, which had been slated for Monday, have been called off because there is a Bill that has been taken to Parliament. He does not know whether the Bill will be passed rejected. He is actually almost stopping the operation of an existing law, which is the law hon. Nandala is talking about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see. The Lord Mayor of Kampala is the same as my mayor of Mbale, the mayor of Masaka or the mayor of Arua. The problem is that people do not listen. The House is going to become smaller and smaller and do you know the reason why? You remember one time on the Floor here I said that 75 per cent of our colleagues might not come back to this Parliament. Experience has shown that already over 100 have lost in the primaries which shows that in the final election, some more people will lose.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please do not intimidate colleagues. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, what I am trying to say is that we should make a law which will stand the test of time. One time, Members here made a law and it caught up with them in the Seventh Parliament. That is Kyolabye Dan whom I always refer to. He said, “We do not want independents in the Constitution” but the first person to be independent was Kyolabye Dan; I used to sit with him. The other law that I read was the one of Magezi, Balaki Kirya and others. When they were making the Detention Act, they said this law should have passed last week, then two days down the road it was applied to them. 

I am sure some of you will want to be mayors; let us be fair, this country belongs to us and we need to be very fair. Who knew Amama would go forward? He was a super minister! –(Interjections)- You knew it? You have just come here; this is your first time in Parliament. I know, hon. Sarah Opendi, that is even why they made you lose out.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I appreciate the point that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is making; he is saying that we should not legislate with our eyes, that a good law should be blind. However, he has mentioned my name and did indicate that that is why I lost.

Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to indicate that I lost when he does not know what actually transpired and does not even belong to the NRM party? He does not even know what is happening now; is he in order, Rt Hon. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have taken 10 minutes; you are abusing the rules. 

Honourable members, I just want to respond to two issues. The first one is about the programme. The Business Committee sat this morning and your party was represented by the Leader of the Opposition. We were given a programme and that is why we have said we shall not sit tomorrow, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday to give you time to deal with your primaries. So the House will commence on Wednesday next week to take into account your request. It is not that you are required for the whole week. The Leader of the Opposition was there and other members when we set that programme.

The second issue is on KCCA. Again, it is a matter which engaged us today in the Business Committee because we had to decide how quickly we shall deal with that Bill - do we have the time, will it come before the nomination or after. We had a long debate and there are a lot of legal complications surrounding the KCCA Act. However, we have asked the Prime Minister, who was in the meeting, to come this afternoon and inform the country what they are going to do about KCCA, especially the office of the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor. We have taken this into account and we are waiting for a statement this afternoon.

3.21
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very urgent national importance. This morning I got a call from my village, which is Olwal in Amuru District, that a number of young people had actually invaded the village and they were planning to clear some large chunk of land in preparation to plant eucalyptus. I did not immediately act. I went to the National Forestry Authority and had a discussion with them.  The most disturbing thing is that the office in Kampala was not aware of what was happening in Olwal, so they had to call the Gulu office to get the information. 

The information I got is that they had given that land to a private investor to plant eucalyptus. For Members who may not know, this same land was given to BAT way back in 1964 for their activities and they planted eucalyptus but it was cut down. Therefore, the community has taken over the land and the affected number of people is over 3000. The district forestry authority is now coming back to plant eucalyptus on the said land. The community is now very rowdy and unsettled because they fear that what they have planted is going to be destroyed.

My prayer to Government is that they take very swift action and investigate what is happening in the Olwal Forest Reserve. This is because the area in question is expanding. They are now saying that the area is much bigger than what the community actually knows. The community is saying that it wants to take charge of the land because the people have multiplied and they wish to continue using the land. My prayer is that the people of Olwal Forest Reserve be helped immediately because it is something that is very urgent. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we shall ask the Prime Minister to come back to us on that with the minister concerned - The minister is here.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am receiving this information right now. I will check it out and give the information required. However, I can confirm that whatever is going to be done must be done in accordance with the law. If there is any encroachment on the land, the law is very clear on how that is addressed. Thank you.

3.26
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of urgent national importance. A week ago we got an outbreak of cholera in Busia and we sent information to the ministry through the DHO; he came to Kampala and met the Commissioner of Clinical Services. However, during that time, for about six days now, there has not been any intervention from the ministry. As I speak now, we have lost about five people and more than 10 are admitted. 

The situation is quite worrying in Busia. It is a border point and it is also a low-lying area, where we have a bigger percentage of swamps at River Sio and also Lake Victoria which is nearby.

My call is to the ministry so that we could get support that will cause an intervention within the health centres that we have. Right now, there is nothing realised on the ground. The medicine that is supporting us in Busia Municipal Clinic and Masafu has been got from Bugiri Hospital, and I believe Bugiri may not have also prepared itself for such an epidemic that has arisen. I would want to call on Government and the ministry to intervene fast so that we help with the problem that is already in Busia.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the Minister of Finance is taking down the requests. 

3.28
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give hon. Sarah Netalisire information about Lwakhakha Road because I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. 

That loan request was presented to this House and it was approved. It is now incumbent upon the implementers to implement but it was handled by the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, are you in position to answer hon. Maganda’s issue?

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform my good friend that I was not running away but I was just getting the latest information. This is because this matter has been in the media and on Sunday another Member of Parliament from Busia raised the same issue but I was aware that my senior staff were handling the matter. That is why I was moving out to get the latest so that I could inform the House. Therefore, if you could allow me a few minutes, I will get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall appreciate your response.

3.30
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and to find out from you whether procedurally, we are moving well. You have informed the House about what transpired in the Business Committee and I feel that there is one critical issue that ought to have been discussed or you ought to have informed this House about how we are going to proceed on this particular matter.
 
Just as a preamble, Madam Speaker, lately you have not seen me in the Business Committee simply because as independent MPs, we resolved to dissolve our caucus following the amendment of the Constitution, which said that people now can cross in the last 12 months of the residual term of Parliament. Madam Speaker, you could be asking yourself why I did not come to make this point in the Business Committee but that is my justification.

Madam Speaker, back to the point; on Tuesday, you remember that I raised this particular issue because I sensed that this matter was going to give us headache if we did not find a way of proceeding with it well. In the same spirit that my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, raised the issue on the proposed KCCA (Amendment) Bill, I also raise concern about the proposed amendment to the Parliamentary Elections Bill that came on the heels of two things: one, a Constitutional Court ruling affecting Article 78 (1) (b) and (c); and two, a constitutional command under Article 78 itself that requires us to review the representation in this House of some colleagues.

The Bill was brought here and, Madam Speaker, I contended then and I still do now, that that Bill is not properly before this House. This is because the Attorney-General confirmed, when I raised it, that he actually appealed the decision of the Constitutional Court. Therefore, it only follows that once such a decision is appealed, then this House is caught by the sub judice rule that we cannot discuss that matter.

Since the Attorney-General conceded on the Floor that he appealed, then it leaves us with two dilemmas: One, we may have to wait until the court disposes of the appeal. This means we cannot consider the amendment that he has brought. On the other hand, like he tried to insinuate on the Floor on Tuesday, he said he was going to withdraw the appeal. The effect of this is that some MPs who have been affected by that ruling may not or do not deserve to be in this House.

Madam, I was concerned because your Chair has been beleaguered with these kinds of things in the Ssekikubo case and others. I do not want the House to go through that kind of thing again, if we can address our minds to it at the earliest opportunity. Therefore, I want to find out if the Business Committee also discussed this matter. In my mind, this matter puts us in a fix; if the Attorney-General appeals, the sub judice rule catches us. If the Attorney-General does not appeal, some Members may be affected and that means that the law must, therefore, be expeditiously amended to be in line with the ruling.

May I seek your guidance, Madam, in regard to this issue?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should avoid situations where we allow other institutions to stifle the work of others. The Attorney-General said he has issued a notice. He has not issued the grounds. It is just a notice saying, “I intend to appeal, give me the records of proceedings.” Who knows the grounds? 

Therefore, I think that if he files the appeal and the court says we should stop working, we shall stop. However, he has just issued a notice and he has not done anything else apart from that. He might even abandon the notice. It might even be dismissed for want of prosecution. 

I think let the court do their work and we do ours. Otherwise, at this rate someone who does not want what we are doing will just go to court and put in an application and say, “I have applied to the court, stop working”. The Legislature will do its work and let the court also do their work. However, when the Bill returns to the House, you can raise those issues again when they are reporting. We are not going to stop doing our work because a notice has been filed.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, if I understand your ruling well, then I think it is proper that the Members who the court said are here illegally should vacate the House – (Interjection) - From the Speaker’s ruling, I think it is proper that we follow the law. Court ruled that those Members are not here legally; they should leave the House.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a declaration from the court declaring their seats vacant?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Court ruled that they were elected illegally, under a wrong law. Therefore, they are not supposed to be in this House. They remained in the House because there was an argument that there was an appeal. Since we are now not considering the appeal, they should wait from outside this House.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us not be stampeded. Let us just do our work. If you want to expel them, bring a motion here with the ruling and the implications so that we can debate.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMET (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I request to lay on the Table a motion for Government to borrow up to €45 million from the French Agency for Development and €40 million from KFW, the German Development Bank, to finance construction of the 44.7MW Muzizi Hydropower Project and associated transmission line.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a request for Government to borrow up to US$ 84,979,502 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the four industrial parks substations and transmission lines project.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Committee for perusal and report back.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow up to US$ 14 million from the International Development Association to support the Great Lakes Trade Facilitation Project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

3.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013, Volume II Central Government (Uganda National Roads Authority).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a date for debate will be appointed. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION AND CONTROL BILL, 2015

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, toxic chemicals are defined as chemicals which through their chemical action on life processes can cause death, temporary incapacitation or permanent harm to humans and animals. In respect to the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015, Uganda signed the Convention on Prohibition of Development, Production, Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction on 13 April 1993 and it was ratified on 30 November 2001. 

The Chemical Weapons Convention is an international instrument that regulates the development, production, stockpiling, transfer and use of chemical weapons. The Convention on Prohibition of the Development, Production Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction is a milestone agreement. Not only is this the first disarmament treaty to include a timeframe for elimination of an entire class of weapons of mass destruction, but it is also the first multilateral arms control treaty to incorporate an extensive verification regime. 

The preamble also recognises the prohibition embodied in the agreements and the relevant principles of international laws on the use of herbicides as a method of warfare. It also expresses the desires of the state parties to enhance the economic and technological development for peaceful purposes. 

Under article 7 of the convention, each state party is required, in accordance with its constitutional processes, to adopt the necessary measures to implement the obligations under the convention. In particular they are required to:

a) 	Prohibit natural and legal persons anywhere on its territory or any other place under its jurisdiction as recognised by international law from undertaking any prohibited activity to a state party under the convention, including enacting provisions with respect to such activities.

b) 	Not to permit in any place under its control any activity prohibited to a state party under the convention; and 

c) 	Extend its penal legislation to any activity prohibited to a state party under the convention undertaken anywhere by the natural persons, possessing its nationality, in conformity with international law.

It is important to note that Uganda is a non-possessor state of chemical weapons, but it is pursuing a peaceful and development agenda on the use of chemical and industrial development. Therefore, whereas Uganda is a non-possessor state of chemical weapons, some of the chemicals used in industries could pose a threat to the population if not managed well.

The objects and principles of the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015 are: 

a) 	To give the force of law in Uganda to the convention and comply with the obligations under the convention. 

b) 	To ensure that Uganda complies with the obligations under the convention.

c) 	To establish the National Chemical Regulatory Authority for purposes of the convention. 

d) 	To provide for inspection, seizure, searches and enforcement for licensing and permits in relation to the scheduled chemicals.

Uganda is behind schedule in regard to putting in place the regulations. It is against this background that I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015” be passed by this august House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have been reading the proposed law, which has 250 pages. What is of interest is that I looked at the budget of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and realised that although they are proposing so many things which involve money, I do not see any provisions for this law in their budget. 

I would like to raise a point a procedure. The minister has presented the certificate of financial implications and yet in the budget of 2015/2016, there is nothing budgeted for this law. Therefore, Madam Speaker, why are we passing a law which has financial implications and yet in the budget there is no money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we find difficulty, we can move the commencement date forward. Let us do our work of making the law. We can discuss the issue of commencement. Minister of Finance, do you have something to say about the certificate?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I think the Secretary General of FDC is trying to derail the House. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development looked at this Bill, issued a certificate of financial implication and said it will be incorporated within the existing legal framework. If they need extra resources, that will be handled at that stage. 

Madam Speaker, this is the first time I am seeing a Bill being questioned. We never go back to see whether the money is there for every Bill. We depend on the certificate from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I do not know why hon. Nandala-Mafabi wants to derail us in this way. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the chairperson of the committee comes up, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kibanga Primary School from Kalangala. They are from the islands and are represented by hon. Fred Badda and hon. Carolyn Nanyondo. You are welcome.

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Terence Achia): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015. I beg to lay the report and minutes of the committee on the Table.

Introduction

The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015 was read for the first time on 20 February 2015. It was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for consideration and report back.

Background

THE SPEAKER: The background has been given by the minister.

MR ACHIA: Since the minister has already done away with the background, I proceed to the objects of the Bill.

There are only four objects:

a) 	To give the force of law in Uganda to the Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production, Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction signed by Uganda on the 13 April 1993 and ratified on 30 November 2001.

b) 	To ensure that Uganda complies with the obligations under the convention.

c) 	To establish a national authority for the purposes of the convention.

d) 	To provide for inspections, seizure, searches and enforcement and for licensing and permits in relation to scheduled chemicals.

Methodology 

In the process of considering the Bill, the committee held meetings with and received submissions from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	The committee observed that chemical safety and security is not adequately addressed in Uganda. As Uganda moves towards more open borders within the East African Community integration context, it is important to underscore the need for greater chemical safety and security in the country. In fact, the country is faced with various vulnerabilities such as:

i) 	Security due to the threat of terrorism. The region is facing terror attacks and threats by terrorist groups and the country cannot rule out the possibility of access to chemical materials by violent groups.

ii) 	Inter-regional trade. As a result of integration, trade has increased hence spurring industrial activity, which is reflected in increased importation and transport of chemicals for industrial production and usage across the region. This therefore, increases the likelihood of chemical incidences that might negatively affect public health and safety.

iii) 	Absence of or weak legislation and enforcement. This may lead to leakage, diversion, misuse and access to chemicals by unauthorised illegitimate actors to the detriment of the population.

iv) 	Porous borders. There is ungoverned space on land and maritime on Ugandan borders. Therefore, this could lead to activities of smuggling that can facilitate illegal movement of chemical materials in the country. In addition, there is an inadequate monitoring and tracking system of the toxic industrial chemicals across the region. This also increases the risk of illicit trafficking. 

In addition, there is limited financial, institutional and human resource available to the ministry responsible for occupational safety and health, which has an impact on their effective functioning and capacity to effectively implement the convention’s provisions.

There is also limited relevant technical expertise and reliable equipment to detect, search, rescue and decontaminate toxic chemicals. 

The committee therefore recommends that because of the afore-mentioned vulnerabilities and gaps, there is an urgent need for development and implementation of a chemical safety and security programme in Uganda. There is also an urgent need for coherent, coordinated and sustainable national efforts towards effective chemical safety and security management. 

2. 	The committee observed that trade liberalisation has led to an increase in flow of goods into and out of the country. Due to increased industrial activities over the years, there has been an increase in the use of chemicals in the country. This requires a legal and institutional framework to undertake monitoring, verification, declarations, licensing, and general enforcement mechanisms. 

3. 	The committee observed that there is acid violence, which is a significant crime in Uganda, with devastating consequences on victims, their families and society. Acid violence rarely kills, but it always leaves victims with severe physical, psychological and social scarring, and leads to social stigmatisation, breakup of families, poverty and destitution. 

The committee recommends that the National Chemical Regulatory Authority be established to regulate importation, exportation, transportation, storage, handling, use and disposal of scheduled listed chemicals under the convention and other toxic chemicals. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary one-third of the members of the committee. You are free to debate. 

3.54
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee. 

This proposal is long overdue. You remember when there was a disaster in Japan I raised this matter on the Floor of Parliament. I wanted to know whether our country had the capacity to detect, inspect and even destroy any such facilities. Therefore, this law is timely. It is in order and proper that we discuss this Bill and find out our immediate problems. 

After that disaster in Japan, very many cars were submerged into the ocean. I have always doubted whether some of these spare parts and old vehicles we bring into this country include those submerged toxic vehicles. On that note, I would like the minister to assure this House that Ugandans are safe. Thank you.

3.55
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for this brief and elaborate report. 

Madam Speaker, this law is long overdue particularly for us who come from districts, which border other countries, like Arua, Koboko and Moyo. A lot of smuggling has been done in these districts in whatever form of merchandise. 

The third objective proposes an authority for the purposes of ensuring that management of chemicals in this country is clearly scrutinised. We have seen various institutions importing chemicals. I want to zero down on the Police. Just a few days ago, we found a canister of pepper-spray that was being used by the Police to quell riots. These are toxic chemicals that expired in 2013 but were still in the possession of the Police and being used. 

In such circumstances, Madam Speaker, it becomes of relevance for us to have an authority that can crosscheck whatever chemicals the various institutions are bringing in this country. I do not think the Police would destroy the expired pepper spray that is in their possession if such an institution or authority, which can inspect these stores where these chemicals are being kept, does not exist. Therefore, I would like to applaud the committee and implore Members to support the proposal to establish an authority that will act independently. It will crosscheck whatever chemicals are being imported, those that are in existence in the stores and those that need to be destroyed. 

The expired drugs in our various health units - I remember together with the Committee of National Economy we visited various hospitals. When we went to Yumbe Hospital, we found a whole store full of expired drugs. The hospital was stuck with the drugs; they did not know where to take these drugs. The National Drugs Authority, which had dumped these drugs there, refused to retrieve them. They claimed that the consuming entity had already procured these drugs and therefore, it became their mandate to find out what to do with these expired drugs. 

I feel it is relevant for such an authority to take charge of such expired drugs. In my opinion, they become toxic chemicals. I therefore want to support the committee’s proposals and implore Members to do likewise because this is long overdue. We needed this law yesterday so that we can have various institutions to help this country in controlling toxic chemicals. Thank you.

4.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I think this Bill should have been passed long ago. 

This country has no capacity to monitor and even to destroy industrial waste. The industrial waste that goes into the water we drink is a big danger to this country. If you went to Mulago Hospital and saw the cases of cancer, it is so alarming and threatening and the country is just looking on. They should have come up with this Bill long ago. This country should have put more money into NEMA to be able to monitor what is happening. We see so many companies now being registered in this country, but they do not even check to find out how they are going to dispose of the waste material. Therefore, this is a very important Bill. 

My colleague who was on the Floor earlier talked about the nuclear waste in Japan. The tsunami destroyed the industrial plant and the wind blew everything - This country has no capacity to monitor all the vehicles that are imported into the country and are offloaded here. The vehicles that are in this country are junk that is offloaded in Uganda; they use red fuel and yet western countries stopped using red fuel many years ago. The fumes that come from these vehicles are dangerous to the lives of Ugandans and that is why we have so many cases. Uganda cannot even monitor and see how we can dispose of these materials. We need to monitor to see if they are in the country.

I asked the Minister of Finance one time why we allow all this junk in the country and yet they cause a health hazard to our people. He said, “We want taxes, we need money”. However, the importers of these vehicles pass on taxes to Ugandans and it is Ugandans who are suffering.

I, therefore, implore this House to pass this Bill and we put in place stringent measures. The Minister of Finance should give NEMA more money so that they are able to monitor and also employ professionals. Uganda is a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency that is based in Vienna but we do not see these people coming here to help Uganda. The late Prof. Walumbe was a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency and he used to monitor the use of these chemicals and how dangerous they are. The country has done nothing to advance his work. 

My colleague has just talked about pepper spray; the tear gas we use against Ugandans in this country is very dangerous. All these things are very toxic. That is why many Ugandans are now getting cancer and are dying of cancer and yet this country cannot even manage to control these diseases. We have had hand grenades in this country. There was the war in the North and you heard of the nodding disease; all this is as a result of chemical weapons that have been left in this country. 

This Parliament should therefore pass this law. The Ministry of Finance should also put in money to ensure that this pile of chemical weapons is stopped from coming into Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.04
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I stand here to support the motion. We have seen in this country the dramatic effect of toxic chemicals when people have applied acid directly on the bodies of other people and they have been maimed. We have witnessed this. We know that it sends a message that there is something wrong in the community and it is being ignored. If these chemicals were being handled or managed properly, they would not get into the wrong hands of those people who use them to hurt others.

I would also like to add that while we can see the obvious dramatic effect of toxic chemicals, I would like to assure you that there is also the slow effect of toxic chemicals, which is actually affecting the population through the food chain. We are applying some of these herbicides and pesticides to our crops but they contain some of the chemicals which slowly accumulate in the plants and when we eat them through food, these chemicals slowly but surely accumulate in the body and cause harmful effects on the body organs like the brain, the nervous system, the liver and the kidneys. 

If we do not take action, we shall soon have those toxic chemicals contributing greatly to the causes of the non-communicable diseases in this country. The cancers may increase and many others diseases which manifest unaware. We are seeing people dying of conditions which cannot be easily explained; probably, it is due to this accumulated effect of chemicals. I therefore would like to urge the House to support this Bill and we make it law so that we have mechanisms to manage, monitor and control toxic weapons. I beg to submit.

4.06
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can see that even the committee had a problem - the report has only four pages - because they are looking at this law in isolation. Why do people smuggle? They look at cost and benefit. Why do people import these things? I am sure the Minister of Finance was involved. Why should somebody import a second-hand car, for example? The reason is that a new car in Uganda is twice as expensive as those in UK or Japan as a result of taxes.

If you want to deal with this issue, you need to look at the other side - why people are importing these things. Why should somebody import a second-hand refrigerator? It is because the taxes for a new fridge are very high. Why would somebody buy a second-hand cloth? It is because a shirt in Kampala which is imported is very expensive. Therefore, whatever is done to solve this problem should address the root cause of some of these things. 

I rarely go to Garden City because my colleague, Ken-Lukyamuzi, told me not to go there. However, I recently went there and I heard somebody saying that he has a phone with four SIM cards. I wondered how one could have four SIM cards in one phone; that is so dangerous! A phone is supposed to have one SIM card. Those waves can kill somebody. That is why you find that when somebody is charging a phone and makes a mistake of receiving a call, the chances of surviving an electric shock are minimal. 

The inspection of all imports in Uganda is the responsibility of Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). The question is: is UNBS doing their work? The answer is no! Why? We do not know. Recently, I had to ask UNBS why they had not come to inspect my Umeme meter. All weighing scales are supposed to be checked by UNBS. The reason why I went there was because I was paying Yaka and on one meter – there is another house where I have a meter - they are cheating me. If I pay Shs 20,000, I lose Shs 3,500 which is not accounted for. 

I implore you people to always check your bills –(Interjections)- No, not arrears, even VAT is there. I have all the information and I have even sent it on WhatsApp. You can actually see the bill; there is the unit cost and there is VAT but I do not understand the difference. When you pay Shs 40,000, you lose Shs 70,000. That is the reason I had to go to Umeme. If one has arrears, it is a different story. By the way, you better check your receipts. Therefore, Madam Speaker, even if you create many authorities when those in existence are not doing their work, we are in danger. If we do not look for the root cause as to why people bring toxic materials, we are in danger.

Recently, I got a letter from a Mugisu who lives in Canada. He said that they had identified for me second-hand beds for the hospital, but I needed to pay transport costs. Do you know the reason behind this? The hospital has thrown out the beds and wants somebody to remove them. These Ugandans have gone to pick them and would like us to bring them over here. I told them that if they had some money, let them bring it and we buy beds made locally. We shall not help the Canadians dispose of their items in Uganda just because we are badly off. We, therefore, must deal with the causes of such imports. 

Soap expires; you women who use lotions very much, they expire but you continue using them unknowingly. That is why some of you are becoming brown when you are supposed to be black, and some of you are becoming black when you are supposed to be brown. This is as a result of using expired soaps and lotions. The expiry dates are not put there but they expire. The toxins you are talking about – Sometimes we are the ones who go and import these things and use them; and at the end of the day, while you are keeping them in your houses they go bad. 

I would like to make a proposal. One, if the committee had wanted to do a good job, they should have invited people from the pharmaceuticals, people who import second-hand cars and  people who deal in items that expire because the moment something expires, it becomes toxic. Why should we import second-hand items from Japan, items which have not been checked by SGS? Now it has been said that SGS must check these items. Why would SGS allow these items to be imported to Uganda and yet when they come here, they are very dangerous for us.

Madam Speaker, it is true this law is long overdue. However, it looks like there are gaps which have been left out and at committee level some of us will move amendments to deal with how this law must be tightened. I thank you.

4.11
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, committee, for the report. I rise to support the motion but with some reservations.

I am aware that Uganda signed the Chemical Weapons Convention and we also went ahead and ratified it. I also think we are under obligation to domesticate it.

Having read through the report, I am compelled to comment on two issues. One issue is on the acid violence in this country. Many Ugandans, including me, have been very disturbed and have been asking what we can do to check this serious vice of people using acid against fellow Ugandans. It is rampant, a serious problem and a problem which needs an urgent law to address it. This is the law that will address this problem, but it is such an issue that we need to see it being checked immediately.

Having said this, I also would like to comment on one more issue of the Chemical Regulatory Authority. We have been passing laws here and creating authorities, but sometimes it becomes disturbing to see that whenever we are trying to come up with a strategy to handle an issue, we are thinking of creating an authority. Do we really have to create the Chemical Regulatory Authority? Is this the solution to the problem? Isn’t there a way we can handle and implement this law without creating an independent authority? I am looking at this in terms of the costs involved and efficacy of the authority to execute its duties.

I, therefore, propose that we look at another way other than taking the recommendation of creating an authority called the Chemical Regulatory Authority. We can find ways to domesticate this somewhere as an operating office and not necessarily create an authority. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you chairperson of the committee for this opportunity.

4.16
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the presentation of the report. 

I would like to also add my voice to the rest on the necessity for the regulation of dangerous chemicals in the country. I also want to examine whether the committee took stock of those chemicals that were implied, especially the chemical weapons; what exactly was meant, because we are domesticating it? What about the precursors of the chemical weapons whose importation or stock piling should also be prohibited? This Parliament should seek to understand what these precursory chemicals are. 

Whereas it is good to domesticate international conventions, we should not desist from inventions. Ugandan scientists also need to invent. If you make a law that tightens our borders and prohibits importation of certain chemicals which are described precursory, it could also be a barrier to the entry of chemicals which science could use for doing good things as well. That is why I think the committee would have been helpful if this matter was interrogated further, so that we can isolate the chemicals which are precursors of chemical weapons, which people can use separately so that they can combine them to make chemical weapons. I, therefore, think the committee chairperson, who could be privy to that information, informs this House so that we take good decisions.

Madam Speaker, what I would like us to insulate ourselves from is wholesale swallowing of whatever the conventions direct. Some countries have got some of these chemicals, which they can use for inventing other useful things which developing countries, including Uganda, could import. So, if we buy into everything without scrutiny, we would be preventing science from progressing. Otherwise, I thank this Parliament and the committee for this report and the scrutiny they were able to do. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the House and hon. Taaka, who raised the issue on cholera. 

I have checked and the staff from the Ministry of Health are already in the field supporting our health workers at the district level. Drugs have also been delivered by the National Medical Stores. The situation is under control and from the cases being reported, there is a reduction in the number of cholera cases being reported daily.

Whenever we have rains, we have these cholera outbreaks and that is why I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to join us in the campaign against open defecation because this is partially the problem. We have so far 42 cases that have been reported and from the staff, there are two deaths that have been reported. That is the information from the ministry.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the toxic chemicals, I would like to thank the committee for their report and also add my voice to those who have said that this law is long overdue. Most of us consume chemicals on a daily basis without knowing. Some of us apply them on our bodies without knowing. 

Actually, we have no stock or inventory of the chemicals that are in this country. It is, therefore, important that since we are just coming in with a law now, this law stands that test of time and we hope that it will deal with the challenges that we are facing now. We see increased cases of cancers as mentioned by earlier speakers; infertility is also is as a result of these chemicals and also diabetes – (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Opendi for giving way. The cholera situation in Busia is not only a Busia case but it emanates from Kenya. Whenever it rains, their pipes and sewage systems burst and all the dirt, waste and everything flows to Uganda. That is why you will find that the outbreak is just along the border. All those areas along the border are affected. 

Therefore, honourable minister, I would request that we go beyond our borders to see that we can curb that situation. Locally, we have tried to consult the people in Kenya but most times they do not care. We even go around those areas and clean but the same thing keeps on flowing. There are items we do not pay taxes for, which we import from Kenya, and these are dust, the floods and the waste which flows freely. You do not have to open the gates; they just come in and affect our people. Thank you very much.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much for that information. We will deal with our colleagues from the other side so that it becomes a bilateral matter. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill is long overdue as mentioned by the other Members and I am glad both sides of the House are supporting it. We have mentioned the cancers but infertility is also at times a result of some of these chemicals that we consume or come into contact with unawares.

Madam Speaker, when we move around the country, we have seen houses with asbestos roofs and they also have a negative effect. There are toxic chemicals that come out of them. So, it is timely that we have this law passed so that we can be able to move on and deal with some of these hazardous products that are still within the reach of the population. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last year I was involved in the Cancer Run organised by the Rotary and one of the things we were requested to do by the victims of acid attacks was to make a law regulating the importation, storage, transportation and access to acid. I want an assurance that this law is going to address that so that we can tell them that we have discharged our responsibility. I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION AND CONTROL BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands as part of the Bill-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, Parliament has adopted a certain procedure about commencement dates of Bills, why are we not following it? It says that the commencement date is the date the Bill is assented to. I would like to move an amendment so that the Act comes into force on the day of assent. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have objection to that amendment, that it becomes effective on the date of assent? 

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection since Parliament has been following the same procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Clause 2 will be amended as follows: In paragraph (a) insert the words, “this Act and” between the words, “by” and “the”. So that it reads, “acts or omissions prohibited by this Act and the Convention…” The justification is: to clarify it properly.

In paragraph (b), insert the words, “this Act and” between the words “under” and “the”. In paragraph (c), insert the words, “this Act and” between the words, “under” and “the” so that it shows clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is about interpretation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will come to it last.

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Clause 6, sub clause (1) is amended to read as follows: “The minister shall designate an authority to be called the National Chemicals Regulatory Authority within the ministry responsible for occupational safety and health”. 

Sub clause (2) should be amended as follows: substitute paragraph (k) with the following: “the ministry responsible for education”; this is instead of “institutions of higher learning”.

Also, insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (k) to read as follows: “Uganda National Meteorological Authority”, and renumber it accordingly. Which means that will become (l) and then the other (l) becomes (m).

Insert a new sub clause (4) immediately after sub clause (3) to read as follows: “The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of technical persons appointed by the chairperson to assist in the day-to-day operations of the Authority”. The justification is: to provide for management of the Authority.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have difficulties with the very principle of creating an authority. The Bill in the form in which it is presented is good and serves the purpose for which it was intended. If you permit me, I will read clause 6 verbatim: 
“The national authority 
The minister shall designate a national authority within the ministry responsible for occupational safety and health to serve as the focal point for purposes of implementing the Convention…” 

The only intention of the ministry was to have a focal point for purposes of the implementation of the convention. However, as hon. Lubogo had earlier indicated, Ugandans are in the habit of thinking that if you have any problem, you create an authority. The danger is that with the creation of an authority, you have costs added to our already overburdened budget. Do we really have to spend money in creating an authority with a secretariat, and staff for purposes of implementation of this convention?

If you look at sub clause (2) of clause 6, the membership given is a long list: The ministries responsible for foreign affairs, defence, internal affairs, and agriculture, animal Industry and fisheries; Internal Security Organisation; the ministry responsible for finance and Uganda Revenue Authority; the ministries responsible for trade, health, justice; NEMA; institutions of higher learning. Sub clause (3) then empowers the minister, by statutory instrument, to expand the membership of the focal authority. I am not convinced that we need to create an authority. I would want to formally move that we retain the clause as it appears in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to pick up from what hon. Odoi-Oywelowo is saying; you know, these days he thinks like me. 

Madam Chairperson, this should be a department in the ministry but not an authority. There are so many conventions which are signed in Uganda, does it mean when you sign a UN convention in respect to anti-money laundering you come to the Ministry of Finance and form an authority to deal with anti-money laundering and trafficking? We have a convention to deal with hunger; shall we come to the ministry responsible for hunger and create an authority?

Madam Chairperson, this is very dangerous. In fact, I think we should delete this term “authority” and simply form a department in the ministry to deal with the day-to-day issues of this convention. We should not create things of this nature. They are free to co-opt people who can come and help them. 

You cannot add more expenses here because these people who come to attend the meetings will take what we call a sitting allowance. These days when you go looking for somebody in the ministries, they tell you that they are attending a meeting in the Ministry of Gender. When you call them the following day, you find they are in the Ministry of Public Service attending a meeting. They are rotating every day to collect sitting allowance instead of doing their work. This is very dangerous to the people of Uganda.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the committee of gender on the amendment to create an authority. You are aware that the Ministry of Gender has been suffering with that department that did not have the capacity to even manage the occupational hazards that have been affecting people in this country. 

You are aware that we have been talking about all those chemicals that have been affecting our people in Uganda. We are not only looking at implementing the convention, but we are looking at toxic chemical prohibition and control. These chemicals are widely used in the country. This department you are talking about will not manage to handle all the challenges that we face in the country. They are talking about creating employment opportunities but we are looking at the challenges the country is facing in terms of managing toxic chemicals within the country. Why should we forego that instead of looking at the bigger picture?

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we maintain the authority but it can be reduced such that it effectively manages these issues. When you talk of Ministry of Trade and Industry, by the way they have challenges and cannot manage. When I looked at this authority I was so excited and thought that Members of Parliament would support it such that we can reduce these challenges. It is not a matter of getting jobs; we are looking at the health of the people of Uganda and the ministry needs to be empowered and it cannot be empowered just by giving it a department. I propose that the authority is the way to go and I beg members support this so that we can – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe we are just flogging a dead horse. If you read the provision, it says the minister shall designate a national authority within the ministry. It is not like setting up Uganda Investment Authority or Civil Aviation Authority; it is within that ministry.

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, first of all, this is a requirement by the convention, that we should have an authority. We already have the occupation and safety health department and that is why we have all these members at no cost. This will cost us nothing; it is just for management –(Interjections)- yes, it is mandatory by the convention that we should have that authority within the ministry -(Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the view that whenever we sign conventions we should not go into establishing authorities, otherwise we will have so many of them. This is why Cabinet passed this provision as it is, allowing the minister to designate a national authority within the ministry responsible for occupational safety and health. This saves us in terms of costs because we shall not need another budget to support a standalone authority. 

Most importantly, however, like hon. Nyakikongoro has just mentioned, on the health side we have various authorities and institutions that can handle this. We have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the National Drugs Authority which is being transformed into the National Food and Drugs Authority and we have a Bill that is coming to this House. I would like to request members, therefore, that let us maintain the provision as it is in the Bill. Thank you.

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, this matter of workers facing danger in their workplaces is a serious matter especially now at a time when we are moving towards industrialisation. Already, we have casualties of so many workers being maimed but there is no way they can address their problems. They, therefore, need some sort of –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am aware we are not discussing workers’ issues but we are discussing the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill. Toxins affect us, dogs and the environment; so those are not issues of the workers. Is my colleague in order to bring in issues of workers which should be under workers’ Bills to the Toxic and Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill?

THE SPEAKER: I did not see the order- 

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, what I was trying to say is that I support the minister, and this Bill is for the minister and not the committee. Therefore, I am wondering why hon. Nandala-Mafabi was calling me to order. I do not know why he is always in a hurry. 

I think these authorities have been too many. Our people have been burdened by a lot of expenses - KCCA, Uganda Revenue Authority, Uganda Roads Authority; we need to reduce on the expenses in Government. This is one way of reducing expenses, by leaving it to a department to handle some of these threats. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, there was a proposal from the chair.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, we are objecting. We want to maintain the clause as it is. The chair was trying to say that we create an authority and we are saying no; we are disagreeing with the committee report.  We are saying that we want it to remain as it is in the Bill. We want the committee to suggest a withdrawal for purposes of moving and we support the minister so that we stay with what is in the Bill because of costs. Mr Chairman, we are pleading with you to withdraw.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Well, as I read from the observations, I said that there is an inadequate monitoring and tracking system of the toxic industrial chemicals across the region. When we look at the department taking care of this, the Department of Occupational Safety and Health in the gender ministry, we want to be able to activate and empower this department. This is the reason as to why we want to create an authority which will be able to support this department.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the authority is already there under clause 6: “The minister shall designate a national authority within the ministry…” It is already there. What you were amending was to add the words, “National Chemicals Regulatory Authority”. You were amending the name.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Yes, it was the name. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: All that needs to be done is to amend the name.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: It is only the name, the National Chemicals Regulatory Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are amending the Bill to include the words, “National Chemicals Regulatory Authority”. The amendment is in the name but not in the structure.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Yes, it is only the name.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think what is in issue is that even when you go to the ministry, the department in charge of occupational health and safety is actually not even effective. What I think the Bill was trying to create is an authority so that when you are going to deal with these weapons of mass destruction, there is actually capacity to deal with whatever we are dealing with. What the Members were saying is that if what the minister proposed, that the nomenclature in the treaties signed is about an authority, we can have the authority in name but the staff will remain the same so that you can only expand the staff within the ministry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is what I am saying. His amendment is to include the three words, “National Chemicals Regulatory” to the word, “Authority”. 

DR BAYIGGA: We are used to the word “authority” to mean authorities such as Uganda National Roads Authority and so on. However, I think that this one is different from those authorities.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is different from those.

DR BAYIGGA: Why don’t we then change the nomenclature and we call it a special department. This is because the import of the National Chemicals Regulatory Authority will in future be interpreted differently so that it meets the requirement of other authorities that already exist. However, because the meaning which is imported in here is different, we would rather give it a name that can be acceptable but –(Interruption) 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, if we want to create somebody responsible for these chemicals and we fear the word “authority” because the nomenclature is used to mean an authority with a board, why don’t we call it the National Chemicals Regulatory Unit, because it is a department? If we are insisting on “authority”, why don’t we say, “National Chemicals Regulatory authority” with a small “a”? (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: I thank you for the information. Madam Chairperson, I think you can see that there is need –(Interjections)- Just a minute, honourable members; let me summarise. There is need to make this definition distinct from that of the other authorities that we have been thinking about. That is why I thought that the minister should establish a special department to handle that other than a regulatory authority which can be misinterpreted. That is my reasoning.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But will that department be able to summon the PS of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or of Ministry of Defence or Ministry of Internal Affairs? We should also look at the composition.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I thought that in order not to confuse this with existing authorities - what this envisages is some kind of entity, an authority to deal with a problem and not necessarily a corporate body that is established. So I do not think that it is something that we should baptise with a name. 

In my view, we are only talking about a national authority and not necessarily a body with a name. I thank that we are wrong in suggesting baptising this authority with a name. The moment we do that, then we shall be trying to create an authority similar to the likes of Uganda National Roads Authority and so on. I thought we should avoid giving it a name. So, I think the provision as it is in the Bill is sufficient.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was another amendment on the education ministry - to substitute “higher learning” with “Ministry of Education”. Are you oaky with retaining the name as it is?

MR BATARINGAYA: We have no problem with the Ministry of Education specifically. That is what the chairperson wanted instead of an institution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you know that he had moved two - 

MR BATARINGAYA: The others were all ministries but when it came to institutions, he is trying to substitute the institution with “Ministry of Education”. We have no objection.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think that we need to contextualise what we are dealing with. You see, the treaty implies that we are going to deal with weapons of mass destruction. They were calling for an authority because it would be employing specialised people who actually would be dealing with these weapons of mass destruction. I only wonder whether a department in the gender ministry can employ specialised people to deal with the substance that we are talking about. 

I will give an example. When the National Medical Stores collects expired drugs, they do not have the potential to dispose of them. Their work is to collect and then give to the National Medical Stores and then wait for a budget and the costs are high. Madam Chairperson, if we go by what we want to do to avoid costs and we create a department within the ministry, I wonder whether it will attract people who are actually going to deal with the problem. 

With your permission, Madam Chairperson, I would like to retract from my earlier position because even the minister does not seem to have the full grasp of what he is dealing with. You could see that he was going to say that it was just a question of the name and yet it is not. When it is an authority, it comes with the powers and financial muscle to employ specialised people to deal with weapons of mass destruction. Not anybody can destroy those weapons, just as it is with the National Medical Stores; when they collect the expired medicine, it will be very easy for them to destroy because there will be specialised people. The cost is very high if they have to wait for specialised people to come and do the destroying. I think the minister can make it better. What you are going to concede to is –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought that the minister told you that he is doing what the treaty required him to do and also what other countries are doing. Maybe he lifted it from the treaty.

MR MWIRU: Yes, but what he needs to understand is that they create authorities in other jurisdictions because those authorities are powerful and not in this context. Maybe you are looking at it in the context of the general elections, so that when someone does not go through that person can go to the authority.  It is not in that style. We are looking towards creating an authority which will have the financial muscle and competence to deal with what is in issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, have you looked at the functions of the authority? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I am reading something here in the appendix of the treaty itself; on page 44, something called an “organisation” is described and it says, “‘organisation’ means the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons established pursuant to Article VIII of this Convention”. So why don’t we create an organisation and we call it – (Interjections) - and we end with “organisation”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, have you looked at the functions under clause 7 because the functions are laid out there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before you go for the functions, I would like us to know what the word “authority” means. “Authority” means that you have authority. (Laughter) The Ugandan National Roads Authority has the authority to do roads, Uganda Revenue Authority to collect taxes, and National Drugs Authority to deal with drugs. 

Madam Chair, I have looked through the whole convention and I have not seen anything referring to an authority. I have gone through it. For purposes of moving on, we can say that the minister shall designate a unit within the ministry responsible for XYZ. We had wanted to leave out the authority but they said that is so bad, so what we can do is to have the unit authorised – (Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want to inform Members. Clause 8 says, 
“Collaboration with other government institutions and international bodies - 
The national authority may, to the extent required for the effective implementation of this Act and the Convention, collaborate with other government agencies, ministries, departments and agencies and international organisations.”

Honourable colleagues, for purposes of making progress, since the majority are in support of the clause as it is in the Bill, I suggest we support the position as it is in the Bill and allow the minister to move on. Clause 8 gives us leeway to deal with other agencies, even international bodies that may have the capacity that we do not have in the country. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question that paragraph (k) be amended as proposed - That is on education; are you objecting to paragraph (k) to substitute institutions of higher learning with the Ministry of Education? I put the question that sub clause (2)(k) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we proceed, I want you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Buckley High School, one of the oldest girls schools in the country. It is in Iganga District represented by hon. Muwuma and hon. Kwagala. You are welcome. (Applause) Their former head teacher is not here at the moment; I think they would have been happy to see hon. Mutyabule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, are we done with clause 6? Are we amending it as the committee suggested which means we are also creating a secretariat?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I only talked about (k), which was substituting “institutions of higher learning” with “Ministry of Education”.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Title

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Insert the words, “to provide for the control of other toxic chemicals” between the words “destruction” and “to”. So that words there provide for the control of other toxic chemicals.

The justification is: to provide for the control of other industrial and laboratory chemical substances that are not catered for in the schedule to this Act and the Convention.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION AND CONTROL BILL, 2015

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION AND CONTROL ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: But I think we amended the title. Just read the whole formulation. 

MR TERENCE ACHIA: We amended the long title in between the words “destruction” and “to” –

THE SPEAKER: Just read the new formulation. 

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Yeah; the information will be an Act to give effect to the convention and on the prohibition – 

THE SPEAKER: Just read the long title that we passed in the amendment - Okay, honourable members, title is settled and Bill passes, in its original form. Thank you very much. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOTTERY AND GAMING BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented and debated, what was waiting was committee stage. Therefore, let us also complete it.

THE LOTTERY AND GAMING BILL, 2013,

Clause 1

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 1 is about interpretation. I have some amendments I will move later -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is interpretation? Let us leave clause 1.

Clause 2

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I have a proposal on clause 2 on the establishment of the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board. Substitute for clause 2 the following new clause: “Establishment of the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board.

(1)	There is established a board known as the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board.
(2)	The board is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and may, for the discharge of its function under this Act –
(a)	sue or be sued on its corporate name;
(b)	acquire or manage, dispose of its movable or immovable property; and 
(c)	do all acts and things a body corporate may lawful do.
(3)	The application of the seal of the board on any document shall be authenticated by the signatures of the chairperson of the board and the chief executive officer and in absence of the chairperson by any two members of the board and the chief executive officer.
(4)	Every document purporting to be an instrument issued by the board, sealed and with the seal of the board and authenticated in accordance with this subsection (3) shall be deemed to be an instrument of the board and shall be received in evidence without further proof.”

Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether I can read this whole amendment verbatim because it is long. It is creating the board but also gives the objectives of the board. Should I go ahead and read the objectives and functions of the board?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, since you are proposing to delete the other one. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: “The objective of the board is to supervise and regulate the establishment, management and operation of the lotteries, gaming and casinos in Uganda and to protect the citizens from the adverse effects of gaming in Uganda.

Functions of the board

The board shall -
(a)	regulate and supervise the establishment, management and operation of lotteries, gaming and casinos in Uganda;
(b)	license casinos in Uganda;
(c)	licence persons operating in casinos and any other employee of a casino;
(d)	improve gaming devices or equipment;
(e)	licence gaming premises;
(f)	assess impose and collect a gaming tax;
(g)	improve games that may be made available in a casino;
(h)	approve and set standards for the supply, installation or adaptation of the gaming software;
(i)	participate and contribute to good causes in accordance with this Act;
(j)	protect the members of the public from adverse effects of gaming including promotion of transparency and accountability;
(k)	implement Government policy relating to lotteries, casinos and gaming;
(l)	promote public awareness of the gaming industry;
(m)	receive, investigate and arbitrate complaints relating to lotteries, casinos and gaming and take appropriate action;
(n)	advise and make recommendations to the minister on matters relating to lotteries, casinos and gaming;
(o)	perform any other function conferred upon it under this Act.

Powers of the board 

To carry out its objective, the board may exercise, perform, and discharge any of the following powers:
(a)	Control, supervise and administer the assets of the board in such manner and for such purposes to promote the purpose for which the board is established.
(b)	To conduct any investigations or inquiry relevant to the gaming industry in Uganda.
(c)	Conduct any inspection and examination of books of accounts, records, returns and any documents or premises of a licenced person.
(d)	Issue guidelines, directives or instructions to any licenced person for proper management of casinos, lotteries or games.
(e)	Search the premises of any licenced person in accordance with this Act. 
(f)	Delegate any of its powers other than the powers of revocation, licencing, delegation or variation of such delegation and
(g)	Do such other things to ensure efficiency in the management of casinos, lotteries or games.

Composition of the board

(1)	The board shall consist of -
(a)	a representative of the Ministry responsible for Finance appointed by the permanent secretary;
(b)	a representative of the Ministry responsible for Internal Affairs appointed by the permanent secretary;
(c)	three persons not being public officers who are knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to administration of casinos, gaming and private sector management; and
(d)	the chief executive officer who is an ex-officio member.

(2) 	A person shall not be eligible for appointment if such a person is an employee or director of any company, firm or institution where such employment or directorship may lead to a conflict of interest.

(3)	The minister shall appoint a chairperson from among the members appointed in sub-section (1)(c).

(4) 	The members of the board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in the instruments of appointment.

(5) 	The minister shall in appointing the members of the board ensure that there is a balance of gender, skills and experience.

(6) 	The members of the board shall be persons of high moral character, proven integrity and shall be fit and proper persons.”

The justification is that like on benchmarked best practices, there is need to establish an autonomous institution in order to effectively regulate the overgrowing gambling industry. This is to strengthen regulations and management of that sector. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, looking at the functions of the board, in (a) we are talking about regulating and supervising the establishment, management and operations of lotteries, gaming and casinos in Uganda. There is this term that is commonly being used everywhere, “betting”. When I do not find it here, I get concerned. I would like to be assured whether it is covered by the nomenclature that is appearing here.

Secondly, in (b) we are talking about licensing casinos in Uganda. It is not talking about licensing lotteries anywhere in the functions. When it comes to licensing of gaming in (e), it is talking about licensing gaming premises. I am wondering whether that is inclusive enough to cover the activity of gaming itself. I thought that we are not necessarily licensing the premises but the activity – the real thing that is done in those premises. I thought that we should consider some amendments in those areas.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Mine is an observation regarding the numbering of the sections. Clause 2 is establishment. However, when you go down – objective of the board, functions of the board, powers of the board and composition of the board are hanging, yet they have sub-clauses under them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want some marginal note relating to that part?

MS KAMATEEKA: I think objective of the board should be clause 3; functions could be clause 4; power of the board could be clause 5, etc.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, on a lighter note, since I came to Parliament in 2001, I have never seen hon. Nyanzi very smart. Today he is very smart. (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, we are making a law for the Minister of Finance, who is not available. I cannot see the Minister of Finance; I am worried.

From what hon. Amos Lugoloobi has raised, if you read (e) – license gaming premises – it is very dangerous. He can license my house as a gaming premise. He can even license a trading centre yet we are trying to say there are those machines which have been brought by the Chinese and are in every trading centre. As Parliament, we must come up with designations and say, there must be designated areas like we did for smoking – tobacco – that you can only smoke from a designated area. Likewise, in gambling and betting, we must have a designated area. It is not a matter of licensing. They must give a license to a designated area for the purpose.

We want to avoid every shop becoming a licensed premise for gambling. It must be designated so that everybody knows in the newspapers that if I go to Busamaga – where I come from – there is a trading centre called “X” where there is gambling. It should be known that they have designated a certain area which is publicly known. That is number one area where I move an amendment.

Secondly, there is “betting”. We are saying “gambling” and “gaming”. I do not know if that means betting. I think we should go ahead to add “gaming, gambling, betting” because these are serious terms. You can go to somebody and they say, “I am not gaming; I am gambling.” Therefore, “gambling” is not covered by law.

Therefore, I would like to move an amendment in light of what hon. Amos Lugoloobi brought that the minister shall designate –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Do you want to start with betting because betting has been defined in the interpretation clause. “Betting” means making or accepting a bet on -
    a) outcome of the race; 
    b) likelihood of anything occurring or not occurring; and
    c) whether anything is or is not.

Therefore, “betting” has been catered for. It is defined. If you want it, we can also put it in the function.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have made it easier for me. Since it has been noticed in the interpretation, it means it is serious. Therefore, it must be reading, “To regulate and supervise the establishment, management and operation of lotteries, gaming, betting, gambling and the casinos in Uganda.” The justification is to ensure that we put everything under the armpit of the law. If that is agreeable, I can move. 

On the second one, “licensed casinos in Uganda” is fine. However, we need to put designation. The minister can say, “The board shall designate premises for gaming, betting” all those things above. If we agree on that, I have no problem.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think it is a nice proposal to say, “License designated gaming premises” – I do not know.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Licensing and designating are different.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Can hon. Mafabi come back on the microphone and redraft what he proposed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I think the expression is “to designate”-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Designating is important.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Designate premises for gaming, gambling, betting, lotteries and casinos.

MS KAMATEEKA: What is the difference between gazetting and designating? I thought they were the same. If you gazette an area for gambling, you have designated it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know for gazettement, you can say that the whole of Luwum Street is gazetted as a betting area and you publish it so that everybody knows that if you go to Luwum Street, that is the street for - You must publish it actually in the gazette that it is the area for this activity.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the chairman has agreed that we first amend (a) to put “lotteries, gaming, betting, gambling and casinos in Uganda.” That is the first amendment.

The second one is to deal with licensed casinos. What we should do here is to designate premises and license for lotteries, gaming, gambling, betting and casinos in Uganda.

The justification is that we would like Government to first designate and after, license. If I designate you but you do not meet the license functions, I do not licence you. I could have designated your premise but I do not need to license you if you are not meeting the licence function.

Then the other one is amendment of 2. 

“(d) Approval of all equipment of lottery, gaming, betting, gambling and casinos in Uganda.” The reason is they can programme a machine and cheat people. People can put money and the machine releases it maybe after two weeks and people lose. Therefore, it must also be approved. 

“Approval” means they have tested the equipment and it has chances of releasing or keeping money - (Laughter). We must therefore have approval of equipment or devices of gaming, lottery, betting, gambling and casino. My sister is asking questions about the machines of the Indians. They will now be tested but held in a designated premise.

Madam Chairperson, I do not know where we shall place the age of gamblers.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The age is being talked about in the later clauses. It is there. As we go ahead, we shall find some prohibition of minors. I assure you that it will come.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, even if we are talking of age, there are some groups of people who are at gambling age who should not go there; for example, soldiers and university students. If you give tuition fee to your 21 year old son who is in his fourth year of engineering and because age allows him, he may go and gamble the money. Therefore, we must also tie those who are school-going. 

I was in London on mature entry study and in Leeds they said, this place is not for students even when I was of working class. Therefore, you have to be careful.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I propose that we discuss that when we get there. Let us do away with one first. 

However, Madam Chairperson, I was wondering whether the amendment he just made does not have a consequential effect on (g) where it says “approve games that may be made available in a casino”. Do we not have games in these other activities? We have games across and not just casinos alone?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is okay.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Does the Gaming Tax apply to all the five? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to find out more on taxes. 

I was also about to raise taxes. Supposing I make a profit and that is my income, that should be Income Tax. If I have chargeable income - therefore, we need to differentiate these two taxes. On whom do we levy Gaming Tax? Is it on me who gambled and got the money or the person who has the machine? Is it what he makes in a year after balancing out what he is supposed to pay?

We need to understand this. Is Gaming Tax to be levied on me who came with nothing but has now got a thousand? Must I pay Gaming Tax or is it the owner of the machine or casino to be charged? I need to understand this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is important we know who is liable to pay that tax.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Assess, impose and collect a Gaming Tax. Since we are also going to create a fund, every operator whether a casino or lottery is going to pay an annual tax on those games. Those will be brought to Parliament annually either to be changed or something like that.

That is why we are creating -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it tax which the owner of the facility is liable to pay and not the one who come to gamble?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, what the chairperson needs to know is that once a gambler has received money, that is income to a gambler and it forms part of the chargeable income under section 19 of the Income Tax Act.

Therefore, a tax must be levied on a gambler because he does not file any return. A gambler’s work is to move around and gamble to get money. What he puts in the pocket is his income. There must be a system. Since what a gambler has received as income forms part of the chargeable income, then a tax should be levied on him.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: What is in the principal reads: 
“
    1. To establish a lottery and gaming fund.
    2. To provide for licensing and regulation of lotteries and gaming.
    3. To provide for taxation of casinos and gaming activities.”

It is the principal. It is saying to provide for taxation of casinos and gaming activities. That is why it is coming here as a function.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to make some provision. If you say “assess, impose and collect a Gaming Tax”, then a gambling tax must also be there. It is because we have up here defined lottery, gaming, betting and casinos. Therefore, it must change.

Why I am very eager about this law is because I have participated in formation of one international law. When I come to gamble, the chances of getting anything to begin with is zero. When I put in my $100, it means I expect nothing. If anything comes out such as $20 or $30, it is called a windfall. That means I came expecting to get nothing. 

Therefore, whatever somebody comes with or whatever he pockets is supposed to be liable to tax. This is because that is his chargeable income. When you have carried out your gambling and finished, they will ask you to declare what you got out of the machine and not what you came with. 

The reason as to why it is even called gambling is because you invest and get nothing out of it. I am telling you that. I participated in the UK law. What it means here is that if you come in and start gambling and get $1000, you must pay tax on the $1,000 irrespective of what you inserted in. This is because you came expecting to get nothing. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: So, what do you propose?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to propose, as hon. Mwiru comes, that we are going to assess, impose and collect - Therefore, when we are making assessment, it must be both on the gambler and the owner of the equipment. The owner of the equipment will balance what he made at the end of the year. He will remove wear and tear for his machine. He will remove his rental and he will use the balance to pay Cooperation Tax or Income Tax if he is an individual. There are two types of people to be taxed here.

I want to propose -(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Nandala-Mafabi for yielding the Floor. I have difficulties with arguments of my brother, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. He says that if you put $100 in a slot machine and receive $20 back, you must pay tax on all the $20 that you have received as a windfall. The word he uses is “windfall”    

I do not see the relationship between $100 and $20 being described as a windfall. If you put in $100 and you get back $20, you have actually made a net loss of $80. I am not very good at mathematics or accounting but common sense would tell you that a person who puts $1,000 and gets back $200 has certainly lost $800. The $800 is the net income of the operator of the machine and he will be charged on the basis of that at the end of the year. 

Therefore, why must you tax the person who has lost and at the same time tax the one who has gained? That is the clarification I am seeking. 

MR BADDA: I think we have to make laws that are implementable. If you impose a tax on the gambler who does not keep books, how will you then asses his or her tax? How will you levy tax from such a person who enters with a coin and moves out with some money? How will you implement it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The people who gamble under normal circumstances should be people with excess income if you had never known -(Interruption)

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. However, in Uganda it is different. If you go to a betting house today where they bet on soccer, you will find that someone has only Shs 2,000 in their pocket as the income for the whole day and they will invest all of it hoping to probably benefit. Therefore, in Uganda it is a different scenario. It is actually for the poor and not for the rich. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is like the Tobacco Bill that we passed. What you wanted is to curtail people from smoking. We are doing the same thing here. We are trying to curtail people from gambling, if you had not known that. 

World over, the people who gamble must have excess income. This is because when you go there and take your Shs 2,000 as you are saying, you will sleep hungry. You will become a thief because if they take it, you will go and steal. You must have weighed people going there who have nothing because they will steal. To do that, you must punish them and this is how you punish them. 

If you go there with Shs 2,000, the expected income is zero; it is a game of chance. That is why they call it a windfall. The moment you expect nothing out of it, anything you get above zero is income - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I am giving hon. Nandala-Mafabi information. Last year in 2014 on the Tax Bills, we passed here a Winning Tax. Whoever goes for gambling and wins, there is already a tax in existence and it is being collected by this board. Therefore, they get money from the gamblers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we are spending a lot of time here. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is the heart of the Bill. If we do not tie it here, you have no chance. Even the Kamuli people will suffer. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Can I give information? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make a proposal. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The information is by way of an amendment on (f) asses, impose and collect all applicable taxes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that would help. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I think that covers everything because the duty of setting which tax to pay is by a different authority which is Parliament. Therefore, the work of the board is simply to asses based on the existing tax policy. They impose based on the existing tax policy. 

These applicable taxes are actually elsewhere. It is not in this law. What we are simply doing is helping Government to collect these taxes. The tax authorities are at liberty to designate agents to collect taxes on their behalf. I would feel that if we simply said “assess, impose and collect”, all applicable taxes would be sufficient to handle the problem. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to understand what we are dealing with. If you go to the villages today, the young people have moved away from production. They are not in their gardens. They have taken those gambling houses as a source of income. What we are saying is that by creating a tax on the gambler and once the tax is assessed under the regulations, any gambling house which has been licensed as they pay out income to a gambler must deduct a tax. 

I am very sure you have travelled to other jurisdictions. Once you must pay tax, it is deducted at source. That is what we are looking for in that. That is why we are creating an obligation by virtue of that amendment hon. Nandala-Mafabi proposed, on the person having the machine and carrying out the gambling because he is the one who knows who has got a windfall or an income in that respect. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask whether the owner of the gambling facility keeps records? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to answer that. The machine records what is coming in and what it pays out. It is like a cash sale. What you are paying out is very clear. It will be withheld at source if it has been passed here as a law. 

What hon. Amos Lugoloobi is raising cannot be imposed. They can only collect. What we are doing here, Madam Chairperson, is that (f) should say, “Collect lottery, gaming, betting, gambling and the casino tax from both the owners and the gamblers.” That should be it all.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to know; if I go to gamble, would they say that Rebecca Kadaga received Shs 20,000, Nandala walked out with Shs 100,000? - That is what I would like to know for purposes of keeping the record.

MR EBIL: The other information that I would also like to seek is that, that is the formal gambling sector that you are talking about. However, there is the other one which is even worse; these people at drinking places like “waragi” places playing cards and gambling off all their income. Therefore, if that is the interest that you are talking about, how will you regulate the other informal way which is illegal?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the minister. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, in (h), we are providing for the board to approve and set standards of the gaming software; it will therefore be easy for the board to know how this will be done. This means that every person who is going to engage in the business of gambling must comply to a standard of a certain software which can actually take care of what you are asking about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there have been some proposals for – 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. How shall we get to know what hon. Ebil mentioned; they go and play “matatu” and they are also in Indian clubs which do that full time from evening to dawn. How do we get tax out of those ones?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have asked the board to gazette the gaming areas but also designate the facilities where you can do that.

MR BAHATI: Those who will be doing that kind of business beyond this law, it will be considered illegal and they therefore should not do that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended in relation to the function of the board as has been proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 3, with a head note of “Tenure of office of members of the board”, replace sub-clause (1) as follows: 
“A member of the board other than the CEO shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for only one more term.”

The justification is to make it clear that re-appointment of a member can only happen once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, gambling is like smuggling. If you are saying that a person is to be eligible for re-appointment, it is very dangerous. At least this should be treated as an exception; we know what we are doing. These people should be there for only one term, non-renewable. Gambling is a terrible thing. It is like marijuana or cocaine. Therefore, to avoid this problem, the board will serve only once and move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, there will be no continuity and no institutional memory; everybody just goes? Really is that what you want?

MR BAHATI: We know what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has in mind but I think that it is important that institutions have the memory and one term, after three years, I think is not too much. We are building institutions and we also have people in this country who are honest and we will need to have people who have the knowledge of what the board has been doing. I therefore think that one more term after three years is really not too much; it takes care of the fears of hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 4, Madam Chairperson, functions of the board: delete the entire clause.

The justification is that this has been covered in details under the functions and powers of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 4, deleted.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I substitute for clause 7 the following new clauses: “Secretariat of the board: The board shall have a secretariat headed by the chief executive officer and consisting of other staff as may be necessary for proper and efficient discharge of the object and function of the board. 

2) The secretariat shall have such functions as may be assigned to it by the board.”

I think this will be another sub-clause in there: 
“The Chief Executive Officer 
1) The board shall have a CEO who shall be appointed by the minister on recommendation of the board and on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment. 
2) A person shall not be appointed CEO unless that person - (a) has academic or professional qualifications in Accounting, Finance, Economics, Laws, Taxation and Private Sector Corporate Management with experience and confidence to manage the affairs of the board; and 
(b) is a person of high moral character and proven integrity. 

3. The CEO shall be an ex-officio member of the board.”

This one shall also be a sub-section in that clause: 	

“Functions of the CEO
(1) 	Is responsible for the day-to-day operations and administration of the board. 
(2) 	Subject to this Act and to the general supervision and control of the board, the chief executive officer is responsible for - 
a) 	implementing the objectives, policies and programmes of the board; 
b) 	the proper management of the funds and the property of the board; 
c) 	the organisation, control and discipline of the staff of the board; 
d) 	the development of an operating plan to guide the board; 
e) 	the development of an economic, efficient and cost effect internal management structure; and 
f) 	performing any other function which may be assigned to him or her by the board.

(3) 	The chief executive officer is, in the performance of his or her functions, answerable to the board.”

Another sub-section which shall be re-numbered is as follows: 

“Tenure of office and remuneration of the chief executive officer 
1) 	The CEO shall hold office for five years and is eligible for re-appointment for only one more term. 
2) 	The CEO shall cease to hold office if - 
a) 	he or she resigns;  
b) 	he or she is declared bankrupt or insolvent or has made an arrangement with his or her creditors;
c) 	he or she is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude; 
d) 	he or she is removed from office by the minister on the recommendations of the board for - 
i) 	inability to perform the functions of his or her office; 
ii) 	arising from infirmity of body or mind; 
iii) 	misbehaviour or misconduct; or 
iv) 	incompetence.”

Another sub-section: “Staff of the board 
    i. Subject to sub-section (8) (1), the board shall appoint other staff as may be necessary for proper and efficient discharge of the objects and functions of the board under this Act. 
    ii. The staff appointed under sub-section (1) shall be paid such remunerations and allowances as the board may determine.”

Another sub-section: 

“Exemption from personal liability: A member or staff of the board shall not in his or her personal capacity be liable in civil proceedings in respect of any acts or omission done in good faith in the performance of his or her functions under this Act.” I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment concerning the tenure of office of the chief executive officer. I propose that it should be three years.

The justification is that the sector we are dealing with is a very terrible sector and the Minister of Finance will agree with me that the Auditor-General has raised it in his report to Finance that your department in charge of this section has not been collecting taxes from the existing ones.

If there is connivance and someone is in office for five years and is going to get another five years, that will be a terrible period for the country. It should be three years renewable once. I beg to move.

MR LUGOLOOBI: In (2) (a) in the amendment relating to the academic and professional qualifications, I think we should amend it to read as academic or professional qualifications in any of the following:

    1. Accounting
    2. Finance and others. Otherwise this will create a problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we okay with the three years for the chief executive officer being reduced from five to three?  

MR BAHATI:  Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 do stand –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is talking about consultancy. Madam Chairperson, I have never seen us making laws where we allow organisations to look for consultancy. They have staff; in case they have a problem that the staff cannot perform, they are free to do consultancy. I would like to ask the minister why it is in this specific law.

When we were making the URA Act, why didn’t we allow them to get consultants? When we passed the UNRA Act, why didn’t we say they could get consultants? Why allow this one specifically to have consultants? This should be deleted because they are free to do it unless there is some motive why you want it in this particular case. I would therefore like to propose that clause 8 be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what was the rationale for this provision?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, what we had in mind was that this is a specialised board. It is also a new thing that we are engaged in and we wanted to make it clear in the law. Removing it does not do any harm. We can still go ahead and hire consultancy.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information that calibrating machines for casinos is a technical thing. For instance, someone is setting up a casino and is going to reap from innocent people. We therefore need somebody who knows these machines. However, since it is about hiring; it is within their means to do that.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, actually the explanation is found in clause 2 as it was contained in the Bill. The board, as the minister had proposed, had the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Finance, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Solicitor-General and these are non-technical persons. However, we have since moved away from this position to a better position proposed by the committee. Therefore, we no longer need clause 8 – the provision for consultancy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, deleted.

Clause 9

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, on Funds of the Board; the committee proposes to delete sub clause (2). It is covered in clause 10(2)(a) and 10(2)(a) reads: “Defraying the approved exercises of the board.”

MR NANDALA–MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have already now known the funds of the board and we have now made the law clear. 

First of all, the board has an account to be opened which is approved by the Accountant–General. That is how we have managed them under the laws - in the Public Finance Management Act and the Accountability Act. We should not go against it.

Secondly, that means that all monies collected must be taken to the Consolidated Fund or the Ministry of Finance will come here with the budget of the Lotteries and Gambling Board and that will be approved and it will be Parliament to give them the funds. Therefore, clause 9 should be changed because the funds of the board will consist of the money appropriated by Parliament. The justification is known and I am sure hon. Bahati understands what I am talking about.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 9 reads: “Funds of the Board shall consist of -
    (a) applications and license fees since they will be getting money from licenses and application fees;
    (b) money from the funds approved by the minister;
    (c) money appropriated by parliament;
    (d) grants, gifts, donations from Government or other sources;
    (e) any other fees charged for services and activities rendered by the board on any other monies that the minister may approve.

We know very well that in their functions, it already says they shall impose –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is for deletion.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA:  Funds for the board may be applied for payment or discharge of expenses, obligations and abilities and for payment of any remuneration, allowances payable under this Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, even if they collect fees and licenses, we shall appropriate and the Minister of Finance will direct that from what you collect, retain this amount but after it has been approved here. That is what we call appropriation in aid.

What we are trying to say is that if you say the application fees shall be maintained and is not part of the budget, you are making a mistake. I know that is why hon. Bahati is trying to talk to you. Here we shall say the funds of the board shall be appropriated by Parliament and when they are appropriating in Parliament, you can say, when you collect such an amount of money, you can only retain up to the amount which has been approved. The moment you say that the fees should be retained and you come here and appropriate more money, you are making a big mistake. Even the fees should be collected and be appropriated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, they should be part of the budget.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we should also read 9 in relation to 10 because it is saying: “(1)There is established a lottery and gaming fund which shall be paid - a) all monies in 9(1);
b) the proceeds from the national lottery after deducting expenses of conducting the lottery.” This fund is a bit unique because one per cent of the annual turnover of every lottery or gaming business licensed under this Act - therefore, lotteries are also going to be licensed by this law. It is therefore a process and it is much bigger than a small fund. 
“(2) That the fund shall be managed and controlled by the board for purposes of - 
    (a)  defraying, supporting, contributing-"  -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They were making two mistakes; one, the funds of the board for its expenditures shall be money appropriated by Parliament. The one you are talking about of the lottery and gambling is okay. What happens is that it becomes due to Government after the lottery has gone through. You pay off the lottery and the balance is what will be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. As a fund, this money is still a contingent account in respect of the money collected out of lottery. Therefore, when the lotteries are done, that is when you can transfer it but for the expenses of the day-to-day running of the board, you must appropriate it here in Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those are things like rent, salaries - these two funds are different.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I also agree with hon. Nandala- Mafabi but I propose that application and license fees should be transferred to (10) lottery and gaming fund -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are those funds?

MR KABAJO: Under (9), “The funds of the board shall consist of (a) Application and license fees…” but if we agree with what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, the funds of the board shall consist of monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the board. That means these other parts must be transferred from there to somewhere they fit better. I can see that collection of applications and license fees fits better under (10), where they established a lottery and gaming fund into which it is paid. For example, application and licence fees and others and in that case you do not mix up things. Funds of the board will only be what is appropriated by Parliament to the board. Then all the other collections will form part of the lottery and gaming fund. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: In sub clause (2), (a) insert the words, “as appropriated by Parliament” at the end of the provision and (b) insert new paragraph (d) as follows: “d) Addressing the negative effects of gambling.” 

The justification is to allow Parliament appropriate the money for expenses of the board and also mandate the board to address the negative effects of gambling.

Insert a new sub clause 3 as follows:
“(3) The monies received in sub section (1) shall be retained by the board for purposes of supporting, contributing or participating in good causes in accordance with this Act.”

The justification is to ensure that the money levied on the licences is only used to support good causes. I beg to move.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the amendment being moved but when you read clause 10 (2) in the Bill, it has an effect of taking away the aspect of appropriation we have been talking about. Sometimes even giving the Minister of Finance powers to determine where the money can be spent and advice the board - I would propose that 10 (2) be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is going to manage the lottery and gaming fund, if we just delete?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the proposition is that the board will have a strategic plan, will have a work plan and a budget which they will be submitting to Parliament and we shall approve and create money for their operations so that all money they collect as non-tax revenue will be paid into the Consolidated Fund.

We are now exposing all the funds they will be collecting to be spent as per the board. Looking at what the chairman had proposed that they will be spending for good causes, it is up to the board to say that we now are going to spend for good causes and they will find good causes as they so wish.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, in effect, we should not be creating a fund. Instead we are saying that all the money that is being collected is remitted to the Consolidated Fund because the moment we create a fund, then we are talking about the management of that fund. This money as collected should be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, from what we have been discussing, again we can see that perhaps this part about reporting and contributing to and participating in good causes would then fall under the functions of the board or something like that, whereby when they are making their budget for the year, they would make a provision for contributing to good causes. This is from that budget which has been appropriated by Parliament that they will pick money to contribute to the good causes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we do not need a fund?

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I still think we need to define what will be collected. For example, we have already agreed that application and licence fees will be collected by these people. We have already said that grants, gifts and donations will also be collected and all other fees charged for services and activities rendered by the board will also be collected.

I would think that the best thing is to first collect this money into that fund then later on transfer it to the Consolidated Fund but it has to initially be collected and then later on transferred.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, to begin with, I agree with hon. Mwiru to delete (2) because if the board wants something, it will be put in the budget. They are free to include even capital investments in the budget. They can also plan for trying the negative effects, maybe publicity. They are free to do it in their budget since we have agreed, we shall approve it here. Therefore, subsection (2) should be deleted.  

For the lottery and gambling fund, it is assumed that the Government of Uganda will have a lottery board and that the tickets belong to the National Lottery. If they really belong to Government, it would be okay to maintain a fund because they will first collect the money, pay the winners and after, the balance will be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. The money which should go there must not have a contingent liability.

If Government is going to have a national lottery board whereby it will print its lottery and gamble because they want to raise money, not like the one of Sudhir of scratch here and win –(Laughter)- then that would be different. There I would agree to have the lottery and gambling fund. However, the purpose of it will be for collecting the money of the lottery and paying the expenses of winners. The balance will then be transferred to the Consolidated Fund because already the expenditures of the board have been appropriated by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? There is 2(a),(b),(c).  Read all of it. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think they want to delete (2) including (a) displaying the approved expenses of the board, supporting, contributing to good causes -the whole of (2) should be deleted. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, that part of the good causes needs to be transferred somewhere else rather than just deleting it. We want to recognise that this lottery will be used to support and contribute to good causes. We therefore need to put it somewhere within the law, whether it is not this particular place.

Madam Chairperson, I think that issue of good causes is redundant in this case because if we have said that Parliament is going to appropriate as per the budget, that means every expenditure will have been budgeted and those so-called good causes will be in the budget. Therefore, putting it here is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They will be coming here to present their proposals and plans which include supporting good causes and then this House will approve.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like us to qualify that the good causes will include supporting the She Cranes; the national teams because usually what we benchmark is that Government does not plan for those national teams including athletics that is why they keep begging. We had thought that since this money can be used to sponsor such national teams as a good cause for the public.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think under the law it is a requirement for these betting companies to do corporate social responsibility when they are licensing; therefore, the good cause will be taken care of under that aspect. 

On the issue of the She Cranes and the Uganda Cranes, I think since you are in government, you’ll advise the Ministry of Education and Sports to take care of that.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to invite hon. Paul Mwiru again to reflect on subclause (2) because we are creating a fund and we need to know how this fund is going to operate and be managed. 

Subclause (2) says, “The fund shall be managed and controlled by the board” and that is a good statement because if you create a fund, you cannot just leave it hanging. How is it going to be managed and for what purpose? We do not want also to expose it. I think it is better we again look at how we can tighten too rather than just leaving the fund hanging anyhow.

Secondly, I know it can eventually go to the Consolidated Fund and one can argue that why do you have to create it anyway? You can still collect and take it to the Consolidated Fund without creating this but when you create it, then you must be sure on how you are going to manage and control it.

This money which comes from – we cannot say gambling and gaming is a good business that is why we are restricting it and it should also benefit the community. It could be for charity or whatever and that is why it is not good business per say and we are restricting it.

Clause (2)(a)and(b), I do not find any problem with them; since you are always suspicious of ministers, you might say that the minister may be misused the fund, leave it out. However, (a) and (b) are very good things to reflect on.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, what we are talking about - we have had problems where funds are collected and not sent to the Consolidated Fund directly; that is why even in many government ministries, where they collect non-tax revenue and receive the money, at the end of the financial year they are supposed to transfer this money collected to the Consolidated Fund on weekly basis but they do not. That is why we are saying here that whatever you would like to do, honourable minister, it is going to be covered because I do not assume that the ministry operates the way maybe you were imagining. We would like to assume that entity is going to have a strategic plan and a work plan and a budget. Therefore, every financial year it is going to inform us that we intend to undertake these activities so that we shall give them the money and they will be running.

MR BAHATI: No, what we would like you to help us as a lawyer - you have created it, okay but you have left it and you are not even in the law stating that after balancing out expenses, you transfer this money to the Consolidated Fund. You are just leaving a fund hanging.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have been consulting with the chairperson that they are creating a national lotteries board and if we are going to create it, then we will need a fund. However, what hon. Bahati is rising means - I will now ask hon. Mwiru here to help me. Do you want 10(1) to remain?

If you agree that clause 10(1) should remain, then we can say there will be established a lottery club and a gambling fund which shall be managed and controlled by the board for the following function; proceeds from national lottery after deducting expenses thereafter transferring it at the end of the financial year to the Consolidated Fund.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I will give an example; under the law, even most of these lotteries which are being carried out by many companies like telephone companies are supposed to pay taxes to Government but because there is no law under which they will pay the taxes, that is why they have been just collecting money meaning that when we talk about lottery, it is not necessary that Government must participate in conducting the lottery.
 
No, the law is to the effect that whoever carries out a lottery the way it has been done by most of these telephone companies, when they send you a message and say respond to this and you will earn this and when you send they deduct money from your phone; that is gambling.

I am saying that we never even needed one because it is not going to be Government to conduct this lottery; whoever is going to carry out this act of a lottery must pay a tax. I will leave it at that perspective. That would mean that we do not need (1) and (2); what we need is that the board must tell us that in the year under review these are the activities we are going to undertake, please appropriate for us money for purposes of efficient running of the board for us to undertake these activities and that is all we are saying. It is up to us to have the mechanism to know who is conducting a lottery and gambling so that whoever is doing it, the law will catch up with that person. Therefore, we need to create efficiency of the board to see that their work is to put into place a mechanism of collecting all money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, let us find a solution and move.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, since we want (1) to be there then let us say the funds shall be managed and controlled by the board for purposes of - 
(i) 	we stay the defraying of the approved expenses of the board from the national lotteries; and
(ii) 	sending that money to the Consolidated fund.

The fund is created first of all to run the national lottery and secondly, to send the balance to the Consolidated Fund.

“Managed and controlled by the board…” it is collecting money for the national lottery, where they remove expenses and then the balance is returned to the Consolidated Fund.

Two, any other money returned to the Consolidated Fund. Money should be moving from that fund to the Consolidated Fund after those operations.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we are about to agree but the issue is; there are lotteries which will be conducted not by Government, which are not national lotteries. Therefore, the board should have no business to deal with that money and that is what we are saying; that is why we should separate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is better we read it very carefully. The information I would like to give hon. Mwiru is (b) says, “The proceeds from the national lottery after deducting expenses of conducting the lottery” that means that money is now meant for Consolidated Fund. Section (c), one per cent of the annual turnover of every lottery or gambling business licensed under this Act the one per cent - that means we collect that and it should go to the Consolidated Fund. 

I think, if you do not mind, the information I would like to give you is that we can have the fund to deal with (b) and (c) but the management and control of the fund which is (2) shall be by the board.  How do you bring in the Consolidated Fund? 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. By definition, what do you mean by “management and control” and you are also handing it over to the board? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think you have made it better. I think we should delete this one –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We delete (2)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, (2) but where do we send the money after deducting expenses and the one per cent? We must agree where we will send it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And who sends it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, and who sends it. Let us agree and then we can say, “A board shall collect the proceeds from the national lottery after deducting the expenses of conducting the lottery.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t we stand it over as we do the others while you think and try to sketch the proposed amendment? Okay, let us stand over it and we go to Clause 11.

Clause 11

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On clause 11, the person to approve the opening of accounts is the Accountant-General. “The Board shall, with the approval of the Accountant-General, open and maintain such bank accounts necessary for the exercise of its functions.” That is all and you stop there. Then you can say, “For their functions as the Public Finance and Accountability Act….”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think we had said that. In other words, clause 11 on power to open bank accounts insert the words, “and in accordance with Public Finance and Management Act” between “Minister” and “open”. The justification is that Section 33 of the PFM Act stipulates the procedure for the management of a bank account for public funds. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Substitute for “with approval of the minister” the words, “in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act”. The justification is that section 36 of the PFM Act states the mandate to raise money through loans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 13. Estimates of income and expenditure. Substitute for “within three months before the end of each financial year,” the words, “in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 16, in sub clause (2), substitute for “within three months before the end of each financial year”, the words, “in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act.” It is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 18. Investment of surplus funds. Delete clause 18. The justification is that every appropriation expires at the end of the financial year, in line with Section 17 of the PFM Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, deleted.

Clause 19

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we go to the amendment, I had some issue and I wish to seek your indulgence; the reasoning capacity has gone down and we could even make mistakes in this law. 

Hon. Bahati and I have liked this law and we have discussed it. I suggest that we leave some energy for it as sugar levels are down. I am also sure hon. Lugoloobi will agree with me on this. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is not a very long Bill, honourable members. Were we on clause 17? No, we were on clause 19 which was for also deletion. Had you moved?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, deleted.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We had this proposal to replace “Minister” with “Board” and the justification is that the power to issue licences for any other lottery other than a national lottery should be vested with the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clarification, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 24.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Replace “Minister” with “Board”. The justification is that the power to issue licences should be vested with the Board. It is consequential.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you look through what it is saying, “casino and gaming licence”, we needed to amend it because initially we have defined what happens. So have we agreed that will be a consequential amendment because we have said “gaming, gambling, betting” – because if we go and here it is only reading “Gaming Machine” -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Like where? Where is it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Are we okay there? Will it be consequential? Okay now on 24 – in No. 1 and No.2, the minister should be out. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: That is what I proposed.

MR KABAJO: I just wish to know whether in the title, we have changed from “minister” to “board” to issue licences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is the board that is issuing. Now hon. Nandala-Mafabi is asking whether we have abandoned the words “betting” and the like.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: They are consequential.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we shall instruct the counsel to amend consequentially. Okay, very well. (Laughter). On clause 24, the chairperson has an amendment.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: On clause 24, we replace “Minister” with “Board” and therefore also the head note shall change to reflect that the board is the one that issues the licences. “The power to issue licences should be vested with the Board”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have agreed on the licence to operate. But supposing I have a dispute with the board, where do I go? I should go to the minister? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Appeals Tribunal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have checked in the appeal and the minister does not surface. This is why I wanted us to agree to either put it here because if I have a casino –(Interjections)- hon. Lugoloobi, you cannot do that. 

What we have to do is to find a way to deal with it if the board refuses by going to the person who appointed the board. If it fails, then I can follow the court procedure.

So, Madam Chairperson, I wanted to seek your indulgence; at what level should we put in “the minister” in the process of licensing because when –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We have created an autonomous regulatory authority board for gaming. So if you are cross with the board, you go to court and you don’t have to appeal; you just sue the board because it is a corporate body.

MR KABAJO: If you go ahead a bit in clause 39, there is where they talk about processing of applications by the board. I think maybe that is where you need to put that in case you are not satisfied with the way the board has handled your application, that you appeal to so and so.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us say that when we come to clause 39 hon. Nandala-Mafabi can move his amendment if it is acceptable.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, even all independent bodies do fall under a minister, for example, the Minister of Finance is here presenting this Bill; so surely there should be an appeal process through the minister and if it fails, then one can be free to go to court but I think there should be that provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us do that under clause 39. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi be ready with your formulation when we get to clause 39. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is why with these sugar levels –(Laughter)- this law is very important; you can easily make one mistake here and the machines will be in the trading centres.

There are 52 clauses and the next one is where we have specific gambling machine licenses. We are going to talk about machines which we have no competence in. Madam Chairperson, we may not be able to finish this and since we have done half way, I would pray that we do the rest when we reconvene. We are too tired.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have given you time so that you can do your other things. We have given them Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.

I put the question that clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, consequential amendment, minister with the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You see, we are talking of gaming equipment but there are also devices within a casino. We should say “gaming devices and equipment within the casino”. There are also devices we can use.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, delete sub clause (2) of 32 which means that it does not apply to gaming machine or device are exempted from the requirement of this Act by the minister by statutory order. I think we had put an exemption but we are saying delete (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think from clauses 34 to 40, those are consequential amendments because they are talking about replacing “minister” with “board.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Bill be amended consequentially to replace “the minister” with “the board” in clauses 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 44.

MR NANDALA: The board will have no power to make a statutory instrument. That is 37. The minister may by statutory instrument require a license. So this is the power of the minister. Then also the minister may by regulation prescribe minimum capital.

THE CHAIPERSON: Let us deal with 34, 35, 39, 40 and 44. Those are the ones that are consequentially amended substituting “board” for “minister”. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, when it comes to 40, the application is determined after the minister grants a license after the board has recommended to the minister. So, if you substitute “minister” for the “board”, it is like the board is recommending to itself. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us do 34, 35. Those are consequential. I put the question that clauses 34 and 35 be amended consequentially as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 34 and 35, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we go to 36. I put the question that clause 36 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Processing application by the board; in sub clause (3) delete the words “to the minister”. The justification is that the power to review applications is vested with the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But they don’t refer to the minister for anything.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the board will process, when they process and a member has a dispute he must go to the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it may be a stand-alone. Let us get this clear; is it the board that finally issues the license or it is the minister. So, Clause 39(3) is okay.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: It is the board that issues the license and we are saying –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: No it is not the board.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: But we have already amended it from above. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 39(3) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39(3) deleted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am introducing a new sub clause which can be the new (3) to read, “In case an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision, he may appeal to the minister.” The justification is that that will be the first call point before he/she can go to court.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, before the appeal, earlier it was the minister that was going to approve this application and now it is the board to approve and that approval is provided under clause 40. We thus need to import certain provisions from 40 into 39 to provide for the approval by the board. For instance 40 (1) (a) “approve the application and licence…” we could shift that to maybe clause 39 (d) after investigating and inquiring into the matter stated in the application the board shall approve the application and issue a licence -(Interjection)– Yes, we have updated but what I am saying is that you deleted but I am now creating a new (3) which says -(Interjection)- can you listen to me first so that you understand? (Laughter) 

After investigating and inquiring into the matter stated in the application -(Interjection)- I am now stating a new sub clause; the board shall approve the application and issue a licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is in conflict with clause 40.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Let us finish with clause 40 then you can bring an appeal.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Before you appeal, you have to approve because he was proposing for the appeal -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It comes after 40. Under 40 (2) where the minister rejects an application in whole or part, the board shall, within 14 days notify the applicant etc. Therefore, I think we could insert the other appeal process to the court now because the minister would have already been involved.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I would propose that since we have finished clause 39 and you had asked hon. Nandala-Mafabi to cause for an appeals process, let us first finish 40; “Determination of the application” where we also amended then after that, we do the appeal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether we have not made a mistake because if we remove 39 (3), it means there is no procedure for the board to speak into - I put the question that clause 39 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Have we deleted sub clause (3) as amended?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the effect of that will be that there is no procedure for sending the recommendation to the minister.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: No, Madam Chairperson. You see, sub clause (3) says the board shall make a recommendation to the minister in respect of the application. Now they are the ones who are going to retain that power. Now we have to delete it –(Interruption) 

MR MWIRI: Madam Chairperson, we are deleting. The effect is that the board should be the one to issue. The minister now is not involved; that is why we are proceeding that after the issuance, then there can be an appeal to the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will the minister no longer issue? And so clause 40 is going to be amended? If the power is with the board then we now only provide under clause 40 for an appeal.

MR LUGOLOOBI: This clause 40 was relevant in as far as the approval was in the hands of the minister. Now that we have shifted that to the board, whatever we need in clause 40, can be included in clause 39 because the board is undertaking the entire process and the outcome of that process is the approval which we can provide in clause 39.

MR KABAJO: I think we can still retain clause 40 even though his argument is correct but just for clear drafting. You have that the board has gone through the processing of the application and then clause 40 determination of the application and then you say they will approve the application or reject it and then you provide for in case they have rejected the application, how does the applicant appeal. Therefore it is just drafting otherwise you could combine the two.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore we should delete clause 40(1) which involves the minister’s-

MR BAHATI: We can suggest an amendment to read as follows: “The board shall, within 21 days after receiving the application -
(a)	approve the application -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Reject the application? 

MR MWIRU: The whole of clause 40 should come under clause 39 after deletion so that there is proper flow although I seek the indulgence of this House that maybe we make a provision for gazetting of these licences because it is not only true that it is only the applicant who may be aggrieved by the grant of the licence but even I, as a citizen, may be aggrieved but there is no way I would know that they have granted it.

We have, for instance, been having issues with the National Council for Higher Education. They go and issue certificates to people who are not qualified but you have a problem to challenge their certificates because they normally say the Act says you must challenge it within 30 days under Section 129 of the Act. 

There is no way you will know that they will have issued. By the time you come out, they will say you did not challenge it within 30 days. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I thought we would make a provision for gazetting the licence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay; first, you said that we no longer need the section on determination and that it should be joined with clause 39 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a proposal. First, I want to agree again with hon. Paul Mwiru that there are items of clause 40 which we should move to clause 39 and I would like to make this proposal to begin with that we amend (3) if it is agreeable to read: “(3) After investigating and inquiring in matters stated in the application, the board shall, within 21 days, determine the application by -
(a)	approving the application and issuing a licence;
(b)	rejecting the application;
(c)	Approve the application and issue a licence in respect of one of the activities specified in the application, and rejected in respect of the others.

(4) Make a report to the minister of the licences issued and applications rejected within 14 days.” The purpose is that the board must now inform the minister. 

“(5) Gazette the licences issued.
(6) In case the applicant is dissatisfied, they may appeal to the minister.”

What we want to do is that we want to bring the minister in the loop first by being informed and second, by gazetting and the minister is aware and if the applications have been rejected and anybody is aggrieved, the minister will have a report showing why X’s application was rejected.

He could have another view either to say no, let me re-issue it or not. That is why I am saying that any applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the board may appeal to the minister.

MR MWIRU: And (7), I would propose that we provide the form of the procedure of appeal so that people know that when appealing to the minister, is it by way of an ordinary letter? What form would the appeal take?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t we going to ask the minister to formulate regulations for the better carrying out of the Act?

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You see, the board is made up of very many people. They discuss and they agree on giving the licence. The applicant will now say, “I want to appeal to the minister.” The minister is a single person who may not know much about the application and in addition, he is a single person who can be bribed. You are really going to bog down the work of the board. 

In my view, the minister should not be the person to whom you can appeal. You can appeal to the courts rather than the minister as the minister can be compromised. Thank you very much.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, going to court is automatic and the High Court has jurisdiction on any matter. Why we want to appeal first to the minister is because if there are any irregularities against the act, he will take action so that the process does not become cumbersome and expensive yet that issue could be solved. It is just helping to facilitate business.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, the minister does not act as an individual; he has a support system to assist him in these matters. Therefore, my colleague, hon. Baba Diri, should not worry that the minister will act as an individual or be bribed. The minister has a machinery to work with. Thank you.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Baba Diri, that in case you do not agree with the minister’s decision, you are free to go to court. Thank you.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add that the period within which the appeal must be made should also be specified.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In relation to the period, is this board a full-time board? Are they sitting there every day? This is because earlier we had said, “… within 21 days after receiving the application, the board must either reject or…” Are they full-time? Is 21 days feasible for processing this application?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think this board is full-time, given that they work in this country where gambling is almost - and there are many licences.

However, Madam Chairperson, we had talked of the minister making regulations and in clause 40 we had said, “Change the word “minister” with “board” and leave the words “on the recommendation of the board by regulations”. Maybe that one has collapsed? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, this is your Bill. Do you still think the 21 days are feasible for the board?

MR BAHATI: I think so, Madam Chairperson, because this is business. Therefore, to prolong the period would also be unfair to them. Even if the board was not on a full-time basis, once an application comes in, they will be able to sit and make a decision.

MR KABAJO: In addition to what the minister has said, on initial establishment, the board may be busy. However, later on after the industry has settled down, they may not have so much work. Therefore, they do not have to be a full-time board. In the initial stages, they may be like a full-time board because they have many activities in the process of setting up the industry.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I think we created a secretariat and the work of the secretariat is actually to implement the functions of the board. We stated that very clearly. Therefore, this one does not have to be an executive board. It should pass policy and let the secretariat implement those policies.

However, I thought I should also add something because in the chronology of the amendments that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was making, I think he skipped the one that was contained in the original clause 40(2), which read, “Where the minister rejects an application in whole or in part, the board shall, within 14 days, notify the applicant of the rejection and specify the reasons.” In this case, I think we need to maintain this with an amendment. He excluded it in his list. 

The amendment should now read, “Where the board rejects an application in whole or in part, the board shall, within 14 days, notify the applicant of the rejection and specify the reasons.” I think we should maintain it with that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we had amended it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The applicant has the right to know what happened to the application.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have substituted “board” for “minister” throughout.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with his proposal because remember that now we are only dealing with the board. We had said that the board will, within 21 days, determine the application; either approve or reject the application. 

Therefore, in those 21 days, if they reject the application, they should automatically inform the applicant. I think the only part that we should change here is that when they reject the application or approve, they should inform the applicant in 21 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is 14 days, according to the proposal.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, what we had agreed was that within 21 days, the board will -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Whether they have agreed or not, they have 14 days within which to inform you of their decision. The 21 days is for them to process.

MR KABAJO: You are saying after they have approved or disapproved, we give them another 14 days? I think that extra 14 days is irrelevant. After they have approved or disapproved the application, why don’t they inform the applicant within a short time of maybe two or three days?

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Within 14 days” means that “14” is the limit. They can do it in a day or two but they should not exceed 14 days without informing you that they have rejected your application.

Now, I think we may have to delete the old 40(3) because it was saying, “Where the minister does not act within the time specified, the recommendation of the board shall be taken as the decision of the minister”. I think we need to remove that because it is wholly in the board. 

Anybody has a problem with the old clause 40(4)? “The board shall sign the licence…” I think that one is okay.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no longer clause 40. It has gone to 39.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is one issue here: “The chairperson of the board shall sign the licence”. Have we moved it up there?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have left that one there because it is the board, which has the final authority.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am getting confused.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are almost there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to plead again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The main ones are almost finished.

Clause 41

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 41 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We had proposed to replace the word “minister” with “board” and delete the words “on the recommendation of the board”. I think it is also consequential.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, they are saying, “An operator of a casino will pay tax as per Schedule 4.” I thought that the person to impose tax is done under the tax laws. Before we approve 46, Schedule 4 says, “20 per cent of total amount of money staked less the pay-outs.” What is this? 

Don’t you think we need to stand over it so that we can understand it and harmonise it with the Income Tax Act since this is income?

Madam Chairperson, I propose that we stand over this because we need the minister to help us. He is saying, “20 per cent of the total amount staked less the pay-out winnings for the period of filing returns.” In short, it is saying 80 per cent is untaxed. Why? I thought when you get income, you remove expenses and the balance is taxed. [MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Which is 20 per cent.] No, how do you come to 20 per cent? If it is Income Tax, it should be applicable to the Income Tax rates because this is income. If that is the case, we should say 30 per cent of the total amount.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: In gaming or gambling, this Schedule 4 is fixing the Gaming Tax at 20 per cent. Therefore, you remove your expenses and what remains is the winning, which you tax at a 20 per cent rate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, after removing the expenses, which are the wins, the balance is my profit and income is taxed at 30 per cent. Therefore, first and foremost, we must adjust this to be able to harmonise this with the Income Tax by putting this at 30 per cent of the total amount. 

Therefore, we should amend this to read 30 per cent and then go to the other side.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, instead of specifying 30 per cent, why don’t we just say that the earnings will be taxed at the rate determined under the Income Tax law or something like that? This is because it may be at 30 per cent now and in another year, it could become 25 or 35 per cent. 

Therefore, rather than specifying it here that it should be 30 per cent - if you want the operator to pay the tax on his income as it is in the Income Tax, then it is better to just say that here because it may be subject to change later on.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I am not so sure that I will be very useful but I think the beginning point is to delete 46(2), which says, “The amount of tax levied under sub-section 1, the intervals and the time within which it shall be paid shall be determined by the minister.” We are the ones who determine taxes and when they are paid. This is power we should not pass on to the minister as a starting point.

In addition, we could simply say, “An operator of a casino or gaming activity issued with a licence under this Act shall pay tax in accordance with the law.” Then to determine what taxes they pay, we go back to the several revenue laws that we pass here from time to time.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I agree with hon. Fox Odoi that if we tie it here, there will be need for us to keep changing. It is probably not right to tie it in this law. We can determine the rates and the taxes in the tax laws that we approve every year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course this is not my Bill but wasn’t this intended to catch those exorbitant profits that the casino people make? They are not just ordinary incomes; you know in a night you can make $1 million.

MR BAHATI: However, when we bring the tax laws, these will also be brought here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am reading two things and I would like the minister to help me. After paying the Gaming Tax, do you also pay Corporation Tax?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you pay both?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “An operator of a casino or a gambling activity issued under a licence shall pay tax at the rate specified in Schedule 4.” Is this a final tax? [MR BAHATI: “It is not.”] That is what we must get very clearly. Therefore, what is the final tax? 

Can we assume that this operator, as Chairperson has said, will pay in addition to the other taxes prescribed, a gambling tax under this Schedule? For example, you will get your pay-outs and assuming you made $1 million and the pay-out was $300,000, you are left with $700,000. You must first pay 20 per cent of that and then pay 30 per cent of Corporation Tax on the balance. 

If that is the case, we can say, “An operator of a casino or gambling activity issued with a licence under this Act shall, in addition to taxes prescribed in the law, pay Gaming Tax at the rates prescribed in Schedule 4.”

MR LUGOLOOBI: Could there be a situation where the pay-outs are more than what is staked and what happens in that situation? Do we refund the money? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in gambling, unless that machine is spoilt, it will never lose. I will tell you that it is programmed in such a way that at certain intervals, it releases money and keeps some after collecting. I have studied casinos and gambling centres. What they do is to programme the machines. The machine is programmed by a person that you will collect money. When it collects money and you are the first one to put in money that day and it releases money, it means the money was carried over from the previous day when it did not release it. It is now releasing it. Otherwise, those machines will never make a loss.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, it is possible that you get a licence, rent space and hire people to operate a casino. You install the machine and nobody turns up to gamble for a whole month but you have overheads. You are paying rent, employees and you have invested in the machinery. You would make a loss. What happens in that circumstance? Would you still pay Gambling Tax? 

Madam Chairperson, a Member of Parliament that I will not mention for purposes of decency invested in gambling in Northern Uganda and he ran into those problems. Nobody turned up to gamble. (Laughter)

MR BADDA: Madam Chairperson, we should not narrow this to gambling machines only. We can also think about a situation of betting. You can bet and the company makes a very big loss for these games. What do you do in that case? 

Another clarification I wanted to seek in this situation is, we are importing a special tax. What are we intending to cure?

MR MWIRU: Hon. Badda, I will take you to my constituency where people are gambling in every centre. I will tell you that if you look at the NRM primaries with the turn-up you had of 3 million out of the 16 you had registered, you will realise that most of the youth whom you had registered as voters were in those gambling places. (Laughter) That is it. They were not even in the gardens.

Madam Chairperson, one time I went to my constituency as early as 7.30 a.m. and I passed by the betting place. It was full. They were not even in church yet it was a Sunday. 

The mischief we are curing is that these young people should get into production. I am very sure that in Kalangala you have a lot of productive land. More than 50 per cent of Ugandan land is arable but the young people have taken this to be an economic activity. That is the mischief we are curing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when I was in one of my trading centres, they told me, “Madam, we are glad that you have come. We hope you have come to carry away these machines.” I asked them, “What is the problem?” They said, “We have sold our animals, we have sold our land and we are losing.” I said, “Let me find a way of removing them legally.” They took me and showed me four machines in shops and across the road. They are getting impoverished. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, as long as someone has bought any machine or is interested in that business, they should pay tax. It is not our business whether they have made a loss or not. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those young people told me that every evening, the Chinese come to collect money. They are not paying anybody, they do not have a license or permission from the local authority. They simply go there for collection. They do not even give accountability to Uganda Revenue Authority or the government of Busoga and throughout the country. 

Honourable members, we had an amendment that paying this one does not absolve you from the other taxes such as Income Tax. That was the import of honourable -

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I need to get it clearly whether hon. Nandala-Mafabi is suggesting that - Because you see, somebody has come and invested and he is paying a fee for the license. That fee can be controlled and it can also be prohibitive. However, I do not know whether you are suggesting that even if the machine is not working, we should have a tax for as long as you are investing. If that is the case, we need to be very clear. 

To the point which hon. Nandala-Mafabi was making, gaming is a zero sum game; the operator will always win. If you go for gambling and make Shs 100 million, you will have got it from somebody who has invested it but the operator will always win. We need to be sure about that because that can also create a problem. How will you call it? What kind of tax?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I thought that with taxation, there are provisional assessments and then final assessments. I think that your people would be assessing them and saying for example in June, they expect you to have made a certain amount. Then you will tell them that you did not make that particular amount.

MR BAHATI: No, that is already covered for, Madam Chairperson. What we want to distinguish on principle is, we are proposing that this operator pays tax on revenues. The other point of claiming that you did not make money when you made it can be sorted out by giving you software, which we can monitor. That is what we have provided for in the previous clauses.  

However, for somebody to pay tax whether the person is operating or not as long as they have a license becomes a bit of a problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are not operating, you close. But you are still open.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me make it clear so that my colleague can understand. We are saying 20 per cent will be a Gaming Tax. That is after you have removed the pay-out. After removing your expenses and the capital allowances for your machine from the balance, you will pay what is called Corporation Tax. That is on the profit. 

However, if you decide to lock your machines for a year, even the 20 per cent will not be there because there will be no income and no pay-outs. A license is not supposed to be prohibitive so that you do not trade. Take for example if you have a shop on Kampala Road. You cannot say that I should pay Shs 20 million to trade. A license must be between Shs 500,000 to a maximum of Shs 2 million. A license is an allowable expense because it is the one which you use to trade. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal was to add the words, “In addition to 46(1)” as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Have we agreed on deleting 46(2)? Should we leave it?

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I propose that the interest on unpaid tax be moved from 1 per cent to 40 per cent. The justification is that for instance hon. Bahati will agree with me that in his ministry, that sector has not been collecting taxes from these companies. They have been finding it easy to deal with whoever is supposed to deal with them. 

However, if they know that the law provides for a punitive amount, if you do not remit a tax, they are therefore going to find it very easy to pay the tax rather than dealing with those officers who go to collect the tax from them. 

Madam Chairperson, the last Auditor-General’s report that we dealt with - hon. Bahati, you can go and cross-check in your ministry. Most of the tax was not collected. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: From the lotteries? 

MR MWIRU: Yes, from these companies. When we asked them why, they said that they do not pay but they are making money. It seems that they find it easy to deal with them as they go to do the collection. 

If you as the owner of the lottery you know that if you do not pay tax, you must pay 40 per cent, you find it easy to pay the small amount; the tax. Therefore, I am making it very punitive in that direction. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So I pay the tax but I also pay 40 per cent. 

MR MWIRU: No, Madam Chairperson. We are saying that would be interest on unpaid tax. What this means is that it is the obligation of the tax payer to pay tax. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The provision says, “Shall in addition to the tax.” You still pay the tax. It is late but you pay it. Then you are talking about an interest at 40 per cent. It is high. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there is no reason as to why a businessman would want to pay 40 per cent. Because you do not want to pay 40 per cent, you pay the tax as per the law. This is what you are saying. It is punitive in a way that it is prohibitive for anybody operating a business- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you caution yourself before you delay. 

MR MWIRU: Yes, before you delay. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would support any measure that would compel people to pay taxes. However, if you read clause 47, it says, “A person who does not pay the tax due within the time determined by the minister under this Act shall, in addition to the tax, pay interest equal to 1 per cent of the outstanding amount for each week or part of the week that tax remains unpaid.”

In a year, you have 52 weeks. If you do not pay this tax for a year, you have 52 percentage points. It is already more than your 40 per cent proposal. Therefore, the one per cent per week makes good sense.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to help the Members. Under the Income Tax Act or the VAT Act, if you do not pay tax, you pay two per cent per month. With business, you can trade on credit but gambling is in cash. It therefore means that the moment the tax money is due, you must pay. We must put a provision to make sure that somebody does not keep money so that he does not pay. 

Although, I do not participate, I am told that money lenders charge 20 per cent and I know that Members of Parliament can sometimes be desperate. It therefore means that every week, 5 per cent is charged. If I am the one operating this machine, I know that I am going to pay 4 per cent at the end of the month, I would rather lend the money to a Member of Parliament at 10 per cent and make a profit of 6 per cent.

You know the man who is going to be the chairman of the board. What I would like to make clear here is that the minister should not be the one to determine the tax; there should be self-assessment. If you wait for the minister to determine, I will wait for two years to expire and even the minister can collude – I am not meaning David – and say, “Go and do the business, I will assess you after one year.” When he assesses that you must pay this much, within this time and if you do not pay, he will charge you 1 per cent. 

Therefore, what I would like to amend here is, “Any person who does not pay the tax due on a due date shall pay, in addition to tax, an interest equal to 2 per cent per week.” 

The justification is that in a month, it will be 8 per cent so the motivation to lend the Member of Parliament, who might default, does not arise. I am re-drafting to say, “Any person who does not pay tax due on the due date” – The tax may be due and the due date is different.

Suppose the minister says, “Every end of the week, you must pay”, if you do not pay at the end of the week, that means that it was due at the end of the week and if you have not paid and it takes a week, you must pay it with interest. Therefore, my amendment reads, “Any person who does not pay tax due on the due date shall, in addition to the tax, pay interest equal to 2 per cent of the outstanding amount for each week or part of the week that the tax remains unpaid.” I think that is better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, on clause 48: “A person shall lodge a tax return with commissioner…” On which date? I think we need to be careful here. It must either be weekly, monthly or annually. The annual one is for Corporation Tax or Income Tax but what about this one of collection of winnings? We must put a date. We must agree here –

MR KABAJO: I remember that we deleted 46(2) because I – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We did not delete 2.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We deleted 2, Madam Chairperson.

MR KABAJO: I remember that hon. Fox Odoi had proposed for it to be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He abandoned that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you have made a mistake if you did not delete it. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been given power to determine at what interval the person has to pay. We must determine it in the law, do not leave it.

It says, “The amount levied under sub-section … the interval and the time within which it shall be paid shall be determined by the minister.” That is very dangerous. The minister can say, “Pay after one year.” To avoid problems, those involved in gaming must make weekly returns.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have given that power to the board to assess and impose, among others. I think we should not do micro-managing. We gave that power to the board under section 2.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, dates for tax payments and the law - for instance, Pay As You Earn must be remitted by 10th of the next month. VAT is remitted by the 15th of the next month and Income Tax must be paid after six months -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we just say, “… under the law” instead of saying it is summed under section 46(2)? We delete that and say, “For each tax period under the law.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, these are different taxes; this is Gaming Tax. Section 46 is talking about Corporation Tax but (46) must have a definite day when somebody must file the returns.

We can put 48(3) to say, “The gaming tax shall be paid every …” and then put the date. I am now asking those who gamble to give me the date.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, on (48) what if we said, “A tax person shall lodge a monthly tax return with the Commissioner General” and we stop there? That means we have determined that every month you must put in a return. 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, when you leave it open like that, you leave room for people to determine on their own. That is why in the other taxes, a date is specified. I thought you would say, “A taxable person should lodge a tax return for the month by the 15th day of the following month.” Would it be bad if we phrased it like that? It is not harmful because we have had it done in other tax laws. Is there a problem with us giving a date? 

I am proposing that, “A taxable person should lodge a tax return for the month by the 15th day of the following month.” This is to give him or her two weeks to prepare to pay tax for the month.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think we can take that. We will have determined the period for a tax return and also when this tax return should be submitted. So it should be submitted every 15th of the following month.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there are two returns here and I would like to make that clear. “A taxable person shall lodge a tax return with the Commissioner General for each tax determined under section 42(2) by the 15th of the following month. The tax return shall be in a form prescribed by the Commissioner General.” 

In (3), because we have put two taxes there, the other taxes should be according to the prescribed laws because according to the Income Tax law, you must submit your returns six months after the expiry of the financial year. However, there will always be a provision in the middle of the year. We therefore do not want him to run away. We should say in (3), “The Income Tax shall follow the Income Tax Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that implied? Income tax is governed by the Income Tax Act. Even the returns are filed under that law.

MR BAHATI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Income Tax is implied because it is in the other Income Tax law. We do not have to go deep into this.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 49, agreed to.)

(Clause 50, agreed to.)

(Clause 51, agreed to.)

(Clause 52, agreed to.)

(Clause 53, agreed to.)

(Clause 54, agreed to.)

(Clause 55, agreed to.)

Clause 56

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Chairperson, we must prescribe the age. Here, they are talking about people who should enter the casino. We would like to amend clause 56 to say, “The following shall not enter or subscribe to a public lottery or gambling or casino.

    1. Persons under the of age 21 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minor is below the age of the majority; you are below 21.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Okay, but there are others that we must put here:
    2. School going -
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what about these children who are smoking glue?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is dangerous and not allowed. That is why when they get you smoking in a school –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they are not in school. They are smoking glue on the streets.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we must change it because if we get there, you have broken the law. When you go to buy cigarettes in the UK, for example, they will say, “Bring your ID.” When you bring your ID, it will show that you are a citizen of America but you are a student. The moment you are a student, they will not give a cigarette or alcohol apart from postgraduate students –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you introducing a new sub-clause under 56? Because this one is regarding someone acting on behalf of a minor but now you are saying that you do not want the minor to end the place. Make a proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we must block people who go there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am saying; make a second proposal because this one is okay because someone is acting on behalf of a minor. Let us have a sub-clause 2 to deal with prohibiting minors from participating or entering.

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, I support what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying. There are students who have blown their tuition fees over gaming -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think I see it under clause 55: “A licensee shall not accept a minor to access or enter into a casino or gaming premises. A licensee shall not accept payments from a minor.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since the House has not risen, I would suggest that we look at clause 55. Even in casinos, there are people who go with guns. Sometimes when they lose, they can shoot. Therefore, those with guns should not be allowed in the casinos. People go mad because they come with may be $50,000 and it is gone –(Interruption)

MR EBIL: There used to be a soldier called the late Captain Suicide Katungi. He went berserk in Kampala casino and he is among the historicals. What I am saying is, it can happen today. For instance, there is a casino in Gulu and a soldier in the Fourth Division goes to gamble with a gun and loses money, he can just go crazy and attack.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We need to create a different section because this one is about minors. We may need a new clause to deal with issues of guns and so on.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, this section 55 was specifically for minors and (56) also goes ahead to say: “No adults should subscribe on behalf of minors.” Therefore, if they want that one for other prohibited people in the casinos, let them add a new clause 57.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Or maybe prohibited conduct - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we do that, since we have said that (55) is for minors, let us put a (56) to deal with grown up people but who should not go there. (Interjections) We shall deal with it under (57)? Okay, let us first pass (56).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to insert a new clause 57 to deal with students and armed people: a police man, a soldier or even a civilian with a gun. Like here in Parliament, when you are entering, you leave your gun at the reception. I would like to say in 57 (1): “Students at whatever level –
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Students like at the university?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: For example, if I am doing a PhD –(Interjection)– Yes, because I have finished my Masters, I have to go for a PhD. Can we say, “Students up to the level of undergraduate – But there are Members of Parliament who have been studying and – (Laughter) I could say, “Students who are dependents – my son in the university -  

MR OKUPA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, wouldn’t the issue of the age cover that especially if we put the age? It will be able to cover. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it means that when a person arrives, he must be interviewed to say, “By the way, who pays your fees? Is it your father? How much?” Isn’t the minority enough?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, age would not even help. Hon. Alengot at 19 years was a Member of Parliament and a student at the same time. So, she could very easily gamble. How can we prohibit hon. Alengot from gambling? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do we put it?

MR WANGOLO: Madam Chairperson, I think we should put school-going students and the court would determine if I am the one –(Interjections)– No, we say school-going and that is enough.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Madam Chairperson, I think we should look at the issue of being armed broadly. Today in casinos, there are several arms that go in and not really guns only. There are knives, poisons, gases – you just go into the bathroom and they suffocate you and do any harmful thing to you. Therefore, we need to know what kind of arms. We need to describe them in order to make sure that they are detected and stopped.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think we can say, “prohibited items” and then we categorise: guns, knives, poison, toxic substances, weapons.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: There are weapons which include guns with explosives, explosives themselves, knives, chloroform - All such things, which are classified as weapons must be prohibited.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will that satisfy you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if we create prohibited items? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Maj. Gen. Oketta is going to help me with a write-up so that when we go to the definition clause, I will put it there. You better do it before you go because you might not be around. (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, I would like to put in clause 57(1) – I think we should now change the year of minors. When people leave university at 21 –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: The information I would like to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that of recent even if you went to a primary school where there is Universal Primary Education, you may find a pupil of 18 years, 19 years and so on.

When you move to the secondary level, you will find those of 23, 24, 25 years old. Age may not necessarily help us to curb that unless we can specifically say, “pupils in primary and secondary school students”. Maybe it can capture that category that you want to lock out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Ssasaga has helped. “Any school-going children and adults who are in the university but are dependants.” I can be in the university when I am self - Maybe as hon. Odoi said, the other young lady was still a dependant but hon. Alupo brought her -(Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, I would like to put in 57(1) “School-going children, (2) university undergraduates who are dependants -(Interjection)- that will be determined. When they arrest you is when this is determined. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I thought your idea was not to even allow them in. If you are now talking about arrests, this means I have come, I have played, I have lost money then I get into trouble. I thought your idea was not to allow them to participate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you know very well that parents have lost money. We want to help parents with children who are gambling. 

Two weeks ago, one parent went to Kyambogo University to find out whether his son was at school. The boy had gambled all the money and he only goes home to collect more and gamble it. Where he sleeps is unknown and his father wanted to hang – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that is very far. I have my late brother’s son whose school fees I have been paying at the university. Last semester, I thought the young man was at school. Because they are two there, the other one came and reported him saying this guy is not at school. When I went to check with the bursar, he had never paid fees for the whole semester and he had disappeared. We just got him last month and he was busy being concubined by some old woman in Entebbe.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you make a proposal of how we can capture dependant students? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, you have said it. If we are to say “dependant students”, I think that is okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, 57(1) dependant students, (2) persons carrying prohibited weapons, which we shall put in the interpretation -


THE CHAIRPERSON: Prohibited items and then when we go to define, we can categorise. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: And weapons, which we shall put in the interpretation section. Colleagues, you have understood the justification. 

MR OKUPA: Maybe Maj. Gen. Oketta will help us. If we use the word “light weapons” because there is a definition for a light weapon, it will capture it properly. I do not know what Maj. Gen. Oketta would say.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you talk about light weapons, they are several but we shall be giving specific ones, which are normally carried by you the civil authorities in public places, army and police so that they are all inclusive and are checked against before anybody goes into those social places.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we better refer that matter to Schedule 5 so that you can adjust the list as weapons get sophisticated. We will refer the matter of prohibited weapons or items and then send it to a schedule because we now have schedules up to schedule 3. We can send it to schedule 4 instead of the definition. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We create schedule 5 to cater for those -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: For those risks-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have been helped a lot. To avoid a problem, when you are entering these places you must first register. You come in, show your identity card, you qualify and then go in. If the owner of the casino allows somebody in, which person does not qualify, he or she should be penalised.

When you enter the casino, first they will ask you, “Are you a student?” You say, “No.” You then sign. If you signed and they discover that you are a student, that case will be directed at the student himself. However, if the owner of the casino does not verify and you have a student inside, the owner will be held liable. 

Therefore, we have to state that anybody who goes contrary to the above -

MR BADDA: Before you put a sanction, I have a problem with screening dependant students. Do you mean that the casino owner will be there to ask, “Are you dependant or not?” I have a different view that we should make it cross cutting; we raise the age and change the word “minor”. We just put the age and say, “All people below 20 or 23 years” and that will be much easier than saying “dependant”. Screening will be a bit difficult for these owners.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think our problem was how to deal with adult dependants. Maybe you are 25 years old, you are being sponsored, you are not a minor anymore but you are a student.

MR BADDA: We remove the word “minor” and just stick with the age. We could raise the threshold and put it a bit up. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minor is a definition under the law. You cannot just do away with it.

MR BADDA: We can find a way of including the word “minor” but in addition, regarding the prohibited people, we include people of the age up to around 23 years.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I have some clarification on the issue of the age. As hon. Badda was suggesting that we raise it, you said that according to the law, you are an adult after 18 years. 

When I got these things from the Electoral Commission, we have that adult age of 18 years old but they are limiting the age for some positions yet we know that someone is an adult at the age of 18 years. How does that compare with what the Constitution says that you stop being a minor after 18 years?

I wanted to use that approach by accepting what hon. Badda is proposing since these things vary in attaining political offices. For example, you cannot be a LCV Chairman if you are not 18 years yet you can be a Member of Parliament when you reach 18 years old. For LCV Chairman, they say you must be 30 years and above. Can’t we also use that to provide for this? Maybe the lawyers would help us.

MS KABASHARIRA: Honourable member, there are some dependents who are 30 years so which age are you going to put? Even at 35 years, they are still dependents and are being paid for school fees. So which age are you going to put?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the Taxation Act talks of 21 years for purposes of managing an estate and the spirit is that by that age you have the capacity to take a decision. I would propose that to get the young people from this gambling business and betting, maybe we would make it 21 years so that these young people go back into a productive force. I beg to move.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Chairperson, I would agree with the age limit but contrary to what is contributed by hon. Mwiru, we need to protect the parents and nation. I think we should put the age at a good level so that when people go in, whether they are dependents or not, at least they have reached somewhere and we are very sure that these people have finished university. 

Many of our children, like those from Buhweju who did not go to kindergarten, go to university at 20 years and by 21 years, they are just in the first year, they are excited and want to discover the world. I think 25 years is good enough. Thank you.

MR BADDA: Honourable colleagues, we are intending to reduce the problem but we cannot be 100 per cent and thorough. As such, let us get a humble age of about 21 or 23 years and it is cross cutting whether you are in school or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But 21 years is the age of the majority. We are not curing - Suppose I am 24 years and I have got my money, will you stop me from gambling?

MR BADDA: Madam Chairperson, we are talking of students who are dependents but those who are schooling and still 25 years will be captured in that bracket. If they are not schooling and are above 18 years, we have no problem with them. I think our law is not capturing them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, maybe we will ask hon. Mwiru and hon. Badda to work out a formulation, which can capture the age and dependents and then the other one on the forbidden items. We can just isolate a few areas, which need to be refined. We shall ask our colleagues to fine-tune it. We are going to introduce a new clause but it will be fine-tuned. Let us go to clause 57.

I put the question that clause 57 does stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, acquisition of assets is by approval of Parliament. Why is it a minister here? This one is not necessary as they are free to acquire. We should delete this because in their budget, they will bring a proposal for example, “We would like to buy land and put a building” and we approve. This should therefore be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we delete this? I think progressively we have been consistent on that one; that if they want to buy property, they put it in the Budget and come here to get appropriation. Okay, delete clause 60.

Clause 60, deleted

Clause 61

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 61 -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 61: good causes in sub-clause 4. Insert the words “sports, art, culture, national heritage” between the words “recreational” and “educational”. 

The justification is that the gaming industry should also support sports as culture and national heritage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Good causes come from clause 10(2), which we deleted so this one should also be deleted. Read clause 10(2) where you talk about good cause and we deleted it. Therefore, clause 61 should be deleted. 

The board will have powers to say, we would like to do (X) and (Y) and if that is for a good cause, it will be passed. You should not tie people to look for something of good cause. Let it come here and the minister will be the first. Because he submits it here, he will defend it and say, “We need them to have a road under their building and it is for a good cause” and we will allow the road to go under the building.

Madam Chairperson, clause 61 should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want categorisation of good causes? Suppose someone says, “Sponsor me to go to the moon” and it is a good cause, will you support him or her?

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are saying gambling and gaming is a dirty game and we are trying to discourage it as much as possible. Now if you allow these people to provide funds for sports and so on, it seems like we are encouraging it. I think we should delete that clause. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are rejecting the proposed amendment? Should we retain the old one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we need to delete the amendment and delete the clause itself because we have said the board will budget. It will take that budget to hon. Bahati who will be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come next year under our government. He will bring it here and we will approve. There is therefore no need for him to say here that the board will apply to the minister who will sanction a good cause. What is this good cause? Everything is for a good cause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether you get the amount of letters that I get from the sports associations for example the She Cranes. We knew a year ago that they were supposed to go to Sydney but they almost failed to travel. Suppose the gaming board says, “I think this is a good cause, let us give them tickets to go to Sydney?”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, what I would recommend is, let us stay the good cause thing here so that even when you come to Parliament here, it is specified that these are the good causes you specified in the law and it includes something to do with sports, art, culture and heritage. Maybe you want to keep the Constitutional Square clean and nobody is looking after it then they do it. What this gaming industry does is a benchmarked activity.

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at clause 61(4), some people can hide under this and even call it a good cause because we have seen it in other areas. They hide in it and say that it is recreational or charitable when actually they brought in – I would rather propose that we delete it because some people can hide therein.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Donations are allowed. For example, there is a landslide in Bududa. The board can decide to take some Posho to the people of Bududa and that is a good cause. A donation is allowed. A hospital may need a bed and the board can decide to take some beds. They can have a budget line for donations but if you bring this, it is going to be very dangerous. They will hide under good causes and instead do bad causes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: However, if you do not set the parameters, how will you identify what a good cause is?

MR BIRAARO: Madam Chairperson, I think we have got a problem of indirectly soliciting tokens from things perceived to be bad for our community. My view would be that we delete all the good causes because when we talk of the board, that means that the board, at one time, may be brought to its knees to get a contribution from these gamblers. 

These gambling institutions have got people behind them. If they have got a good cause and want to contribute, let them contribute individually but not the board. That is officially sanctioning contributions from things perceived to be bad in our community and society.

I think that the whole clause should be deleted and we forget anything about good causes. Individuals or forces behind these gambling and betting houses will contribute naturally because if I have to contribute from Parliament, I do not write the name of Parliament. I contribute as hon. Biraaro.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know, maybe the minister will tell us his thinking but what I understand here is that gambling raises revenue, part of which goes to the state in form of taxes. We are supposed to give back this one back to the people. The state has got its taxes but what about the people who actually contribute the money? Do you just collect and give Government? You ‘eat’ your part and give the other part to Government? I do not know, minister but I am just thinking aloud.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, I think that we are legislating but in this law, there are provisions that are good because the reason we are here is to regulate. However as we regulate, there are activities that can be legalised and like the chairperson has been stating, not all that is here is bad; there are things that can be done for a good cause. 

Therefore, why don’t we allow it here so that what a good cause means can be specified?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Can I give you more information? Madam Chairperson, for the purpose of this section, good cause means charitable, recreational, educational social programme or activity for the benefit of the public and it is going to be in the budget line and will be brought here.

An MP will ask, “Why did you give money to the She Cranes?” This is a good cause and it is defined here and it is specific. Another will ask, “Why money was given to Lugazi Hospital, which admits accident victims and yet its casualty ward is not well equipped?” It is for a good cause and was for the good of the public. So, it is defined. Let it be defined such that we do not –

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you want the clause to remain?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson does not actually understand ‘good cause’ going by the examples that he is giving. The examples that he is using show that there is a problem. I would like to imagine that there is a government and we want every government department to budget. 

In this respect, what we are grappling with is, what is this good cause? In the current Act, there is a requirement to every gambling place like these casinos that before you apply for renewal of a licence, you must show that you did some corporate social responsibility and also under –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which part of the law is that?

MR MWIRU: It is under the Income Tax Act that you can qualify for some exemptions if you show that you contributed towards corporate social responsibility and I think it is clear. That is why most of those gambling places try to use part of their money for corporate social responsibility because once you prove that - I think the Finance Minister is here and can agree with me on that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Before the minister comes, let me first give an example. Madam Chairperson, under clause 9, we have stated what income of the board is. It is the money that Parliament appropriates and it appropriates for the function of the activities of the board, including donations.

Where are they going to get this money for recreation when we –(Interjections)- listen, please – when we have already approved because we removed all the monies from them to be taken to the Consolidated Fund and the thing we can do is that we can appropriate money for them. 

Madam Chairperson, lottery money is like money from cocaine –[MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: “But the Americans have legalised cocaine.”] Listen to me. We are trying to collect as much as we can and take it to the Consolidated Fund. If there is a disaster in Bududa, the government will have a lot of money, which it has collected from the casinos and it can use it to do the work in Bududa.

In Parliament, we have supported the She-Cranes – Okay, somebody dies and we contribute “mabugo”. If we want a good cause, we can pool money as Parliament for the She-Cranes and we make our own contribution. When the Police wanted cars before they started owning theirs, we used to contribute and buy and that was a good cause.

An organisation can, within itself, fundraise but we cannot budget for a good cause, which is not known unless you people want money to be taken anyhow. You put your donation and say that the donation for this year will be Shs 1 billion and whoever you donate to, we are not bothered. 

However, under the Income Tax Act that hon. Mwiru has raised, there are activities that are allowed to be done. For example, if you sponsor students to study for a certain period, it is allowed under section 21 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what is your proposal? Do we delete or we keep it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We delete it. [HON. MEMBERS: “We delete.”]

MR BIRAARO: Finally, on this one, every organisation or entity that gives a donation will always want their name on a signpost and that is part of publicity and marketing for that institution or organisation.

Now if this casino or gambling institution gives money through the board, part of the condition that will be gladly accepted by the board is to put their signpost on what they donated and that is marketing. We are trying to dissuade our people from joining them but we are still marketing them, which is a serious contradiction. I think that anything to do with a good cause and money coming directly from them should be abhorred because we are helping them to publicise themselves even more.

MR BAHATI: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think that the context of this was the nature of this business. It is not a business that we would desire to have in the country, if we had any other way of doing without it. However, because of the circumstances, we are finding ourselves only regulating it.

We are therefore opening a window where the board, as we have seen in (2), may request the casinos and these other gambling companies to contribute towards a good cause because of the nature of the business. This is not like a normal business that we want to collect and – we are not talking about donations of the board but giving leeway to the board to have - If there is anything that requires participation for a good cause, they can request these companies officially and legally. That was meant in (2).

However, we are not so stuck on this. I just wanted to explain to you the reasons behind this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So if we drop it, it means that the board cannot ask?

MR BAHATI. Yes, it cannot ask.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, even when we drop it, these companies will do it by themselves because they know that once you do it, there is a benefit under the Income Tax Act. 

The objective of the board is not to donate for a good cause but to regulate the sector. I would implore my good friend, hon. Bahati, to concede on that and we move.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, as I have said, if the board should go to a lottery company to request for any funds for a good cause, it should be done legally. That is what we are trying to do here.

However, if Members of Parliament think that, that should not be done, I can concede but I must give you the reasons that we wanted the board to do things in a legal manner so that tomorrow, you do not start accusing them that they are conniving with the gambling companies. This should be specified in the law.

MR MWIRU: The problem will be that once they go to solicit donations from them, they will lose on their regulating function.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there are two legs. The first is that the board itself shall participate and contribute to good causes; that is in 61(1). The second one is the board requesting the licensees to contribute.

MR BADDA: Madam Chairperson, if we put it in the law, it will be like telling them that we are giving them the mandate to fundraise. We are literally telling them to fundraise money and then spend it and that is the window that the board will use to manipulate and exploit these companies, which will compromise the board. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think let us delete it.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Madam Chairperson, we are closing one gate but we are opening another gate and that gate is going to undermine the whole process. A good cause can be done. For example, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is always asking for donations for good causes and people give. The moment we legalise this, it is going to undermine the efforts of doing what we want to be done in there. 

I would suggest that, that amendment and the clause be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members. I put the question that clause 51 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, deleted.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this law states, “A person who knowingly or recklessly…” What is this? I have failed to find this in all laws. How will you determine that this case was done knowingly?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The court will determine. It is a matter for the court to determine.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chairperson, this is not a court but URA and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They are the ones to determine whether it was done knowingly or recklessly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there is a tribunal and that is why they took these oil companies; for pretending that they are not eligible to pay taxes. That is how they ended up in court. This is okay.

I put the question that clause 67 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister belongs to the Cabinet. Since we are passing it here, amending Schedule 1 of this Act should be by Parliament. We should say, “The minister, with the approval of Parliament by statutory instrument, amends Schedule 1 of this Act.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it is important. This morning in the Business Committee, we were grappling with unfinished business of elections and so on. Let us allow - is it okay?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think Schedule 1 is about currency points.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, then we should talk about Schedules 2, 3 and 4. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those should be the ones for Parliament?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, the other one is for Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we leave 68(1) and 68(2), you want to propose that the minister, with the approval of Parliament by statutory instrument, amends Schedule 2 and 3 of the Act?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: sub-clauses 2, 3 and 4 with the approval of Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that clause 68 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to set a timeframe. Where you say, “A minister shall, with the approval of Parliament, make regulations by a statutory instrument” and then you leave it open, you may grapple with it for another five years without the minister making these regulations.

That is why I wanted to propose an amendment on 69(1) to read, “The minister may, on the recommendation of the board by statutory instrument, make regulations to give effect to this Act within a period of six months from the date of assent.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the timeframe is very important otherwise people go to sleep.

MR BIRAARO: I think this morning we were together when we had that problem and now we are saying “The minister may”. I think we should make it incumbent upon the minister to make sure that it is done. “The minister shall” takes effect on the time limit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should include the time frame because we have burnt our fingers on that one. I put the question that clause 69 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule, agreed to

Third Schedule, agreed to.

Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have stood over clauses 1, 10 and we received a new proposal, which is being refined.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we have thought through section 57 and we propose an amendment in this way to read: “Prohibiting minors from entering lottery.” This means we are deleting “Display of notice.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why? The old 57 is very important.

MR MWIRU: The title is okay. We are saying that we have deleted sub-clause 2 and inserted -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the display is very important and I think it is a legal requirement. Introduce a new 57(a) to deal with the prohibited items. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, sub-section 1 was talking about age. We are leaving it the way it is and only introducing a new clause to read: “For the avoidance of doubt, a minor for purposes of this Act, shall be a person below the age of 25 years.” We wanted to just define who is a minor so that in the sub-clause it stipulates that anybody below the age of 25 years for purposes of this Act will be treated as a minor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And then the one on prohibited items? Maj. Gen. Oketta, we asked you to formulate the proposal on prohibited items. Have you formulated it?

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Madam Chairperson, there are those basic ones, which are normally available in the hands of the public because majority of them are licensed here in Uganda and some MPs have bought them. These include pistols. Therefore, we have classified guns as pistols because they are being purchased by some MPs. 

    a) Guns, shotguns and machine guns. Machine guns include all kinds of guns. 
    b) Saline: These are chemicals that are used to intoxicate people.
    c) Explosives, knives and chloroform. Those are items that should not be close anywhere near the public.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Explosives knives and what?

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Knives, chloroform and acid. This is car acid. That is in the class of knives because some people put them in the waist or in the pocket to go and knife their friends in the club.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we shall introduce a section on prohibited items?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed that we put it in Schedule 5 so that, that list can be adjusted any time the minister finds new dangerous things in casinos.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we should put prohibited items under Schedule 5 – We introduce a new Schedule 5 to deal with prohibited items?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Schedule 5 be introduced to deal with prohibited items.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Regarding the proposal by hon. Mwiru, I think we could deal with it under the interpretation by adjusting the age. Let us go to clause 1. (Member speaks off microphone)

That is a good amendment. Under prohibited items we say, “The prohibited items as prescribed under Schedule 5.” It is going to be 57(b). Let us go to clause 10.

Clause 10

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chairperson, I still have concerns about the age. By the age of 25 years, the applicability might be very difficult because by 22 or 23 years, some people are already parents and are earning by that age. 

Therefore, I could still plead and propose that 21 or 22 years would be more comfortable than 25 years. (Interjections) Yes, at 25 years, people are already parents and have their homes. 25 years is too extreme.

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Uganda is a young country and we are parents. What we want is for the young generation to be integrated into the productive sector. If these people start going to the casinos, they will be spoilt at that young age. Therefore, 25 years is okay. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause 57(a) be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I also put the question that clause 57(b) be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose clause 10 to read as follows: the heading; “Lottery and Gaming funds. The board shall be responsible for collection and remitting of funds to the Consolidated Fund from:

    a. The proceeds from the national lottery after deducting the expense of conducting the lottery.
    b. 1 per cent of the annual turnover of every lottery or gaming business licenced under this Act.” 

This means that we are deleting the fund and giving the board the powers to collect all monies under (a) and (b) and remit into the Consolidated Fund.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just state the new name.

MR MWIRU: The new name is “Lottery and gaming funds”. It is the heading of the paragraph and nothing has changed. Then we add application and licence fees.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, licence, application fees and other fees that they can collect. Suppose they have fined somebody, it would be income. Therefore, we can say, “licence, application fees and any other fees.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we were supposed to define weapons.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have put them in the schedule.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, in the interpretation clause, we have included: “Replacement of the board with lottery” with the following:
    a. The board means the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board.

The justification is to highlight the regulatory function of the board. 

2. 	National lottery means lottery conducted by or on behalf of the Minister responsible for Finance with a view of raising funds for purposes defined by the minister.

The justification is to clearly differentiate between the national lottery and the public or private lottery.

We have said, insert the following new definitions: 
    a) Gaming machine or device means any equipment or mechanical, electro-mechanical or electronic contravegence component or machine used remotely or directly in connection with gaming or any other game which affects the result of the wager by determining a win or loss.

We are defining a wager; it means the sum of money or representative of a value that is risked on an occurrence for which the outcome is uncertain.

The justification is there is need to define the term “gaming machine” and “wager”. This is to ensure that all major terms used in the Bill are clearly defined and the Bill is in tandem with other Acts of Parliament. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am sure that colleagues have been reading about Volkswagens in America where they got software and tied it on the engines so that the emissions are at a low level. As a result, the Volkswagens passed in America. Now they are going to be fined about $30 billion.

You have talked about machines or devices. What about that software? How do we define it because we need to include software here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make the proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to propose: “Mechanical, device, electronic or software” should also be included to avoid anybody who might come and put software and change the machine’s operation.

In addition, I know my brother Maj. Gen. Oketta has said he has put in Schedule 5 - However, I want to bring a definition in Schedule 5 that weapons means dangerous items. The justification is that we defined weapons under a recent law that we passed; the Parliamentary and Presidential Act Elections. I thought my brother would bring that. Maybe when we were doing it, you were not available. Therefore, we should define weapons as dangerous objects -(Interjections)- no, we do not want to go into including which ones.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have put them in Schedule 5. We have created a new schedule which defines - I think that definition is okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “… as defined in Schedule 5” because we have defined it here and in other laws. 

MR BAHATI: I just wanted clarification on the minor. Do we need to define a minor here or now that it has been put in the body -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have adjusted the age to 25 years for the purposes of this Act.

MR BAHATI: So on page 7, there is a definition of a minor -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which we are going to adjust and substitute 25 years for 18 years. We are coming to it. I think you should move that because we have already agreed on it. “For purposes of this Act, minor means a person below 25 years.”

MS BABA DIRI: Madam Chairperson, there are some youths who are always gambling and they are aged between 18 and 25 years. Do you mean all those youth should be rounded up and that they should not participate? Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: They should not be allowed to go to the casinos. What we are doing is to restrict their access to the casinos. We are talking about access and participation in the official gambling places.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed variously.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS

THIRD READING

8.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that, “The Lotteries and Gaming Bills, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)

Honourable members, I would like to really thank you for your patience, endurance and sustained power because today we have been able to do two Bills. There is so much on our calendar but I really want to thank you. 

When we adjourn, we shall just ask those committees, which have Bills to use tomorrow, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday to see whether they can generate work so that it can take us through the rest of the period up to 26th.

8.34
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi had raised a matter and you had promised that the Prime Minister was going to make a statement as far as the issue of KCCA is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, the matter is very grave in the sense that when you look at the stopping of the process of the election of the Lord Mayor, they did not stop the picking and returning of forms for the councillors.

In the law, as it stands today, there is no requirement for one to be a councillor in KCCA. You just need to buy a shirt and trouser or a dress and once you become councillor, you become a Lord Councillor of KCCA. When they now say that they will elect the Lord Mayor from among the councillors, the amendments they have brought put a requirement of a Lord Mayor to be with a qualification of “A’ level. 

This means that there can be a situation where all those who go through; those who bought trousers, shirts and dresses from the market, do not have the “A’ level qualification. They would have been elected by the people and there will be a requirement that they will have to elect from among themselves a Lord Mayor who does not meet the requirement of the law, which is being moved.

We thought that the Prime Minister’s statement would be timely. We are resuming on Wednesday yet nominations are supposed to be on Monday. Therefore, we shall not have made any pronouncement on this matter yet the Chairman of the Electoral Commission has stopped the nomination of the Lord Mayor but said the councillors can go ahead to pick and return forms. 

This means that after the close of the nominations, that will be it. Councillors will be elected without the qualification to become a Lord Mayor because in actual sense, one must have similar qualifications to that of being a Member of Parliament. That kind of stalemate needs to have been sorted out before. 

THE SPEAKER: This is a quagmire. Honourable minister, I do not know whether you can advise us because I do not know what to do.

8.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): In the circumstances, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I suggest that the Prime Minister makes a statement to the country tomorrow because Parliament will not be sitting so that this matter is clarified after consultation. That is the information I got; that he will be making a statement to the country tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: He is going to make a statement or you are proposing?

MR BAHATI: He is going to make a statement.

8.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, according to the minister, the Prime Minister will make a statement tomorrow. When the Chairman of the Electoral Commission was speaking, he said that he had suspended the nomination of the Lord Mayor and the mayors. He never said that he had suspended the nomination of the councillors. That means those are going on.

In the old law, it was saying that to be a Lord Mayor, you only need to have this qualification and stand. To be a mayor in a division, you just need this to stand. That means councillors would come but you would not need to come from any other constituency apart from the entire area. In this kind of circumstance, Madam Speaker, what law is now being applied?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that is the matter that engaged us today in the Business Committee.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give to this House is that under the law, every law is valid for all purposes; in as long as there is a law, if it has not been challenged and declared null and void, the law has the force of the law. This means that the Electoral Commission is supposed to proceed under the KCCA Act, which is in place.

Therefore, for the Electoral Commission to say, “We are waiting for an amendment”, which amendment may even be rejected by Parliament, is what the government must come up and explain.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why -

THE SPEAKER: No, let me answer hon. Mwiru. In the Business Committee, we looked at the KCCA Act. Under section 82, the minister was supposed to make regulations for the election of the mayor and the deputy mayor, which have not been made. Therefore, there are no regulations for those elections so the Act has not been activated in respect to those elections. That is what we discovered in today’s meeting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why we are getting worried. I told the Electoral Commission that we have made you independent, but you are not independent. This is the third scenario within this electoral process to show that the Electoral Commission is not independent.

Secondly, how do you anticipate a law? That is why the Constitution says, for somebody to be the head of the Electoral Commission, he should be a person who qualifies to be appointed as a High Court judge. I think we should follow that. Appointing engineers is becoming terrible because they become mechanical. If he was a High Court judge, he would have said, “According to this law, we cannot do it.” However, because this one is mechanical, he is saying, “We must wait.”

Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of laws in this Parliament. Just assert yourself. We do not want to be used as a rubberstamp to deal with other people’s wars. As Parliament, we must do our work. We should not come here because Lukwago is very popular and you fear that he is going to win – which he is going to because you cannot bring a dancer and think he can beat a man who knows things. In fact, NRM should not have nominated a candidate for mayorship during the primaries. However, they went ahead and did it knowing the old law.

Madam Speaker, I am pleading with you to tell these people that what they are doing is wrong.

8.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, when we opened on Tuesday, you informed us how you were applauded by the Commonwealth Speakers for being bold when you took a decision on the case of hon. Ssekikubo and group. You are a lawyer and I believe you know what is right. You are the head of this institution and I think you need to evoke the courage, stamina and legal knowledge that you have to direct the Leader of Government Business to inform the country on this matter. 

On the proposal, we did not know whether he was requesting or whether the Prime Minister is going to make a statement, according to hon. Bahati. It is not very clear. As the leader of this institution, direct and save this country.

THE SPEAKER: When we were in the Business Committee, the deputy Prime Minister was there and we agreed with him. Now that none of them has come to do what we agreed, I am now directing Government to issue a statement on the question of elections of the Lord Mayor, Deputy Mayor, councillors of Kampala City Council Authority and all the other mayors.

Honourable members, House is adjourned. Thank you. I informed you in the beginning that we are adjourning to Wednesday next week at 2 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 November 2015 at 2 p.m.)  
