

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA



Tuesday, 30 November 2021


Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for coming for this session and for your commitment towards serving our people. Together, we will do well for this country. Thank you very much. We will go to matters of national importance. (Hon. Katusabe rose_) Honourable member, I have not allowed you to speak.

2.09

MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Welcome back to the House. We deeply missed you. You have just eloquently and wisely stated that you appreciate Members for effectively serving their people. On that note, I wish to respond to your communication of encouraging Members to serve their people.  

I am here to draw your attention to the 67 people that are incarcerated in a prison, yet critically ill. Together with my woman Member of Parliament, we visited them and we found 67 members of our community critically ill, with swollen stomachs, faces and feet. 

The communication from the prison authorities was: “what exactly do you Kasese leaders want us to do?” Madam Speaker, these people need urgent medical attention. This is a prison and not a hospital. Injustice anywhere, is injustice everywhere. For evil to thrive on this planet Earth, you need one condition; good men and women like you, Madam Speaker, to do nothing. Everything else on the Order Paper can wait but not  human life.

Our community so far lost nine people in prison. They will never get any chance to get justice, prove their innocence or the cause to prove their guilt. Madam Speaker, how many dead bodies from Kasese are we waiting for, for us to act? Must our people surely be incarcerated at the pleasure of some individuals that I do not know?

Madam Speaker, in that seat, you have continuously and consistently guided that the Attorney-General - (Interruption)-

MS KABUGHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague, hon. Katusabe. 

In July, we were in Kirinya and the condition in which these people were living was very worrying. As a mother, you shade tears. They have not been given any medical attention, apart from the little panadols they give irrespective of which illness you have. That is the reason they could be dying every day.

Most of these royal guards have had their bellies, cheeks swollen and their feet are swollen like gumboots. You hardly recognise a person you used to work with at the palace. I pray that these people are given special medical attention. Otherwise, we shall lose all of them. Thank you very much. 

MR KATUSABE: I thank my sister for raising that and for the eloquent submission. 

My specific request is: without any further delay and the authority entrusted to you, Madam Speaker, I beg that a team from the Government is dispatched and deployed to the prison authorities and all of those incarcerated be given medical attention.

The inhumane treatment they are given even when they get to hospitals - when I went there -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, you have passed on your message and we have understood. We know what it is. You do not need to take a lot of time.

MR KATUSABE: Lastly, the King is not even exceptional. He was entitled to one medical trip every year but it is five years down the road. His health is also worrying. Therefore, I ask that the Government urgently pays maximum and immediate attention to that request. Also, their families should be supported because their breadwinners are incarcerated with no help. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government? There is a procedural matter.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this point of procedure.  

In November, this Parliament approved a supplementary budget amounting to Shs 3.8 trillion. I remember standing here and clearly stating that whosoever tampers with the budget of Parliament, which is an independent arm of the Government, shall not seek safe haven anywhere, in this country, and we shall not accept that.

We appropriated over Shs 35 billion for this august House, envisaging that we have an interaction in East Africa with other countries. 

Honourable members, with your support, I have spent over three months in different preparations that you are all aware of, in the different disciplines for the preparation for these activities. We held our ground, when we were here, envisaging that all honourable members that were working for this purpose would have it achieved. 

Madam speaker, I am not the character who sits in corridors, talks differently and then, comes here and speaks differently. I have been in the corridors and I have heard people talking differently on this matter. People are complaining from different disciplines that they have been left out from the disciplines, where they have been duly participating. The reason is that only those that come and plead in a good manner are being considered. This is dividing the House and the Members. This is unprecedented. 

Madam Speaker, I know you as a unifier. If people want to peddle battles of previous elections into sports and disciplines, then it will divide the entire House and the way we have been moving. As a unifier, it is my prayer that if we cannot cause the Committee of the whole House to sit and talk about certain matters, then call us from all these disciplines, which you are aware of and that I would like not to mention here. Let us speak as a joint House so that when we move out of this country, we move carrying the flag and the banner of Uganda. 

Just outside, I found hon. Nulu Byamukama complaining. I do not know whether he is in this House and hon. Museveni here – (Interjections) – You are many.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your intervention in this matter – (Interjections) - Yes, because these things of people asking for favours must stop so that there is equity in this House. I know you as a person who stands for equity because I have served with you for a long time. I have no doubt that you can stop the grumbling that is going on in this House. As a mother and friend that I have been with, I know you can handle this matter. 

However, as this grumbling goes on in the background, you will know that there is something wrong somewhere that you ought to address. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I was actually avoiding to bring up that issue but because you have raised it, that is not a matter to be discussed in the House. It is a matter to be discussed in the Commission. That is one. 

Secondly, when we met captains of the different disciplines - I went for a meeting together with the Leader of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip. We have not been involved in deciding who goes and who does not. It is the captains of the different disciplines that made the decision. Our work was to look for money. It is not a matter for discussion, hon. Nsereko. I am giving you information. 

When they agree, ours is limited to looking for money. If a team - say a football team - is for 24 people, they gave us 30 people, including the leadership. We do not know who is playing and who is not. We decided to take responsibility together with the Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition. Nobody should be blamed for this; blame your captains. 

Government, can I have a statement on Kasese?

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard my brother, hon. Katusabe, loud and clear. There is no single person who should be denied medical attention. It is even very clear within the lines of duty of our officers that let it be a prisoner or whoever. He should get adequate treatment because we have hospitals that can adequately treat anyone. If the prison authorities cannot manage, we can make arrangements and one is taken to Mulago, which is a National Referral Hospital. 

Therefore, I am going follow up this matter with hon. Katusabe, the Minister for Internal Affairs and the head of prisons and ensure that indeed, if there are any prisoners from Kasese or any other area that are being denied treatment, we ensure they get adequate treatment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have just got additional information from the person who raised the issue of sports. I want to warn you, captains. Stop the idle talk in the corridors that, “I have been told to remove you.” I am not a sportsperson. Take your responsibility; carry your own cross. 

Do not start apportioning blame. Whoever is removing Members should not say, “It is the Speaker.” No, we are not removing anybody, our work is to facilitate. If you have your issues, sort them out. What we want is for the team to go for sports. 

2.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. My curiosity has been aroused by the response of the Government Chief Whip on the concerns raised by hon. Katusabe. 

Whereas I hear the commitment from the Government Chief Whip, it is not just about the denial of treatment but a problem of the abuse of the criminal justice system in Uganda. The persons so mentioned have been on remand for more than two years - Actually, it is five years now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is more than two years.

MR MPUUGA: That is abuse of the criminal justice system. It cannot simply be glossed over and we say, “They will get panadol.” We need the Minister of Justice or the Attorney-General to come here and inform us of whether they have allocated prisons as courts or actually those people were charged and sentenced. 

Last Friday, I received a list of 67 citizens that were charged in a kangaroo court and remanded in Kitalya Prison. For one and a half years now, they have never seen a court. They are under incarceration.

We need full commitment and a statement of response - I am going to lay these citizens’ names tomorrow on the Table and we demand that Government should explain. There is no way we can claim to be Members of Parliament running under a Constitution, a people's consensus and yet, citizens’ rights are being abused while we claim to be legislating. 

I am not convinced with the response of my honourable brother. I need a more unequivocal response on these challenges. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Leader of Government Business, Government Chief Whip, give us a comprehensive statement, first, as to whether these people have been committed or sentenced and whether you have decided to deny them the presumption of innocence. These people have been in prison for over three years. We need a comprehensive statement on that. Come and report to the House tomorrow. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, if we really need a comprehensive statement, my colleagues took comprehensive time to compile whatever they are getting. Now, we are being given just one day to make a comprehensive statement. I request that you give us one week so that we go through all these processes and do wider consultations. However, what I want to put on record is that Government is not victimising anyone like my brother the Leader of the Opposition has said. We are going to follow the due process of the law. 

I want it also to go on record that we do not charge anyone in a kangaroo court. That is his language and we do not believe in that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwanuka, stop making noise like you are in a drinking joint.

Hon. Tayebwa, this thing has been on for years. It is also a known fact that you have information about what is happening. Can the Attorney-General come and report to this House on Thursday on what is happening to the Kasese team; the 67 people? On Thursday, we expect a statement from Government. 


MR ZAAKE: Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 224 of the Rules of Procedure. In Article 210 (d) of the Constitution and Section 39 (2) of the UPDF Act, 2005, Government is required to seek Parliament’s approval before deploying outside the borders of the country. 

Today morning, the UPDF spokesperson confirmed to the country that UPDF soldiers have begun engaging ADF rebels in the Democratic Republic of Congo, yet the deployment has not been authorised by this House. Isn’t this deployment being done in contempt of Parliament? Honourable members, if you recall, the last time the UPDF entered DRC, they looted minerals and Uganda was ordered by the International Court of Justice to pay DRC over Shs 10 trillion as compensation.  

Madam Speaker, we may incur more costs of an invasion that Parliament has not authorised. I pray that the Government comes to explain this anomaly. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say that it was in a press statement? I am not aware of that. Can we get evidence to the effect that soldiers have been deployed in DRC? 

Commissioner, we agreed to debate with evidence and not based on hearsay. Maybe someone said that to scare people. 

MR ZAAKE: I have evidence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not want to base on the statement. Please, give us evidence that – okay, lay it on Table. 

2.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to just confirm to my colleague, hon. Zaake, that we are engaging with the Congolese authorities and not engaging in fights with Congo. I thank you. 

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I wonder whether the Commissioner is in order to bring such matters, as procedural matters, on the Floor. There are better ways of addressing such matters on the Floor of Parliament. Indeed, as you have guided, it is important that we do not always base on media stories or assertions as facts. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 



2.30 
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, Uganda carries a flag of peace in Sub-Saharan Africa to the extent that we are exporting fish to some countries.

I have reliable information that America has organised an international democratic summit and invited key African countries that have played a role in stabilising the African continent in terms of democracy. It is by shock that the Ugandan Government has not been invited. 

Secondly, the American Secretary of State visited Africa recently; he went to Kenya, Ethiopia and skipped Uganda.  I would like to thank you for your communication today. I have reason to ask whether there is a problem between Uganda and America; why Uganda is being left behind and yet, we are the peace torch bearers in the great Lakes Region.

2.31
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am bringing back this issue because it has not been addressed and I have continued to see Members of Parliament – actually, some are holding press conferences over the same. 

On the 17th I raised an issue on the skyrocketing fuel prices. You directed the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to brief this Parliament on the same last Wednesday. As we talk, according to the global gas prices today, including petrol and diesel, Uganda stands at $1.3 per litre; Kenya at 1.1, Burundi at 1.2, Rwanda is at 1.1, Tanzania at  $1, DRC at 0.9 and Sudan at 0.6. Uganda has the highest at $1.3. There is a link that updates the prices per week and that is where we stand. Therefore, in the region, we have the highest as far as the last one month is concerned. 

When I raised that issue here, there are questions I wanted the minister to answer. We have fuel reserves in Jinja and I would like to know how much fuel we have in our reserves. How long can this fuel take us? 

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that instead of the minister coming to brief Parliament, I saw him on TV addressing the media. He chose to respond to the issue in Parliament on the media; that was Dr Opolot Okasai. He was with the spokesperson of the Ministry of Energy, Mr Solomon Muyita. They made it clear that they will not intervene in the fuel prices because the pump prices have not yet reached the reserve price and yet, we do not know the reserve prices. 

In other words, their prayer or anticipation is that fuel prices continue increasing but they will not intervene until they reach that reserve price. Therefore, my humble appeal remains the same. 

In Buvuma Islands, a litre of fuel is at Shs 6,000. It is worse because fuel is the driver of the economy – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give us your prayers, honourable.   

MR MIGADDE: My prayers are that:
    1. The Speaker directs the minister to come to Parliament and tell us how much fuel we have in our fuel reserve. 
    2. The minister tells us how much fuel can push the economy. 
    3. The minister tells us what interventions they have put in place to avert the skyrocketing fuel prices. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, we need the minister to come and respond to the questions that have been raised. Instead of coming to the House, why would the minister go and respond on social media? It is the House that raised this question and so, we need the minister to come and respond to that. 

2.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Happy belated birthday. I rise on a point of national importance. Starting from Thursday, Friday, all through the week, media has been awash with the news and we are yet to hear a statement from the Government side, especially the Prime Minister or the Government Chief Whip regarding the alleged sale of our international airport. It has even gone to the extent of somebody branding it as “China-Entebbe International Airport”. This is a matter of very serious concern to Ugandans.

I would have expected the Prime Minister who is also Leader of Government Business to present a statement to this House other than us just reading these issues in social media and contradicting statements. We have seen a statement from the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority, where it is equating the loan to getting a loan from the bank by somebody using salary. There is a statement from the Republic of China but we have not seen a statement from the Government of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, this matter has been running for a long time. We also saw the Minister of Finance when he appeared one time before the COSASE, apologising that there was a problem in the agreement that we signed. Therefore, can the Government tell Ugandans what transpired and what is happening? Is our airport safe or it has been mortgaged?

Madam Speaker, I demand that Government, as soon as possible, presents a statement to Uganda through this Parliament so that we get to know whether we still own Entebbe International Airport. Also, go ahead and lay on Table the agreement that they signed. We want to prove whether the agreement was okayed by the Solicitor-General because we are reading that that agreement was not cleared. These are the things you must inquire into and find out what is transpiring in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see for me, I get surprised when you start believing in what you see on social media. Last night, somebody posted that airport had been changed to China-something. This morning, I sent somebody to the airport and he discovered that nothing had changed. And really when we start believing in what is on social media –

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. Allow me lay on Table a statement from the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the statement about?

MR OKUPA: This is the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority statement on 26th November on the clarification of the Entebbe International Airport –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, with due respect, if the matter is before COSASE, we are debating in anticipation. Let COSASE – I am the one who forwarded that issue to COSASE; let them complete. Now, you are rendering the committee irrelevant; let them finish their work and present a report. And honourable member, you are a member of the committee; do not smuggle documents from the committee to the House.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence; these are not smuggled documents from the committee. First of all, I forgot even to carry the Daily Monitor here, which is not from the committee but these are copies, which were distributed to the media. Madam Speaker, I go by your ruling but this is a big concern for this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, please, bring that issue - I know you are a very able member of COSASE; raise that issue in COSASE, handle it and report to this House.

MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 49 of the Rules of Procedure on notice of urgent question.

I would like to bring to the attention of Government but in specific terms to the Minister of Health about the new COVID-19 variant and maybe, for the minister to tell us the preparedness the country has. What are we doing?

Other countries have stopped airlines coming from the affected countries from entering their country. What is the country doing and this is not about social media. This is a real issue. Omicron is real and we want the position of the Ministry of Health on what we are doing and how we are preparing to manage or mitigate the effects of this variant. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that note, therefore, allow me to amend the Order Paper. There is a paper from the Leader of the Opposition on the new COVID-19 variant. I will allow him to present the paper after two urgent questions. 

2.42
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. In 2007, this Parliament, under Article 210(d), approved the deployment of the Uganda People's Defence Forces in Somalia to fight terrorism and to pacify the region.

Admittedly, Madam Speaker, this was a very strategic and a noble cause and since then, the UPDF has kept its presence in Somalia for 14 running years.

Madam Speaker, today, Somalia has made remarkable governance and security gains. We appreciate the role done by the UPDF in Somalia. The UPDF now, working with the Government of Somalia, have established a Parliament and police. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs was required to regularly update Parliament on the situation in Somalia. That, however, has not been done in a very long time. As the Parliament of Uganda, we would want to understand whether we have achieved our mission of deployment in Somalia. Do we still need to be in Somalia or it is time for us now to come back home and do other national assignments? 

My prayers are that the minister responsible gives regular updates to the Parliament of Uganda concerning the stay of the UPDF in Somalia, with a view to enabling this House to assess its decision of 2007.

Secondly, in light of the current terror attacks in the city, and media reports about the ADF crossing from the DRC through Kisoro, is it possible that the minister responsible could consider requesting the authorisation of this Parliament under Article 210(d) to allow the UPDF deploy in Congo?

Because it is very clear that the beehive of the ADF is in DR Congo. Therefore, the UPDF could ask the authorisation of this Parliament, so that we allow you to deploy in DRC.

Madam Speaker, important to note is that this is not the first time we shall be deploying in DRC. We are in Somalia, Central African Republic where we have chased Kony very far away. Madam Speaker, however, if an opportunity is given to UPDF, they should not do what they did in the past. We were given an opportunity - we went to DRC and plundered and we lost track of our mandate there.

I do not want to comment on the media reports that appeared today that we have already struck the DRC. I do not want to go into that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us your prayer? It is like you are reading the Bible.

MR EBWALU: Madam Speaker, I have already given my prayers. You were communicating with someone there. Thank you very much.

2.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, we are engaging with the authorities in Congo over the issue of the ADF and we know why we are engaging. We are focusing on that and we cannot go beyond that. 

On the issue of Somalia – (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A whole Commissioner is shouting on the Floor? (Laughter)

MR TAYEBWA: On the issue of Somalia, whenever it is necessary, we shall be reporting to this House. Thank you. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are you putting to order? On a serious note, hon. Tayebwa, we need a statement on that and the Government should really come out clean.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, you know whenever you direct us to do something, we do it. And we will do it.

2.48 
MR MARTIN MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, I am here to raise a matter of urgent public importance. 

On 25 November 2021, the Minister of Health, hon. Dr Ruth Aceng launched the COVID-19 vaccination exercise for Acholi Subregion at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. However, in the evening of 26 November 2021, a voice recording by a lady who introduced herself as Juliet Ayee Issien, born in Koch, currently living in Nigeria, where she got married and changed her name, as mentioned above, made very serious allegations in relation to the launch.

This voice recording has gone viral on all social media platforms across Acholi Subregion putting serious allegations on the Government and the First Family. It goes ahead to say that there is a plan to decimate the Acholi people using the COVID-19 vaccines. 

The lady alleges that the vaccines being used in the Acholi Subregion are first taken to a particular hotel, allegedly called Pearl of Africa, around Nakasero from where they get contaminated or poisoned, before they are taken to Acholi. 

This recording, which calls upon the Acholi people to boycott or avoid getting vaccinated since there is a plan to decimate and take over our land has caused panic, fear and bitterness, causing those who have been vaccinated already to worry for their lives and those not vaccinated avoiding the exercise for fear of being poisoned. 

Our biggest concern is that this lady alleges that she was a staff of State House for several years and fully aware of many sinister plans against the Acholi people. She further alleges that this information about the contamination of vaccines is being provided to her by her contacts who still work at State House. 
We took keen interest to find out who exactly this lady is. The information we have obtained is that her true name is Jennifer Aryem, the lady who was the state witness during the trial of Dr Kiiza Besigye, in the early 2000s, on treason charges.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mapenduzi, we ruled on social media propaganda. However, Acholi Subregion has leaders. It is upon you and the ministry to come out and tell the people that it is not true. 

The Minister of Health, hon. Jane Aceng should come out and address the people of Acholi and say they should avoid what is on social media. I would also request that the leadership of Acholi Subregion comes out and addresses the people.

Members, is there a market behind there? This is a serious matter and we must come out - To the people of Acholi Subregion, this may be a propaganda campaign. It must be rejected. People must go and be vaccinated. 

MR MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your advice. I just want to mention something and say our prayers. These serious allegations have caused a lot of anxiety and the vaccination exercise has been completely distorted. 
It is, therefore, our prayer – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already given a directive to the minister to go and talk to the people of Acholi. Even the orders we have given here in the House are enough to make those people know that what is being said is a propaganda. There are people who have been vaccinated. I do not see why the Government would be against their choice. Why not another region?

MR MAPENDUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May you then permit me to lay on the Table this flash disc, which contains the voice recording? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural issue. You had already given guidance and the honourable member was continuing to present the prayers. 

In order not to lose this, he who alleges must prove. It would be important for the police to pick interest in this matter and have this lady arrested so that she can substantiate those allegations. (Applause) 

The procedural issue I am raising is to direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to arrest this woman and make her substantiate these allegations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, this lady must be investigated and arrested because she is causing a problem in the country. If it is really true that – now that we have a recording, you can investigate and have the woman arrested.

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I want to make a request that as you direct the minister, can you also help us – I do not know whether it can be a directive – but can we say facilitate the Acholi Parliamentary Group to go with the minister on the ground so that we all do this together and it is not just left to the Government.

On the issue of investigating, I commit to that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already made a ruling that the leadership of Acholi must go on the ground as the Government does its part by arresting the woman and having her prosecuted. The Minister of Health should join the Acholi Parliamentary Group in that campaign.


2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not feeling very well but I do not have COVID-19. I just came from a cold place yesterday and so, I am adjusting to the weather.

The issue raised by hon. Mapenduzi – Actually, while I was out, I heard that recording. I know that you have already ruled and you gave me the opportunity. I just want to emphasise the importance of this issue because it has two dimensions. 

As Government is doing everything possible to vaccinate its people with the available vaccines, somebody is distracting them and we have a new COVID-19 variant coming in. On the other side, Madam Speaker, they are using the name of Government, which –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had already ruled on that issue. 

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: You gave me the opportunity and that is why I said I had just –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was a procedural matter on something else.

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: It was not, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to emphasise the importance - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already made a ruling that the Acholi Parliamentary Group should be facilitated to go on the ground. The Acholi Parliamentary Group should write and get facilitated to go on the ground and do that campaign. Yes, chairman -


2.58
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am the Chairman of Acholi Parliamentary Group. I thank you for your ruling but our concern is this thing is very sensitive. When you stop hon. Mapenduzi from finishing the statement, it actually raises panic in the community. They might think that he could not finish the statement because what is being said is true. That is why it is important, when we are handling sensitive issues like this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman -

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, when we are handling sensitive issues like this, which have caused panic in the community, it is better to give them time. He should have read the prayers. Part of what you are ruling is in our prayer and that is my concern. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that you never heard the ruling. (Laughter) The ruling was in relation to what hon. Mapenduzi said and it was actually helping him. 

First, Government must investigate this woman and she should be brought to book. Secondly, you should be facilitated to go for that campaign on vaccination. Thirdly, Government should come out with a statement addressing this and it should be – Dr Jane Aceng should go on the ground and give a statement on vaccination. I do not know how much more you want us to do.

2.59
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very urgent importance.

On Saturday 27th November, heavy rains ravaged several villages of Kaapa, Kojja, Makanaga, Ssemalulu, Bukasi, Kaasok’engo in Zzinga Parish, Bussi Subcounty in Busiro South. Several houses and gardens were destroyed as well as several commercial facilities. Hundreds of residents were affected and as of now, they have nowhere to sleep. They have nothing to eat and to wear. 

My prayer is that Government urgently comes to their rescue and provides them with construction materials for their houses, food and mattresses. You know very well that this is an island that has many mosquitoes. I pray that Government also provides them with mosquito nets.

Perhaps in your mercy, Madam Speaker, you should direct that Government provides the affected residents with start-up capital because they have nothing. I beg to submit, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government - Did you get Emyooga money? (Hon. Thomas Tayebwa rose_) No, I am still asking the Member whether there was Emyooga money in his constituency.

MR MATOVU: Thank you for that question, Madam Speaker. The few that registered were unable to access their money. Specifically in Bussi Island, there are none. I beg that, as you have put it rightly, they should come and attend to this. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to give the Parish Development Model. (Laughter)

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleague, I sympathise with your people who were affected by this disaster.

Like you have made your prayers, that assessment should be done by the District Disaster Committee so that it is formally submitted. When you submit, please, ensure that I get a copy so that I can follow up. 

However, honourable colleagues, there are some people that we have not yet sorted and this has been due to budget constraints. Recently, you added us some money in a supplementary budget and we are going to ensure that we clear the backlog. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In addition to what you are saying about the District Disaster Committee, when you look at Article 249, we gave you an order to bring a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission. You are not going to start handling things district by district. We need a planned Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission in place. We gave you one month but you have not done it.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I relayed your directive and indeed, Cabinet took it up. For now, we agreed that we also do a comprehensive plan, which is developing SOPs for managing disasters in the whole country. The draft report has been made and it is coming to Cabinet. Once that is finalised, it will also come with a disaster commission. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, this is a constitutional matter, having a Commission in place. You cannot run a country in a kangaroo way. (Laughter)

3.05
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance.

On Saturday 20th November, in the evening, a petrol truck was offloading fuel in Kakyera Subcounty, Kakyera Town and the offloading person lost control of the pump and petrol spread all over. Unfortunately, it spread into a chapati maker’s sigiri, which caught fire and almost burnt the entire town. Thank God because we are near a lake, the residents managed to put off the fire that had already destroyed nine houses.

There was very much destruction of people’s businesses. It is a trading centre and so, people’s businesses were totally burnt down in those nine houses. The biggest challenge that we faced is the allocation and mushrooming of small petrol stations in our constituencies. There is a big security threat to both the economy and human beings. This petrol station was just constructed on someone’s verandas and it is licenced by the Government to operate.

Honourable members, you will agree with me that when you are moving through your constituencies, you see those small petrol stations in corridors, people’s verandas, near trading centres and so, you wonder where the Government or local government is looking when all these things are happening.

This is a big security threat with the Alshabab or the ADF we are encountering - it is very easy to burn up a trading centre in seconds because of those small petrol stations. It has already happened in Rakai. Thank God it was not a terror attack but it happened.

My prayer is one, these people do not have anything to use. They have lost businesses. Therefore, we call on Government to help and facilitate my people, because they have lost everything.

Secondly, I call upon the Office of Prime Minister to quickly give relief items to these people. They have no shelters and they have big families. They have no right to clothing and have nothing they are left with.

Thirdly, this fire burnt the nine houses because we did not have a quick response from the fire brigade. I request the Government that at least, we should have subregional fire brigade stations. We had to call Masaka - Mbarara was out and they called Bushenyi. Had it not been for the lake that is near us, the entire town was going to burn down. You can imagine what loss that would have been.

Therefore, Government should give assurance to Ugandans that the threat of fire is handled through establishing subregional fire stations - because now, a region serves nine to ten districts and you wonder how an emergency can be treated. I pray that the Government looks into that.

In addition to that, I request the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to also give quick relief items to these people because they do not have food.

These people also have loans. They have been running businesses through loans.  They cannot operate anymore and they do not have any way of paying off these loans or even putting back their businesses. Therefore, I pray that under the Microfinance sector, it should look into their problems and make sure that they are given quick -(Interjections)- not Emyooga. Emyooga has stopped but microfinance has the money for small businesses under SMEs.

Lastly, the owner of the petrol station who is Julius Kato should be reprimanded and the officers that gave him the operating licence for not following what was supposed to be done; to put a petrol station on someone’s veranda was wrong. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Kinyamatama. You have just said that the person was given a licence. He never gave himself a licence; why would you reprimand that person? 

Secondly, it is a disaster that happened. I mean you could not avoid it; our sympathies to the families that lost their houses and businesses. However, you cannot reprimand the owner of the business because you as the Government gave him a license to operate. The best thing we need to do is to be very careful. 

3.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, it is a very unfortunate situation in Rakai. I am happy that hon. Kinyamatama has raised it. Hon. Kyaviira Ssemwanga, the Member of Parliament for Buyamba also came to me today over the same and I guided him to work with us to get the assessment done.

Madam Speaker, because the prayers were very many, I am going to link up with the Member of Parliament so that we go through them together and we see how best we can quickly help the people of Rakai. I thank you.

3.11
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matters of national importance. On the 8thh September, this Parliament passed a resolution to transfer the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to the Office of the President. It was also resolved that vote 23, which normally takes care of that ministry be also transferred to the same Ministry of the Presidency.

Unfortunately, to our disappointment as representatives of the people, I have received information from the staff who work in that ministry that for the last six months or more, they have not been paid. Some of them have been chased out of their residential areas and as usual, they are experiencing a lot of hardship.

It was not the intention of Parliament that the staff of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation be abandoned. It was agreed that they would continue to serve this country as they were doing before under the same ministry except that administratively, all the operations were transferred to the office of the Presidency.

Madam Speaker, as a representative of the people, I would like an explanation from the Government as to what has happened to the vote of Science and technology and why is it that the members of staff or people who serve under that ministry have not been paid up to now? I beg to be informed, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ogwal, while you were away, we formed an adhoc committee that is handling issues of science technology and innovation. Therefore, we expect a report and that was one of the terms of reference. We expect a report from the committee on 21 December 2021.

Therefore, this issue is being investigated. It may be urgent but a clear process must be followed. We are going to have a response to that.

3.14
DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matters of national importance. Madam Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use another microphone, please.

DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, we experienced twin bombings in the city and several people were injured and others died. May their souls rest in eternal peace. However, Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the health care for those who are injured or maimed. Usually, in injuries of such magnitude, we either get sharp nails first and second degree burns or even third degree burns. We are asking ourselves that for those who were treated, especially our gallant police officers who were on duty, have they been able to get the required level of health care, which in most cases is tertiary health care?

Recently, on TV, I saw one of the victims of the Komamboga bomb blasts who were still complaining of having sharp nails in her body and some of these are bread winners in the light of COVID-19. 

Therefore, it is my humble prayer that the Director-General through the Ministry of Health can give us an update on how we are taking care of these gallant citizens. If need be,  Government should give them the services they deserve. If it means sponsoring them abroad for more specialised treatment - these are Ugandans - and I think they should benefit from such perks. 

For the police officers, some died or were injured in the line of duty.  Some level of compensation - whether it is promotions - because they were guarding these installations like CPS. Can we consider at least a token or some compensation even for those who died and those who are injured?

My colleague, hon. Suubi, talked about the emergency response system - the fire brigade. I think it is high time, honourable colleagues, that we also looked at extending or decentralising our colonial fire brigade system from the Clock Tower - now that the city has expanded - to places like Kira. Suppose this had happened in a place like Kira, it would have taken more than an hour for a fire truck to get across the town. 

Finally, two weeks ago, the Uganda Police Force passed out 5,200 Police Constables and deployed them all over the country. I thank them for that. However, most of these were transported to the subregions, that is, either Moroto, Mbarara or Hoima. They asked DPCs of the surrounding districts to come and pick them up. My thinking is that during such an operation, you do last-mile delivery of the troops - in this case the police officers. Some of the cars that were being used are the COVID-19 double cabins and the LCV cars that could come and pick these police constables cognisant of the fact that there was no food where they were being taken, and they have not yet been paid. 

Before we deploy, we should have taken care of the entire supply chain, which includes transportation and salaries because these police constables, without pay and you deploy them to subcounties and other police stations, they may engage in criminal activities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Ayume. The Minister of Internal Affairs should come and give us a statement on the deployment of these new police officers in a district without preparation for logistics 

The issue of fire brigades is still on the Minister of Internal Affairs. Just like hon. Juliet had said, these must be decentralised. I remember that day when there was a bomb blast here, it took long for the fire brigade to come. This must be taken seriously. 

Lastly, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health should follow up with the ministry on how these people are being treated. Dr Ayume, as the chairperson, can you follow it up and give the House feedback on how far the treatment of these people has taken place and what we can do. That is within your docket. Thank you. 

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sought your indulgence to make a statement, which in some way or another discomforted my colleague, the Government Chief Whip, regarding the new COVID-19 strand that is on the horizon. I asked my Shadow Minister of Health to raise a few issues for the attention of Government because we do not know when Government is going to respond to it. The fact that we do not sit in Cabinet, we did not know what happens in their kitchen.

We have a few issues to raise and I want to ask the Shadow Minister for Health to raise them on my behalf so that we get a plausible response from Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow Minister, raise your issue and we will subject it to a debate on Thursday, when Government is also bringing the statement on the same.

3.21
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue and statement that the LOP is presenting is on the new COVID-19 variant called Omicron, which was detected in a sample of a specimen that was received on 9th November. The first case was reported to the World Health Organisation on 24th November by South Africa. 

To-date, it is over a week and the country has not responded or informed the public about it. The laxity that we see today is the same that we saw at the time of the Delta variant. As it was in India, we were very quiet and because of that, we closed our economy for 42 days and lost very many lives. Today, we present our alternative policy to the same such that the country is saved from the impact of COVID-19 as it was with Delta. 

The newly discovered COVID-19 variant named Omicron has raised concern across the globe. This variant is reported to have originally been recorded in South Africa. It has so far been detected – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my colleague but I was just trying to find out whether this statement has been uploaded because I do not see it.

DR BATUWA: This is a statement that is received by the Clerk and the Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you become the Speaker today? What she is raising is, was it uploaded? You are reading a document that everybody is interested in following. If it is not uploaded - I am told it is uploaded. Please, check your iPads. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, the document is not there. All the Members can confirm. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, do you have an iPad? (Laughter) I can actually lend you mine. The document was uploaded 45 minutes ago. I think that is when we gave permission to the Leader of the Opposition. 

Honourable members, let us just receive the statement and we debate it on Thursday. 
Could you be fast? Please, summarise?

DR BATUWA: Yes. Concern has been raised on the possibility that the new variant may be more devastating than the Delta variant to which a number of lives of Ugandans were lost during the second wave. The risk is made more imminent, given the low vaccination rate in the country. So far, only 749,126 people have been fully vaccinated - the word is, “fully” vaccinated - against the eligible population of 22 million Ugandans. This translates into a vaccination rate of just 3.4 per cent. Hence, any upsurge, as noticed in the past two waves, would cause enormous strain on the health facilities, loss of lives, economic and social disruptions, as well as depression. It would also lead to further loss of jobs, continued disruption of learning, escalated teenage pregnancies, limited movements in case of heightened lockdown measures. 

It is crucial, therefore, that the country takes the necessary measures to detect, prevent the spreading of the new Omicron variant of COVID-19, and to the worst, contain it. Given the fact that, at the moment, there is no indication that the Omicron variant is within Uganda, the country should harness the window of opportunity to limit its entry into the country. 

Here under, Rt Hon. Speaker, we now present our alternative policy on how the Government should manage it: 
Formation of a joint East African Community Task Force
A joint East African Community Task Force should be formed by member states to develop a common approach towards the handling of the Omicron variant. At the moment, the National Task Forces of the different member states are implementing uncoordinated interventions. This has, in the recent past, been noted in the instances towards vaccination and continuation of learning. Aware that member states are challenged by porous borders that facilitate uncontrolled movements, a coordinated approach would enhance measures towards the management of COVID-19. 

The other approach is to implore the Government to develop a red list because countries that have this variant are known and therefore, we should present a red list. In consultation with other member states in the East African Community, Uganda should develop a red list of countries from which travellers are momentarily not allowed to access the country. A month’s restriction is realistic, for it will enable the Government to attain sufficient knowledge and understanding on the Omicron variant. This would enable continued travels into and out of the country with limited disturbance to the global supply chain. 
The third alternative policy looks at speeding up the vaccination process. It recognises the good effort the Government has done in urban centres; we have vaccination at churches and other areas. However, we are not seeing the same in rural areas or upcountry areas. So, we came up with a suggestion that the Government can borrow to speed up vaccination upcountry. These are parish vaccination clinics that have teams in every parish that move village to village while vaccinating the masses. 

The fourth is to allocate a minimum of five GeneXpert machines at each point of entry. This alternative policy relates to the statement the minister made some time back in relation to the delays at the airport. She made mention of the fact that Entebbe International Airport has two GeneXpert machines, which we clearly saw during that debate; that there were very few and maybe it was the reason for the delays at the airport, much as other processes were streamlined like issuing results and all that. The testing capability of the GeneXpert machine is the same as those in Bududa District Hospital, which has two GeneXpert machines. 

Tororo District Hospital has two GeneXpert machines but Entebbe International Airport receives many passengers. If we leave only these two GeneXpert machines and go by the directive she issued that once you are tested, whether positive or negative, you are let to go into the masses and you are notified later and maybe told to do self-quarantine or self-isolation. In the case of this variant, we cannot be that loose. 

We want a situation where people stay at the airport until a negative COVID-19 test is communicated. For that to happen, in relation to not delaying passengers, we need at least 15 GeneXpert machines at the airport. In case the variant makes presence in the East African Region - as of now, it has not made presence and it is the reason we ask for a common approach. However, in case it makes a presence in the East African Region, we will need at least two GeneXpert machines at each border point. 

The last proposal is the resumption of work by medical personnel. We realised that medical personnel are on strike. We join others in urging them that we are now faced with the Omicron variant and so, they should come to the rescue of the country. This plea is not to undermine the effort they need or the duty that the Government has to match to make their working environment better to answer some of their proposals but to ask them to come together and we beat this fight against Omicron. 
We recommend to the Government that since a supplementary was passed recently, in which allowances for the interns and Senior Health officers (SHOs) was catered for, they should commit the money by the end of this month and pay the first allowances of the interns and SHOs. As that happens, since it is in the statement, we appeal to the doctors who are on strike to call it off this week such that we prepare for this variant. I beg to submit. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government.

3.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to make clarification from what the shadow minister raised because it seems as if the Government has not been minding and is not ready to respond to this. 

Government resolved one thing. We do not want to make any knee jerk reaction in regard to this issue. We want the reaction and steps taken by the Government to be informed by science and wide consultations with our partners, especially in the Southern African Region and WHO. 
Government has been doing a gene sequencing of the positive cases to determine whether we have already got this variant. We expect results to come out today and this will guide us better. Tomorrow, the committee is meeting to look through the process and the evidence they have and also consult our colleagues in South Africa and WHO is part of this. 

On Thursday, we are prepared to come and make a statement here. We did not want to rush to make statements for the sake of it but we want to be informed by science and wide consultations. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come and report on Thursday. Next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for the disability - 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities due on the 3 December 2021. 

Background 
The United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons was held from 1983 to 1992 to enable governments and organisations to implement measures to improve the lives of persons with disabilities all over the world.

On 14 October 1992, as the decade grew to a close, the UN General Assembly proclaimed 3rd December as the International Day for Persons with Disabilities. This day was first observed on 3 December 1992. 

Every 3rd December, Uganda joins the rest of the world to celebrate the International Day for Persons with Disabilities and to acknowledge the capabilities of persons with disabilities in contributing towards the development of the country. 

The day is also celebrated to create awareness on the importance of promoting equality and full participation of persons with disabilities in social life as well as development.

Through this day, Government takes stock of the achievements made in serving persons with disabilities, the challenges encountered and comes with a way forward to serving them well. 

The disability situation in Uganda 
The Persons with Disability Act, 2020 defines disability as a substantial functional limitation of a person's daily life activities caused by physical, mental or sensory impairment and environmental barriers, resulting into limited participation in society on equal basis with others and includes an impairment. 

Madam Speaker, Schedule Three of The Person with Disability Act, 2020 provides for disability categories and impairments to include:
    a) Physical disability caused by cerebral palsy, amputation of a limb, paralysis or deformity. 
    b) Hearing disability, including deafness and hard of hearing disability. 
    c) Visual disability, including blindness and low vision disability.
    d) Deaf-blind disability.
    e) Mental disability including psychotic disability and learning disability. 
    f) We have little people, people with albinism and multiple disabilities. 

Madam Speaker, according to Uganda Bureau of Statistics Disability Monographic Study of 2019, disability prevalence stood at 14 per cent; 15 per cent for female and 12 per cent for male of the 40.3 million population of Uganda at that time. This translates to about 5,642,000 Ugandans with disability. 

According to the same UBOS report, multiple disabilities were the majority of invisible categories of the disability fall, which constitutes at 36 per cent and 1.4 million persons with disabilities. Disability was found to increase significantly with age and disability among people aged 85 years and above was found to be at 71 per cent.

Madam Speaker, Government is committed to addressing the concerns and needs that come with the increasing number of persons with disabilities through eliminating all forms of neglect, abuse and violence as provided under Articles 32 and 35 of the Constitution of Uganda while promoting recognition of their contribution to national development. 

Madam Speaker, since inception of the commemoration of this day, the following positive impacts have been registered:
    a) There has been increased awareness and advocacy about disability care and management through stakeholder collaboration, especially with the civil society organisations.
    b) Appreciation of capacities and contributions of persons with disability to the national involvement thereby enhancing inclusion in the development through exhibitions and testimonies of persons with disabilities during documentations. 
    c) Enhanced Government support towards programmes of persons with disabilities especially in the areas of livelihood, care and support. 
    d) There have been improved legal and policy frameworks both at global and national level that are aimed at protecting the rights of persons with disabilities. 

In addition, I thank this Parliament because we have many laws now that are inclusive of people with disabilities. 

The theme of the International Day of Persons with Disability 2021 
The global theme of this year is, “Leadership and Participation of People with Disabilities towards an Inclusive, Accessible and Sustainable post COVID-19.” Our domesticated national theme is “Not all Disabilities are Visible; a Call for a Stronger post COVID-19 Agenda.” This was purposefully selected to draw attention to the fact that many times, invisible disabilities which include hydrocephalus, autism, mental disability, albinism, down syndrome, cerebral palsy and deaf-blind are not always profiled like others such as the blindness and physical disability. 

Madam Speaker, this year’s theme is in line with the principle of leaving no one behind as highlighted in the SDG and NDP III, among other frameworks. 

The theme is further aimed at strengthening and amplifying awareness for invisible disabilities and increasing mainstreaming of persons with invisible disabilities in all development planning processes and empowering them to attain their full potential. 

Madam Speaker, the main categories of invisible disability in Uganda include mental disability, including slow learners or intellectual disability. This is generally characterised by a combination of abnormal thoughts, perceptions, emotional behaviour and relationships with others and inability to comprehend or remember what is taught in class or even in society. 

This category of disability is not much understood and is worse when children who are frequently perceived as naughty, stubborn or ill mannered by their families and communities and in most cases, may not be given the required support. 

Other forms
    a) Spina bifida, which involves spinal and defects; 
    b) Hydrocephalus, which relates to build up of fluids in the brain; 
    c) Cerebral palsy, which relates to congenital disorder that affects posture; 
    d) Down syndrome, which relates to congenital disorder that affects physical movement; 
    e) Autism, which relates to defects in social skills. 

These categories of disabilities are considered invisible because of their complex presentation, stigma and discrimination attached to them or limited statistics on them. Most times, these conditions present as multiple disabilities and maybe to add, sometimes, in society, they are regarded as witchcraft, which causes them.

Deaf blind
Deaf blind is another complex condition or double disability, which is difficult to comprehend by some members of society and is sometimes associated with witchcraft. 

Related to the above are the complex forms of communication like tactile, sign language and lip reading. These are not easily understood by many people including parents and caregivers. It thus becomes difficult for them to understand the needs of these persons and they end up ignoring them. 

Albinism is another invisible disability that arises from a rare group of genetic disorder that cause skin, hair or eyes to have little or no colour. It is indivisible in the sense that it is not understood. In addition, in some neighbouring countries, these persons have been sacrificed through witchcraft as a source of wealth. 

Girls and women with disabilities can also be contextually categorised as invisible groups of persons with disabilities due to cultural stereotypes that puts on them to a double burden. Girls and women face a double-edged sword arising from Gender Based Violence (GBV). It is estimated that one in every five women is a woman with disability. This is from Disability and Gender Based Violence, ADB 2011. 

For women with disabilities, GBV is often associated with a disability-based discrimination but also associated with the myths and stereotypes attached to girls with disability and women with disabilities which promote sexual and gender based violence and harassment. For example, it was reported that girls and women with disabilities are sometimes raped and used as sexual objects to cure HIV/AIDS. I caution the gentleman; sometimes we do not have fixed partners and sometimes you think we are free and you keep sneaking and get HIV/AIDS. 

Venue and chief guest for the national commemoration 
I just wanted to caution. Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament since the inception of this day, Uganda has been organising celebrations on regional, rotational basis. 
However, with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, since the year 2020, the day has been commemorated scientifically. This year, the venue is going to be Statehouse Entebbe, with a few invited guests. The chief guest for the National Day is His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda. 
What are the efforts made by Government to promote the rights of persons with disabilities?
 Government has registered significant progress in the realisation, promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities through the following innovations:

    1) Enactment of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020. The law provides for the protection and promotion of rights of persons with disabilities. And this is in fulfilment of the constitutional mandate under Article 35, on protection of the rights of persons with disabilities.

    2) The education sponsorship program, under the Joint Admission Board has increased the percentage of students with disability to 60 per cent. This is in addition to affirmative action provided by the higher education financing board that prioritises applicants with disability. 


And maybe, I need to note here that in the higher financing board, students with disabilities, both art and science are considered for the loan scheme. 

    3) The affirmative action on political representation. We now have representatives of persons with disabilities across all political structures of the country. That is from the village to the national level. 

    4) Representation of persons with disabilities on boards and commissions: This has been very crucial in ensuring inclusive programming and development since personal disabilities now have a voice in these boards and commissions

 
    5) Percentage allocation of funds to persons with disabilities under the Parish Development Model: Madam Speaker, it has been proposed that persons with disabilities under the Parish Development Model be allocated at 10 per cent of funds in addition to incorporating the structures of persons with disabilities within the management of the funds. This will go a long way in supporting our beneficiaries to partake of the programme in an inclusive manner. 

    6) There has been an increase of the special grant for persons with disabilities. I thank this Parliament for doing that, as part of an affirmative action to capacitate people with disability access other programmes easily.

Persons with disabilities are grateful to Government for honouring their request to increase the special grant for persons with disabilities from Shs 5 billion in 2021 to Shs 9.6 billion in the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

During the last financial year, the ministry managed to disperse grants to 834 PWDs households to start income generating activities. In this Financial Year 2021/2022, my ministry will disperse grants to 1535 PWD households, of which 78 households have already received the grant in the first and second quarter. 

For information, my ministry is verifying the new groups for this last third quarter. The demand for the grant is high and yet, the budget is limited. 

My appeal to honourable members is to support my ministry and raise this budget of the grant to Shs 16.15 billion. This will enable us reach 24,000 households targeting 36,000 persons with disabilities who need support to start income generating activities. 

The grants are a preparation and grooming ground for persons with disabilities to understand how to manage enterprises, reduce vulnerability, increase household incomes and reduce exclusion from society.
  
In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge and appreciate the honourable Members of Parliament for their efforts in enacting legislation and budget allocations towards disability empowerment. I urged Members of Parliament to participate in the district commemorations and interact with persons with disabilities to better understand their concerns. 

I conclude with an appeal to honourable Members of Parliament, to always support and mobilise resources for persons with disabilities, especially the increment of special grant for persons with disabilities to Shs 16 billion for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I submit, for God and my country. Thank you for listening. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We will debate this for 20 minutes before we move on to the next item. 

3.51
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. And specifically, I want to thank the minister for the support; that this time as we are celebrating the international day for people living with disabilities, we are going to get bicycles in Bugiri District. We are very grateful as Bugiri District. We are going to get 120 wheelchairs. We are very grateful for the 120 wheelchairs on behalf of the people of Bugiri.

We should put a lot of effort as Parliament to support people living with special abilities. Before I came into Parliament when I was working in the NGO field, we used to refer to them as people with special abilities, not just people living with disabilities. So, as Parliament, we should stand strong as we support this group, because all of us at a given time T, you never know what can happen and you start living with a special ability. I beg to submit

3.52
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the ministry for supporting my people with disability in my constituency. Seventeen groups have been supported with Shs 65 million. I thank you.

I want to call upon the people with disability to always have high self-confidence and always compete favourably without fearing that they have a disability. For example – I will give myself as an example – during campaigns, I beat people who had two big eyes. I, a person with one and a half eyes, beat two people with big eyes. 

If I had no confidence, I would not compete. Therefore, I call upon people with disabilities not to always fear to compete with people without disability. I say this, disability does not mean inability. 

Another thing to note is that the number of people with disabilities is increasing daily. As the minister has told us that it is almost 30 per cent out of the 40 million Ugandans – (Interruptions)
MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague has mentioned that he beat people with two big eyes. I am just wondering what he means by beating but also he should explain what big eyes mean, because I mean – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, you are about to go and check whether he has two eyes or not - (Laughter) What the honourable member is saying is during the elections - if you were attentive enough - people who were not disabled like himself – He is just emphasising that he is disabled. He is a representative of persons with disabilities. (Applause) 

Because he is disabled, disability is not inability, that much as you are disabled, you are able to do what those who are not disabled can do. So, he is in order. Can you continue? Next time, I am going to ask hon. Opendi to go and check the level of disability. (Laughter)

MR WAKABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To be specific, I won people with eyes like hon. Opendi. (Laughter) 
That is just an example. 

As I was saying, the number of people with disability in Uganda has increased to the level that we have almost 30 per cent of the people in Uganda disabled. They are being represented by only a few people. These are eight million people. I call upon us that we increase the number of people representing people with disabilities at all levels of leadership in the country. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we are limiting the debate. As you have heard, much as the honourable member is talking about increasing the number; actually, you did not come under disability. You came in your own right as a Member of Parliament. 

However, we must also thank Government for, this time round, giving us a Minister in charge of Disabilities. (Applause) 
The inclusion has been made. 

3.57
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at the presentation of the minister and he seems to be appreciating what has been achieved. He asked for this, for special grants - we have been given. So, everything is perfect, as far as the needs for the disabled is concerned, which is very surprising.

I was thinking that the minister would highlight for us what the areas or gaps are where Parliament would help the disabled and maybe improve on their welfare and so on. Madam Speaker, I am definitely, by virtue of age, already in that class of disability. (Laughter) 

I would like to highlight a few things of interest to categories or people like us. First of all, if you come to Parliament, to walk those long stairs that bring us into the hall here, you require support. Right now, people with disabilities have to be carried. Why don’t we have rails, knowing very well that right now, we have disability as part of reality? As Members of Parliament, we should be having rails. 

We do not even have toilet facilities. People with disabilities have to keep moving up and down to look for where they can find washrooms with gadgets to support them. So, these are obvious issues. What about in areas in public institutions? What about in hotels? What about in public areas? These areas are not being looked at, as a matter of policy.

Madam Speaker, I am requesting the minister to design or make  proposals for more inclusive, responsible policies that would holistically take care of the needs of the disabled.

What I can tell you right now is that COVID-19 is a reality and it is with us. How much has the Government done to touch the lives of the disabled through these various COVID-19 interventions? A disabled person is taken like any other person and yet for them, to access a health facility, is a challenge. 

So, these are areas that I feel very disappointed about. I would have expected the minister – a victim herself. She is a disabled person - just like I am. We should have probably put our heads together, caucused and come up with a better presentation for Parliament to consider our needs because nobody can speak for us, unless we speak for ourselves better. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, take note that we need inclusive and responsive policies for people with disabilities. You actually go to some buildings like Supreme Court. A person with disabilities cannot climb up - there are no lifts. Government should not hire such kind of places that do not cater for people with disabilities.

Also, much as you are disappointed, hon. Ogwal, there is a difference between disability and being elderly. (Laughter) 

4.01
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me appreciate the honourable minister for the good statement.

I am the patron for the Disability Union in Amuru District. They appointed me to be their patron. Disability is not inability. I was quite happy when the minister appealed to Parliament that come next financial year, we should support the increment of the disability grant to Shs 16 billion.

Madam Speaker, it is very important to support persons with disabilities. If you move in the villages and homes where we have children with disabilities, many people do not care about them. If you look at the houses where they sleep, they normally prioritise the children who are able against those who are disabled. We need to take this matter very seriously.

Therefore, when we are increasing the grant to support persons with disability, the ministry and Government should make sure that this grant reaches the person who is deep in the village.

The disabled persons in Amuru district have never benefitted from Government programmes. They normally hear about the Disability Grant. They normally hear that Government has support but if you go on the ground, you will never find anyone benefitting.

At this time, when Parliament is considering this, let it reach the person who is deep in the village, in my village Amuru, Katakwi, Bukedea; everywhere. It is very important, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, the people with disabilities made a mistake to choose a person who is not disabled because once you are disabled, you should talk about it. You should show case on disabilities. Because you fear talking about disability, that is why you have not benefitted.

One thing we need to encourage is to increase on the budget of disability; an inclusion of everybody. We should reduce stigma on the people who are disabled. First of all, there is even stigma on the people who are patrons – they fear talking about it. 

So, we should get a disabled person to be a patron, so that he is able to speak about it and showcase it and change the livelihood of the people who are disabled. At the same time, we also need to make sure that persons with disability are catered for. I like the way you stand, when the Speaker is speaking - include persons with disability in education, sports, technology and innovation. The disabled people must be given priority in education loans and be employed in work places. They should get decent work.

4.05
MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With your indulgence and in line with the Rules of Procedure, allow me to submit while seated.

I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report. I would like to appeal to the Government regarding what we call assistive devices. These include crutches, wheelchairs, hearing aids and many other things that people with disabilities use to survive.

Many years ago, we had orthopaedic workshops in different districts. However, all these workshops have since - I do not know what happened to them but they no longer exist, including the one at Mulago. These workshops used to manufacture wheelchairs and all the assistive devices here.

Right now, persons with disabilities have no wheelchairs and assistive devices. Just like you see hon. Asamo and me - without these crutches, that we have, we cannot come here or do anything without the assistive devices. 

Colleagues will agree with me and some of my friends here sometimes think that I can access wheelchairs. They keep coming and asking me: “how can you help us get wheelchairs for our people”.

I want to say that access to assistive devices for persons with disability is a primary duty of the Government and therefore, the Government should revamp the orthopaedic workshops. Otherwise, a wheelchair is Shs million. It is even expensive for me, who is a Member of Parliament. Now, what about the people who are very poor?
The second issue is about education. The invisible disabilities we are talking about are in the theme. There are no schools that can accommodate these kinds of children. We are not talking about exclusive education but inclusive education. The law says that schools should be inclusive; Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Primary Education (USE) schools must have accommodations for these kinds of children and they must house teachers with special needs.

Madam Speaker, most schools have no special needs for teachers, no access to bathrooms and classrooms. Therefore, the Government should start thinking about making all schools accessible to children with disabilities, if we are going to talk about inclusive education. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us use three minutes each. 

4.08
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Talking about disability, everybody here is a candidate and therefore, it touches the heart of everyone in this House. I would like to join the world in commemorating the day, on 3rd December.

I would like to bring to your attention a challenge, which is Northern Uganda. A new form of disability, which is the Nodding Syndrome - Besides having the challenge of the Nodding Syndrome, the parents of these victims are crippled. They cannot do anything apart from attending to these victims. Also, the young girls are being raped by the same locals within the area and nothing is being done about it. 

It is my humble appeal through you that the minister takes time to visit these areas with patients and victims of Nodding Syndrome because it is a worrying situation. In fact, I am wondering why a report has not come out up-to-date about the causes of this Nodding Syndrome and why there is a blind eye on planning for these patients. We need immediate intervention from the Government.

Secondly, it pains my heart a lot when I see those who gave their youthful age to serve this country - some of them were in the military and attained injuries and became disabled. They cannot access their pensions up to today. They cannot even move to Kampala every day to follow-up on these pensions. It is my humble appeal that we take keen interest in paying pension so that these people can live happily.

Lastly, as a woman, if you go to the labour wards in this country, there are no facilities for women with disabilities. They can hardly climb up on the beds to give birth. I pray that the Ministry of Health provides standard beds for women who are disabled so that they give birth normally and comfortably. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

Originally, the country had diseases that used to cripple our people and cause disability. This Government fought very hard and vaccinated the children of this country. You would expect that disability would be at a reducing scale. However, there are upcoming issues that are affecting our people and causing disability. Therefore, I would like to implore the minister to critically examine these areas and address them in specific terms. 

In Mulago, there is a ward called “boda-boda ward” and there are many people in it. They spend a year there and they leave the ward disabled. There is no management of this boda boda industry. 

There is also uncontrolled alcohol intake, which is causing most of our young children to go berserk and become mentally disabled. We need to address these areas.

There is an area of Nodding Syndrome that she has just highlighted. Madam Speaker, I request the minister to take specific interest in the children with Nodding Syndrome and profile the percentages that are affected by this disease and subsequently become disabled. These are not only disabled but they are in a horrible state.

Last year, I got an opportunity to visit Omoro but when you look at these children, you lose appetite for eating because it is such a painful process. I request through you - (Member timed out)


4.13
MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to commemorate the day for our people with disabilities. I thank the Government and the minister for the continuous contribution it is making towards this cause.

Madam Speaker, we still have challenges with grants, which are not tailor-made. We have to be strategic because these people have unique characteristics of disability deformations. As we continue to give support to persons with disability, we should look at skilling them as a way of sustaining them. Otherwise, most of the activities that require us to apply energy, persons with disabilities are unable to perform. Therefore, we should introduce skills and innovations that can support their income.  

I read a report by the International Labour Organisation that gives data that about seven per cent of people living with disability contributes to our GDP. I beg to submit. 

4.15
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the good submission and the theme, “Not all disabilities are visible.”

Sign language is a right and an integral part of communication, world over. This is to ensure accessibility of the people living with disabilities to services, workplaces and other amenities. This is in line with the 2030 agenda of leaving no one behind. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is mandated to spearhead policy that enforces special interest groups’ inclusion. When will the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development reach us at a stage of having a sign language interpreter for every sector, meeting, event or conference, including the speeches of His Excellency the President of Uganda to the nation where most of these people who have such disabilities never benefit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Sign language and interpretation is very important. Out of the seven billion people, 15 per cent are disabled in one way or another. Out there, they would want to know and even understand what we deliberate in this House. 

Therefore, if we even do not have somebody who can do sign language or interpret for Parliament, then we need to do something. (Applause)

4.17
MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our honourable minister for a great statement about people with disabilities. 

I request that the Government should always put special interview centres for people with disabilities. Sometimes, people apply for jobs but they cannot access the centres to do interviews. Definitely, they are left out yet, they qualify. They have the capacity but they cannot move to the examination or interview centres. 

Therefore, I request that the Ministry of Public Service should always be mindful of people who cannot come to Kampala. They cannot move from our villages like Ntungamo to come to centres like Mbarara to do interviews.

Secondly, we should always have legal aid support to people with disabilities. Some women and girls are raped but they cannot get justice. Government should put a fund where when a person with a disability reports something about such serious cases like rape, being oppressed in families, disabled people whose land is grabbed especially the deaf or the blind, they should always access justice. They should get assistance from Government through getting lawyers because most of them do not have the capacity to hire them. I beg to submit. 

4.19
MS MIRIAM MUKHAYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to re-echo and appreciate the honourable Minister for the report and for the support that they have endeavoured to offer to the people living with disabilities. 

Government has been able to support senior citizens and there is a grant that they get on a monthly basis. My suggestion is, Government should look at a special grant for children with disabilities and help our children out there who are born with disabilities to ensure that they get support. 

In Uganda today, children are struggling to study. Although we have UPE, parents struggle to get all the requirements for their children in school. A parent who has a child with disabilities gets a double cost to ensure that this child goes to school and that they are safe. 

My suggestion to the ministry is that we consider having a disability grant for children with disabilities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Honourable members, you will debate in the subsequent items. Let us hear from the shadow Minister of Gender. 

4.20
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Fortunate Nantongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the statement made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on persons with disabilities. As indicated by many of the Members in this House, we are preparing to return to school in January. However, we have clearly indicated that the education system in Uganda does not cater for persons with disabilities. 

It is true that disability is not inability but disability is associated with limited income. This implies that the parents with children with disabilities have limited capacity to pay school fees for their children to access education. 

We, as the Opposition, propose that the Government should come up with a policy that can provide free education to the children with disabilities. We are well aware that there is UPE and USE. However, we indicate that this is not inclusive enough for the children with disabilities. 

Therefore, we need the Government to come up with a policy that could provide free education and free health care to persons with disabilities.
 
Also, the high prices of the equipment used by persons with disabilities are indicative of the high taxes that are imposed therein. Therefore, we propose that equipment used by the persons with disabilities – (Interruption)

MR MPINDI: Thank you, shadow minister for giving way. The information I want to give you is just to add on the prayer that Government should consider helping children with disability. There is a category of disability, which is mainly in children called spinal bifida and hydrocephalus. This kind of disability is very expensive. 

Our parents, the mothers who have those children with disabilities suffer a lot in terms of meeting medical and other related costs. They incur those costs as individuals and it is very costly. That has resulted in them thinking that giving birth to such a child is a curse and many have abandoned them. 

Therefore, I propose that Government should think of a social protection programme. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you sit? You are the one who gave him permission and the minister is going to respond after. You gave out your time.

MR MPINDI: Madam Speaker, Government should think of a social protection programme that is aimed at enhancing these related costs that our parents are facing. 

Otherwise, I thank the honourable members for the positive submission on issues of disability but also consider the increment that the ministers prayed for, so that we get this money and it comes to your constituencies. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you respond to the issues raised?(Hon. Muyingo rose_) Hon. Muyingo, are you the Minister of Gender? 

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Can I say something before she responds, Madam Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On education, please. 
DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I just want to put right the record. I have heard my colleague say that the Government does not favour people with disability and I do not want Members to go with this wrong information because the Government of Uganda has made education free; right from primary to secondary. We have UPE and USE. 

Even in these, there are people with disability. Every year, this Parliament has been passing a budget to cater for people with disability. We have in place a student loan scheme; gadgets that are provided are included from part of the money that is provided. Even during examinations, these examination bodies have special arrangements for people with disability.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, she talked about free education for the disabled and now, you are talking about a loan. The disabled want free education for people with disability up to university level. (Applause) It is not a loan. 

The presumption is that because they are disabled, they are not able to work and are not able to get money to pay for education. What the House is saying is that we need education for the people with disability. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually food for thought for you to see how you can amend some of these provisions. You do not have to -

DR MUYINGO: I have taken note, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, take note. I just wanted him to go with that information that even the equipment is tax free. Yes, honourable minister.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues for the good comments they have made. However, I want to report that issues of disability are crosscutting and they go to all spheres of life, such as health and education. My ministry is only a co-ordinating agency to ensure that people with disabilities achieve and attain their rights. 

I thank this Parliament for the Act of 2020. It provides rights for people with disabilities in all sectors - the sports; you talked about, the recreation and the health. 

In my ministry right now, we are almost at the final stages of finalising the regulations. These regulations, I want to believe, if completed, will make the disabled get their rights, because we are going to get to litigation on issues of disability on how they are included. It is going to unpack the whole Act and people will be able to handle them. 
I would like to make a comment on their special grant. It is demand driven. As I talk now, we have 31 districts, which have not applied for this grant because neither people– (Interjections)- where is Amuru? Hon. Olanya is the patron. May be they did not apply but it is up to them to make an application through their local government and the DCDO’s office. There, it is assessed and sent to the national level to be given money. Therefore, I would like to encourage him to check. If he does not have the guidelines, he can come to me and I guide him on how the people can apply. 

I would like to agree that issues of assistive devices are great. Madam Speaker, I recognise that once you have been given a platform of where you can bring your issues - that is why I want to appreciate that. We shall continue demanding. Some of our things are very expensive but I wanted to remove from the shadow minister that issues that affect disabled people – note that we do not have taxation; this includes the vehicles. 

I think you see that most of my colleagues are driving cars with red number plates. If you qualify to be disabled, please, enjoy it. Some of us want to pay taxes so that we can drive a black number plate but those who want to get those cars - Mama Cecilia, you are now moving from elders to disability. Next time, you will get that red number plate and enjoy part of what Government of Uganda has put in place.

I would like to say that the Government is listening whenever we have complaints. Madam Speaker, these things are brought on. 
When I will be making my speech, I have the details of almost all the challenges people have raised. Mama Cecilia told me to look at the preventive measures. I want to say that the Prime Minister of Uganda, during the Cabinet presentation, already talked about the boda boda accidents. How do we curb boda bodas, especially in the city? They are very many and are causing a lot of accidents; more disabilities. I think that is one of the areas that people are getting more broken and they will want crutches. Mine is very expensive. A common person cannot get them, because I get them from the US. You might have to look for them everywhere. 

I would like to thank you. We pray that different MDAs will come on board to support disability. Madam Speaker, I pledge, as a minister, because this is my area. This is where I get my votes from. We shall always work together. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like to thank the members of Parliament for acknowledging the plight of the people with disability. 

Honourable Minister, as much as you say that your ministry is a co-ordinating agency, one of the things that you need to do is monitor what is happening. We would wish to hear from you what is happening with the Nodding Syndrome Disease. You will come and present it to this House. We need information on the nodding children in Northern Uganda and what your office has done to help them. 

We also need information on what was raised by Members, on people with disabilities; especially their pending payments that ought to be paid and what policies you are putting in place. 

Like I said before, when you go to the Supreme Court, there is no inclusion of people with disability, even just what Members raised on interpretation; the sign language. We need to get that. 

We also need to reduce the stigma – (A member rose) - I wish you could sit, Madam.

MS ASAMO: Madam, I have a problem with accessibility. That is why you see that I do not even sit here. I do not have special consideration, as a special minister - you know, I am very special but maybe, you need to give me a very special chair here with arms and that helps me to get up – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please.

MS ASAMO: Madam, with your permission, I would like to comment on the nodding disease. Before I became a minister or the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I moved through the whole of Kitgum, Pader and Omoro to check on children with disabilities. 
I know there is a report on nodding disease in this Parliament. The Minister of Health - I remember we even fought for a special budget for nodding disease. However, I was invited on 18th by the Archbishop, Odama, on that issue. I will be in Kitgum and we shall start the process, Madam, and take your advice. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you must appreciate that we have never had a Minister of Disability. You are the first of this kind, so we need a report from the minister, not from Health. 

We also need to make sure that there is inclusion of people with disability. It is now 15 years since we adopted the UN Convention on the Rights of the People with Disability. This is the best time for us to prove to promote the unprecedented space for people with disability, as per Article 35 of the Constitution.

Therefore, we need to promote and remove stigma from people with a disability. 
Honourable members, thank you very much for participating in this debate. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE WORLD AIDS DAY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister for the Presidency. (Hon. Kabanda rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hajjat, when did you become a Minister for the Presidency?

4.35
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Madam Speaker, I am here to represent the Minister for the Presidency who is out of the country but she permitted me to come and present the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hajjat, we have three Ministers in the Presidency. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 65.6 MILLION SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS EQUIVALENT TO $90 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE UGANDA SECONDARY SCHOOL EDUCATION EXPANSION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Prime Minister?

4.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, when a minister is away, she can delegate another minister to present or to act on her behalf. The minister who is here is from the Office of the President. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I should have got a letter in writing like when hon. Muhwezi is away, he writes and says; “I am away; I am sending so-and-so to represent me.” 
I have already made a ruling to that effect, Hajjat.  There are three ministers in the Presidency; it is not only one minister. 

MS NAKADAMA: She is one of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 65.6 MILLION SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS EQUIVALENT TO $90 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE UGANDA SECONDARY SCHOOL EDUCATION EXPANSION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson. (Hon. Silwany rose_) Procedure? 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I am aware that this Parliament has been approving several loans and especially in the sector of education. In principle, I agree with the loan but wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to first review the performance of the previous loans, especially in the education sector before we approve this loan? 

However, in principle, I would support this because it is for the expansion of the secondary schools. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to first review the performance of the other loans? For example, in my constituency, the construction of all the seed schools that were under the loans, there is nothing going on and people are on our necks. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a good idea. Can I have first the Minister of Finance to move this motion and then the chairperson will read the report? 

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: My procedural point is that our Rules of Procedure prohibit us debating in anticipation. Therefore, the matter that my good friend has raised is in anticipation of the report being presented. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I called the Minister of Finance to come and present the motion; I did not take his request. The Minister of Finance should present the motion.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance; I was asked to stand in for the Minister of Finance and now that it is not done in writing, what do I do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, under normal circumstances, the Minister of Finance is supposed to bring the motion, which will either be seconded or not. Then the chairperson of the committee will read his report. Prime Minister -

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I am going to inform the Minister of Finance to be here tomorrow so that he can move this motion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, we push this item to tomorrow. That is a neater way of doing things. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is why I tell you to make your ministers attend to the House. Because when your ministers are not around, it makes things not work out. Next item.

RESPONSES TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. SARAH NAJJUMA ON THE RECURRENT FATALITIES ARISING FROM INCESSANT BOMB/GRENADE EXPLOSIONS IN NAKASEKE DISTRICT, INCLUDING ONE THAT CLAIMED THE LIVES OF THREE CHILDREN IN SEMUTO-NAKASEKE DISTRICT ON 29 OCTOBER 2021 AND THE NEED FOR COMPENSATION OF THE AFFECTED FAMILIES


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government? Minister of Internal Affairs

4.44
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I am going to notify the Minister of Internal Affairs because they are in a meeting. I am going to notify them so that they can come and respond to these questions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this Order Paper was uploaded yesterday. The presumption is that everybody had access to it. It is a total contempt of Parliament for you not to come and respond to what is on the Order Paper. It is also a lack of respect for Parliament. Let us have respect for each other. Next?
4.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I think your guidance is well appreciated from the right hand side of the Speaker but in a very worrying way, Parliament is losing time and before we know it, this House is going to be half empty because there are Members going for games and the holidays are coming close. 

One of the reasons I resisted the overtures of my colleague who wanted us to postpone our statement on the COVID-19 surge was that the frontbench is actually sleeping on duty and they want us to sleep with them on duty, which we are not going to accept. 

The frontbench on the right hand side of the Speaker should be notified that we are not going to join them in wasting time and taxpayers’ money. It is not the first time. I wanted to ask the Minister of Finance about this SDR. I cannot put the Minister of Education and Sports to pin him to answer this SDRs, when delegated. Yet, we have issues with them.
The Rt Hon. Prime Minister must commit. If they are not around, the rules allow them to ask the Speaker to suspend Parliament and we do other business in the committees. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to refer you to Rule 114 and it states “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House and where none of them is able to attend, the Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interest in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly”. For your information, I was not notified. There is an aspect of notification. You need to take note of that. 

Honourable members, we should not take this simple and we are following the rules. Tomorrow, you will go to the Cabinet complaining that I hate you. I do not mind whatever you say. You must do the correct things.

RESPONSE ON THE FAILURE BY MS HAMIS KIGGUNDU TO ADHERE TO CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS TO COMPLETE THE DEVELOPMENT OF NAKIVUBO WAR MEMORIAL STADIUM WITHIN THE PRESCRIBED TWO YEAR PERIOD AND THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO CONSIDER OPTING FOR OPEN BIDDING TO DEVELOP THE COMPLEX AND FOR PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE MATTER. 
4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, this is our response. 

Section 3.1 of the Addendum No.1 to the Public Private Partnership Agreement for the redevelopment and the upgrading of Nakivubo Memorial Stadium between the trustees of Nakivubo Memorial Stadium and Ham Enterprise Uganda Ltd of May 2017, states that “The private party shall complete the works here in agreed within a period not exceeding five years from the date of execution of this addendum”. Furthermore, there is an addendum, No.2, which provides for an extension of three years. 

Madam Speaker, Addendum No.1 was made on the 10 May 2017 and Addendum No.2 was signed on 15 March 2019, in which article 3.1 stipulates “in accordance with the mutual strategic benefits for both parties, best investment practices, and in line with enhancement in the magnitude of works, quality and the financial requirements, the developer is hereby granted an additional three years on top of the five years earlier agreed in which to complete the works”. This is an indication that Ham Enterprises Limited still has a running contract, save for the hindrances in construction works during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports, therefore, will continue engaging Ham Enterprise to ensure that this important project is delivered on time. I submit, Madam Speaker.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My procedural issue was anchored on the fact that the Minister for Security is in the House. Wouldn't it be procedurally right to focus on the issues of security matters, especially the report? Otherwise, tomorrow is World AIDS Day. 

I am wondering whether we want to go down in the history of the world to be a Parliament that failed to recognise the importance and significance of the day, by having the Minister of Health absent. As we continue with the day's business, Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Government Chief Whip to – 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, we have the Order Paper with us and we are following what is on it. This business of smuggling in issues – I think you people just like Maj. Gen Muhwezi.

MR KATUSABE: We love Jim. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we proceed with the Order Paper? Please, next item.

RESPONSE ON THE QUALIFICATION AND SELECTION CRITERIA FOR THE SPORTS PERSONS THAT CONSTITUTE UGANDA CONTINGENTS TO INTERNATIONAL SPORTS ENGAGEMENTS, SUCH AS THE OLYMPICS 

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

The qualification and selection criteria for sports persons to participate in international sports activities or competitions, such as Olympics, is by the qualification determined by the systems set by those individual international federations. Each competition has designed qualifying events and specific periods that are used to determine qualification in line with international federation of that particular sport.

It is important here to note that it is the mandate of each national sports federation or association, with support from National Council of Sports on behalf of Government, to constitute, qualify and prepare sportspersons to represent the country in international sports competition. I submit, Madam Speaker.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS UPDATE ON THE SITUATION AT GULU SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES FOLLOWING A STRIKE BY THE STUDENTS

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not intending to derail the proceedings but I was trying to follow the questions as asked and of course, the rules require that the Member with the question is notified. With a rota for Members to attend plenary, I want to get your assurance that the Members with questions to be answered are considered when the rota is being made by the whips so that we do not have these issues returned as though they were not answered, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not understood you.

MR MPUUGA: What I am saying, Madam Speaker, is that Members who ask these questions, as per the rules, are supposed to be notified on the date and day their question is going to be answered. However, because of the COVID-19 situation, Members sit in groups. 
Can we confirm whether the Members are so notified so that the answering coincides with their presence in the House to avoid them bringing the same issues? After all, the rules allow them to ask supplementary questions, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Hansard will be available and it is for everybody to have access. We will advise the whips and Members. Government Chief Whip, advise your Members on the questions that they raised, which have been responded to. 

Members, once you see that your question is coming up on the Order Paper, come to the House. The rota is not cast in stone.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, this Order Paper was circulated in good time. The response, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, Gulu College of Health Sciences is one of the middle-level training institutions that trains health practitioners in this country. 

In 2021, student unrest broke out at the college, with students protesting an increase in fees and alleging that the college had inadequate teaching staff as well as poor feeding. The management, in collaboration with my ministry, was looking into the allegations when the schools were closed as part of the second lockdown.

Unfortunately, when the health training institutions were allowed to re-open in mid-August 2021, the student unrest returned with boycotting of classes. My ministry immediately dispatched an official to establish the facts on the ground. We listened to the students and appealed to them to return to class to allow for the amicable resolution of the matter. However, the students did not relent.

As a result, on 9 September 2021, after all efforts to resolve the situation turned out to be unfruitful and following a request by the Governing Council, the Ministry of Education and Sports closed the institution.

Madam Speaker, following wide stakeholders’ consultations, the issues around the unrest have been largely resolved. The college is now open and we are now trying to recruit more staff as we get the funds.

We appreciate your continued support, Madam Speaker, as we work towards sustainable solutions for the college, students and the community. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I see hon. Aol here. 

5.00
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is your mask?

MS AOL: I have been vaccinated – (Laughter) – so those of you with masks are protecting me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, put on your mask.

MS AOL: I was fully vaccinated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Put on your mask.

MS AOL: The mask is in my handbag and it is not here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item -

MS AOL: Let me put on this mask. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t you see you even look smarter? (Laughter)

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know as a leader, we need to be exemplary. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First thank Imat for giving you.

MS AOL: I actually ran. I was not here because I was caught up with some other engagements. I thank the honourable minister for the statement he made but I would like to ask this.

As Members of Parliament, we have our people and we are their servant leaders. When they are in pain, what should we do because the moment we go and identify with them, you say we are politicising everything. I thought that was part of our work.

For example, the institution is in my constituency; in my city. I cannot close my eyes to the teargas and the police deployment. Because I took action, I was looked at as a bad person by the honourable minister and probably, the ministry. 

I want to tell you, honourable minister, that even when our students are there, the issue still remains and what brought about all these problems was the payment of fees. Why do we put it so high in a very poor area? Why can’t you try to make this the same in Fort Portal, Mbale and Gulu? In Gulu, where the poverty index is at 68 per cent, you want people to pay even higher.

I love the statement but I still think that the issue is not yet completely resolved, especially the payment. (Information)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The supplementary issues that we need the minister to respond to is that as we speak, students are back to school. However, the school fees have not yet been reduced.

The principal said she would contact the ministry to guide her. That is the major issue that brought the strike in the school. We would like the minister to clarify on that; when you think you are going to revise the school fees to be at the same level - they are the same kind of college but Gulu is extremely expensive compared to other colleges.
Secondly, Madam Speaker, the strikes came about because the lecturers or the tutors were not there. The permanent tutors were not there. Many of the tutors who are teaching in Gulu are part-time tutors. We would like the minister to clarify when they are going to deploy permanent tutors so that students get the quality that they deserve.

Madam Speaker, the issue of Gulu clinical school should be handled with care. Thank you very much, hon. Aol for raising this matter.

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, the other issue is that even the bursar was just transferred and the issue of the transfer; I cannot interfere with but why at this time when things are being worked on?

Therefore, there are issues and we are only treating the symptoms; the underlying causes are still there. Honourable minister, I interest you to work out on the underlying causes together with the governing board. You should work out and let that school also be peaceful. We do not want to hear of any other situation again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, is there a difference between the fees paid in that school vis-à-vis in the other schools teaching related disciplines? Is there a school fees problem?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I can respond but allow me not to talk about tear gas because I do not have it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am asking you about the disparity of fees.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I am going to respond and I am saying that this is a matter that we have taken with a lot of interest. The ministry working with the governing council has been meeting several times to find lasting solutions to all these problems; including the issue of school fees.

We have noted that there were some problems and that is why I am saying that very soon, we shall be able to come back here and share with you the position.

Madam Speaker, my sister over there asked how far they can go as leaders in the community on matters concerning the school. We do encourage the administrators of these institutions to work very closely with the leadership, local leaders and Members of Parliament so that they move together. These institutions are community institutions and you cannot go away unless there is something funny. However there was supposed to be a cordial working relationship. Where things are broken down, Madam Speaker, it is important you draw it to our attention so that we call the Principal to order.

Madam Speaker, about the staff, truly, we are having a shortage of staff in quite a number of -(Interruption)

MR ONGIERTHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way for me to provide this information. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and the information I would like to give the minister is that in a number of these institutions, the issue is not too much about the amount of fees. However, the students are complaining about fees vis-à-vis their wellbeing.

Therefore, they would not mind paying a little more but they also want to see that the increment is commensurate with their wellbeing in terms of fees, accommodation, the toilets and things like that.

Honourable minister, you may remember also as a way of information that there was that strike in Makerere some time back that we had to work on as a committee on education and sports. One of the issues, which came up clearly was when the students said they were not complaining about the amount, but they wanted to see that the fees they pay is translated into their wellbeing. 

However, as long as the fee increment is not translated into their wellbeing, then they have a problem. That is the problem across all institutions of learning in the country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the issue is value for money. If I am paying Shs 1 million, how do I benefit from that? That is where the issue is.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, let me also ask one point of clarification so that he clarifies altogether. One other area of clarification, you say too soon. When you say too soon, the issue is being worked on and is going to be worked on soon. This issue of Gulu School of Health Science was about one and half months ago and you know what students are; why do you delay?

My other issue is that if these students’ hostels have become too difficult to keep students in, why don’t you allow them to also just get their level and get their own accommodation and you stop taxing them for accommodation and feeding, which is not commensurate with what they pay? Why don’t you give them that freedom? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I imagine you are repeating the same thing; value for money and that is what hon. Ongiertho talked of. Honourable minister, can you clarify on that?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much for that useful information. I have taken note and these are some of the weaknesses we noted and we are trying our best to get a permanent solution to.

However, may I also remind you that when you go back to your constituencies, you get to know that these institutions are managed on behalf of the Government by the management committees, on behalf of the stakeholder’s by the board of governors, the council. Sometimes, some of us have not been- I do not know whether you are too busy but we have tried to bypass these people. They also need to be recognised and supported.

About the tutors, so far, we have been able to recruit quite a number and I think this is one of the schools that has greatly benefited in the recent recruitments. We are carrying out- there is an advert that is running also as an effort to recruit more tutors for the health training institutions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, you need to keep the House updated on the status of the school, regarding how far you have gone and what is happening with the students vis-à-vis the lecturers. However, at the same time, even us the politicians, we should not be seen to disorganise the management of the institution. (Applause)






RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LUBEGA MEDARD SSEGGONA ON THE FAILURE BY THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS AND THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TO RESOLVE THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE MANAGEMENT OF NTINDA KCCA PRIMARY SCHOOL AND ST CHARLES LWANGA NTINDA CATHOLIC CHURCH IN WHICH THE FORMER BLOCKED THE ACCESS ROAD TO THE CHURCH

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Ntinda Primary School is a Government school built by the Protectorate Government on Government land in 1954. The school is under the management of Kampala Capital City Authority and is not a faith-based founded school.

Ntinda Primary School is a UPE school and has an enrolment of 800 learners from the urban-poor households in Ntinda and the neighbouring areas. Uganda Land Commission (ULC) under Minute 13/2016(a)(208) of 10-11 February 2016, offered KCCA and the Ministry of Education and Sports a 99-year lease on Plot 20-26 Ntinda Road, on which Ntinda Primary School sits. 

However, Uganda Land Commission under minute 13/2016(a)(261) of 7-8 April 2016 offered a five-year lease on the same land to the Registered Trustees of Kampala Archdiocese. Subsequently, the Archdiocese of Kampala vide letter No. T/1308/16 dated 13 October 2016 requested the Ministry of Education and Sports to transfer ownership of Ntinda Primary School to St Charles Lwanga Catholic Parish Ntinda, Kampala Archdiocese.
The request was accompanied with a proposal to redevelop the school and introduce a private wing to run consequently, with the UPE Programme. 

The school management committee and KCCA protested to the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Land Commission seeking for a cancellation of a five-year lease title issued to the Archdiocese of Kampala. 

The matter is also before the High Court under Civil Suit No. 885 of 2018 KCCA v. the Registered Trustee of Kampala Archdiocese and Uganda Land Commission. This suit is yet to be determined. 

Madam Speaker, a number of events have since transpired around this matter. The Ministry of Education and Sports will continue engaging all the concerned stakeholders to find an amicable solution to this matter. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, what we expected of you is to tell us about access to the church. We do not want to know about who owns what. We want to know about the access; are the parishioners able to go and worship? It is the Government school and the church is a public property. I am surprised that as a Catholic you can speak like that. 

It is the access that we want. It is not ownership. The parishioners who are there are the owners of the children who are in that school. I wish I were you, I would have solved that problem. You cannot deny people access to places of worship. Can we hear from the Minister for Kampala?

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to seek clarification. The last time we were here, the Rt Hon. Nabbanja stood here on the Floor and gave instructions; the instructions were very clear. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister said that let the access be provided so that there is clear movement for people to access the church. This area has many Catholics and the school we are talking about is a public institution. The road is very wide if you do a physical visit of the area, because I always go to that area. 

Therefore, wouldn't it be good, since the Prime Minister of this country already directed, that the minister just comes to give us a methodology or a way that is going to implement the Prime Minister's directive so that they get the road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, the minister is giving us a contrary view to what the Leader of Government Business had given. 

MR MACHO: Further clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Government Chief Whip first. You will speak after.

5.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I visited these two institutions on Thursday. I met the leadership of the parish and I also met the management of the school. What I can confirm is that the church now has access. A gate was built and the key is with the church priest. They have access. 

However, beyond that, there is a need for Government to reconcile these two communities that were staying together. This is not a matter of just debating and we direct but I propose, like you guided - and I am glad you guided me very well - that we ensure that these communities, which have been staying together for 38 years, are reconciled. We look through their differences and then, come back to report when we have achieved reconciliation on both sides. For now, the church has access. This, I can confirm. 

5.21
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I see the Government Chief Whip - let me use my local language - has “slapped” the Minister of Education who was assigned by the Prime Minister to solve a problem. What the Government Chief Whip has submitted is what I expected the Minister to submit. In the English of my friend from Kasese who is not here, he would say - the “crossroads”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi is reminding you whether you are blind. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: The English the honourable member from Kasese would say, “Now, the ministry and the Prime Minister are at crossroads.” Madam Speaker, that is why I always have an argument that since we have almost a barracks of ministers, at least, one minister from each docket should attend to understand the work of Parliament. 

The minister’s submission was contrary. The fact is that if the minister and the Government Chief Whip had met in a room this morning, they would have fought each other because everybody is holding his own way opinion. 

Therefore, I want, on behalf of the Ministry of Education, to apologise for the minister having given very contrary information to what was given today –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, I have never known you as being a minister or anybody in education.

5.23
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for the initiative he took up not to portray this side in a shabby way. At least, it is something that is honourable. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, both these institutions can co-exist; the church and the school. The requirement for creation of a passage for worshippers to go and worship should not create a fuss in the country. All these institutions are for social services. Churches do deliverance for the people in the form of education and educational institutions teach our people. 

I would like to persuade our comrades from the frontbench that such instances should never even appear on the Floor of Parliament to portray as though you do not sit in the same Cabinet, where the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business comes here and makes an undertaking and directs and the the directive is - I would not say insubordination - not adhered to. Who is communicating in this Government? Who will be reliable, in this case? What people want are results; what worshipers want are results. As schools open, they want a well-built fence that can accommodate students in the area and their user well-defined. 
In the same spirit, I would like to state that we do not need the Minister for Kampala because we might see more drama in this case. Since the Government Chief Whip has clearly stated the matter, we no longer need the Minister of Kampala. The issue we need from her is to come and show us that the user of that area has changed to an easement or to a road making it an access area. Unless she is coming here to make that undertaking, all statements that will be contradictory will take us to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need the Minister of Kampala to make that undertaking that this kind of thing shall never happen again. Previously, we had a meeting and this issue should not have come to the Floor. We had a meeting but they went and overpowered the minister. We want the minister to undertake that it shall never happen and that the parishioners will have access to the church. Minister, it is within your area. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, switch on the microphone. 

5.26
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like the Prime Minister directed, we complied, as ministers for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

RESPONSE ON THE ARRESTS OF PERSONS IN BUSIA BY SOME STAFF OF UMEME ALLEGEDLY FOR INSTALLING FAKE ELECTRICITY METERS AND THE NON-FUNCTIONAL UMEME SERVICE CENTRES IN BUSIA 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Honourable Minister of Energy.

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Opolot-Okaasai): Madam Speaker, our answer to that question is:

Hon. Macho’s question is related to the operations to identify and stop power thefts, which are carried out by Umeme Limited along with the Uganda Police Force. 

Tampering with electricity installations is not only an offense, under section 81 (1) and (5) of the Electricity Act. It is also an offence under section 283 of the Penal Code Act. However, it also exposes the consumers and the general public to the risk of injury or even death through unsafe illegal electricity connections. 

The operations were carried out to identify, disconnect, arrest and prosecute persons who had dishonestly consumed electricity, and this is the mandate of the Uganda Police Force, which exercises its work professionally. 

Umeme’s role in these operations is to provide technical support through identification of illegal connections and provision of evidence of unlawful use, or consumption of electricity. Umeme ensures that unsafe and illegal connections are recovered. Most of the operations, even when the arrests are made, are settled amicably. There are no persons who stay in cells. 

Most times, many of the persons who are affected; those connected illegally confess and pay. Therefore, there is no harsh harassment of individuals who are found consuming electricity illegally. 

Pregnant women and disabled people are not arrested but those who are illegally connected are handled amicably. Nobody stays in cells – (Interjections) - yes, they disconnect and actually pay. 

In relation to Umeme opening a customer service centre in Busia, the work is on-going and the plan is to have a customer service centre established in Busia by the end of 2021. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister. Hon. Macho is here. 

5.30 
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I always take time to understand the language of fishermen, although I am a fishmonger. I would like to thank the Minister - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you changed from being a smuggler?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, since my grandfather stays on the shores of Lake Victoria, sometimes, I trade in fish. This is why I am a fishmonger. You know, fishermen speak few things; what they have strictly written for them. Honourable minister, thank you for the statement.

Madam Speaker, the minister lives in heaven and this is why you saw honourable Members of Parliament keenly looking at his eyes and he was very unstable during his submission because what he presented is partly  not in Uganda. 

I would like to strongly disagree with the minister. Busia and Uganda at large have suffered. I am not the first Member of Parliament to complain about Umeme. In Busia, they are called “Umeme torture men”. They have even brought panda gali to Busia. Panda gali means being forced to climb a pickup. For their operations, they work together with the police in a certain hotel, which I will not mention because the owner of that hotel is my good friend. 

Nonetheless, I would like to agree with you, honourable minister when you stated that when they come, they identify, arrest and prosecute. When the policemen arrest you, they become judges and they judge immediately and take money from you. If a minister can say “in one minute you arrest, identify and prosecute”, you know that, that is done in a jungle way. Minister, a jungle is a bush in Busia. Therefore, I want the minister, in my prayer, to go back so that he is told in detail why there is an outcry about Umeme in the whole country. Instead of speaking from an uninformed point of view – they drag pregnant women and persons with disabilities in Uganda, as people who carry out theft of electricity. 

Persons with disabilities are not thieves at all – Let me take the information – (Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, have you started giving people the opportunity to give information? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Umeme issue is very serious. The report read by the honourable Minister is not correct. What hon. Macho raised is not only in Busia but across the country.

Currently, it seems we have two or three teams within Umeme. The first team comes, connects you and installs all the equipment in your house. After one or two weeks, another team will come and say that the equipment was stolen and is fake. As civilians, where do you expect someone to get those materials? 

Madam Speaker, the person applies following the right procedure right from Umeme offices and they send their team to connect you. Umeme needs to be investigated because there is a serious problem. I pray that their term expires faster so that the contract is not renewed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, do you have something to say?

5.35
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the information the Minister was giving the honourable member is not researched. 

My people of Kigula South in Iganga, specifically two subcounties of Nawanyingi and Nakalama fell prey to the same. They were conned by Umeme people. They paid extensions- there is a village called Nakilulwe that got over 12 poles erected by Umeme, got connected and all of a sudden, a team came from Umeme and begun uprooting all poles and bundling up people saying these people had obtained power illegally. The same thing happened along Nakalama, Tirinyi road in a place called Bukoboli. People paid, they even have receipts signed by Umeme staff but Umeme came and began uprooting poles saying they obtained the power illegally. People are suffering; they are being beaten and arrested with the company of police. 

Therefore, honourable minister, do further research and come with an informed and detailed report to this House otherwise our voters are suffering.

5.36
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Umeme issue was raised from the east of the country. I live and stay at the extreme west of the country. What is being raised from the east is even an understatement of what happens in the west. 

Where I stay in my village, Umeme people have no face for any human being. They only talk to the poles and the meters. 

Secondly, honourable minister, you should be glad that we are saying this for you to note. When you say that these people pay, there is no option that people have. When they come, there is a cable called solido. They will cut it off together with the meter, put it on their pickup and take it. You have your food and milk in the fridge. What options are you left with other than paying?

Madam Speaker, I have several times moved to their Ishaka office 52 kilometres away from my home. They have no attention for anyone. I even moved with my case thinking that it would be solved in Kampala but no attention was given. 

Therefore, I think the honourable minister should be glad that we are telling you this; Umeme is not a service provider, it is a beast amidst us. Thank you very much. 

5.38
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to what Members are stating. The treatment that we see Umeme inflicting on our people is just a cover up. Why do I say that?

Sometime back, I was doing some work for USAID in Mbale District and now Butebo in a village called Kanginima and around Nabumali. I was shocked with the kind of connections that I saw in the area. That type of connection cannot be done by anybody without the knowledge and experience of Umeme staff. 

They connect you illegally and then, they come back, ask for money from you and disconnect you in a very harsh way and yet, they are the ones facilitating these people to have power illegally when other Ugandans like the ones in Pakwach are waiting to be served with the same power. Something needs to be done about this institution to bring them to book. Thank you.

5.39
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Macho for bringing this issue. From the look of the honourable Minister of State for Energy, he seems to be innocent. Surely, he is innocent and his age and conduct show that the people who made the report duped him. I think it is prudent that my senior goes back on ground. 

Madam Speaker, I have evidence. On 12 September 2021, I had to go to Jinja Road Police Station where someone from my area had been arrested over such a case. I do not know whether these Umeme people are paid; that is how they look for money. They go around scavenging and they just arrest - They have powers to arrest and prosecute immediately without investigation. That puts us in a very perilous state.

Madam Speaker, my request to the honourable minister is to go back and interface with the leaders; they need to tell him what is there because these people make cosmetic reports. They just sit here and make reports to dupe and misinform the minister because we have evidence in our areas. That is what is happening, Madam Speaker. I want to confirm that hon. Macho is not doing propaganda but giving what exactly is on ground in Uganda. Thank you. 

5.42
DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipity, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to give testimony to what my colleagues have said. In Rukungiri Municipality, we have similar cases but it seems Umeme has different service providers; there are those who bring poles and then there are others who come. 

I also want to think that among these service providers, some are thieves. When one team has gone, another comes and takes away the service wire. Therefore, they have to pay for the service wire or else it is removed claiming that it was put wrongly or it was not in order. 

Therefore, I think we need to ask our Minister to go back and do more work with Umeme to make sure we understand who we are dealing with; is it Umeme, are they the service providers, are they a group of thieves? We really need to know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Three weeks ago, my parish priest called me - not just as a Member of Parliament but as a synod member; a person who represents that parish at the diocese - that people from Umeme had come, they found him robbed. 

In the church, we have connected power. But after connecting the church, there is a meter but that meter also made a loop from the very same after the meter to the parish house. He was arrested and put on a pickup. They called me and I talked with them. I told them that I am not just a parishioner but I am also a national leader, I am a Member of Parliament. I asked if we could sort the thing out. Can I come? And they say “No, you have nothing to do with this”. He was put on a pickup and taken to Mbale. But they did not reach the police station in Mbale. They reached a forest somewhere, they made him sit down and got money from him and then, they released him. It is as serious as that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion.

5.44
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 57 of the Rules of Procedure and to be specific, (a): Oral notice of motions. It reads, “A Member may, with leave of the Speaker, give oral notice of a motion during a Sitting”. 

I would like to give notice that I am going to bring a motion to this House seeking Parliament to conclusively investigate Umeme and then, come up with the final terms; and investigate the terms of the agreement so that we can make this thing come to an end. This is because everybody, including the President of the Republic of Uganda, has complained and been in pain because of UMEME. The President is on record, 13 October 2020; he was complaining about the same thing; umeme. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Keefa, it has been overtaken by events. I am making a directive. You will debate on the next. Now members, I need to rule to that effect. Is the motion seconded? 

Members, I am not waiting for the motion to this effect. And we need to differentiate illegal connection from the connection that hon. Macho was talking of. The illegal connection borders criminality. What Members are saying, this is a connection that at the end of the day you term it illegal. And at the end of the day, the members of the public are mistreated. I am referring this issue to COSASE. COSASE must investigate this issue and report back to this House. Umeme reports to COSASE. You do not have to say it has too much. But Umeme reports to COSASE. So, COSASE must handle the thing and report back to the House on the actions that have been taken on the criminality that is in UMEME.

RESPONSE BY THE HONOURABLE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON LAND GRABBING AND DESTRUCTION OF TREE INVESTMENTS BELONGING TO PRIVATE COMMERCIAL TREE FARMERS, LICENSED BY THE NATIONAL FOREST AUTHORITY IN NAMANVE CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE IN MUKONO DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister was here but she was unaware and she asked for permission to go. We will have her on the Order Paper on Thursday. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aogon? Next? Members, when your issue comes on the Order Paper and you are absent, next time, do not start complaining that your matter has never appeared on the Order Paper.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL SPORTS BILL”
5.49
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 56, 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure to move a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a private member's Bill entitled: “The National Sports Bill”. 

Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (amended) empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 

Particularly Article 94 paragraph four subparagraph (b) of the Constitution and Rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure permit a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill. 

Uganda has embraced a number of sports disciplines and each sports discipline is organised and regulated by a national sports association, which are all affiliated to their respective international sports governing bodies.
The various national sports associations regulate amateur and professional sports disciplines, including sports clubs participating in respective sports disciplines, and are all regulated by the National Council of Sports. 

Currently in Uganda, the national sports associations and clubs are incorporated under various laws, including the Trustees Incorporation Act, the National Council of Sports Act, the Companies Act, the Partnerships Act, and the NGO Act. 

The concern is that the lack of a single piece of legislation governing the cooperation and operation of the national sports associations and sports clubs has resulted in governance and administration challenges, including lack of legal personality, multiple reporting and regulatory legal regimes. 

The national sports associations play a vital role in identification of talents, development of professional and amateur sports and nurturing strong communities by bringing people together. But the operation and existence of these national sports associations and the sports clubs in Uganda is threatened by the lack of clarity in the legal regime relating their incorporation, operation and regulation resulting in under development of sports in Uganda. 
Madam Speaker, the current sports law in Uganda, the 1964 National Council of Sports Act is obsolete, incompatible with the modern trends and demands of international sports;

COGNISANT that there is need to enact legislation to streamline the incorporation, registration, management and recognition of national sports associations and sports clubs and in order to achieve the objectives of their creation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that leave be granted to me to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, entitled “The National Sports Bill”, a draft of which – if allowed – I would lay on Table here, as provided for in the rules.

I further pray for the orders to do the publication of the said 
Bill in preparation for the First Reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by hon. Silwany, hon. Milton Muwuma, hon. Sarah Opendi, hon. Phyllis Chemutai, hon. Macho, hon. Gilbert Olanya, hon. Matovu, hon. Wakayima, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Tom Bright, hon. Ferigo Kambale, Col Victor Nekesa, hon. Christopher Komakech. The whole House has supported it – has seconded. (Applause)

Would you like to speak to your motion – (Hon. Cecilia Ogwal rose_) Let him speak to his motion first.

MS OGWAL: I am a very strong supporter of the Bill but I am just seeking clarification. When we talk about sports, people like us with simple minds think it is sports, which are formal and so on. These days, we are promoting wellness - and the general wellness of a being. 

So, I do not know whether that Bill will take care of wellness as well; in which case we may think, at this stage, to even change the title to “Uganda National Sports and Wellness Bill”, so that we look at it holistically, rather than thinking to amend during the time of debate. I am just posing a request for clarification. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Actually, when you participate in any sport, you are keeping well. (Applause) 

MR MAGOGO: Madam Speaker, sport is a multi-sectoral activity that falls in very many categories. If you are going to change the title, it might be one of the Bills with the longest names because it falls in tourism, industry, health – it will be everywhere but sport itself compresses everything, like you have guided.

Madam Speaker, sport, over the years, has transformed from a mere recreation and social activity to a socio-economic transformation game changer. In addition to the inherent health and social values of sport, modern sport has become; a major employer of youths – educated and uneducated; a tax revenue base; a huge advertising platform for countries and brands; a forex earner; a mobilisation tool for communities; a tourist activity and one of the patriotic and unifier activities of communities. 

Currently, the international sport economy is over $600 billion, rated ahead of the aviation industry and Uganda is not partaking of it, yet we have demonstrated that we have enormously been endowed with untapped sporting talent in this country.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a member of the United Nations, the African Union and many other international organisations and is currently bound by resolutions of these organisations. 
On 3 November in 2003, the UN passed a resolution, declaring sport as a means to promote health, education, development and peace. On 28 November 2018, another resolution was passed by the United Nations General Assembly, emphasising the critical role of productive, public-private partnerships for funding sport for development and peace programmes, institutional development and physical and social infrastructure and reaffirmed that sport is an important enabler of sustainable development and recognised the growing contribution of sport to the realisation of development and peace in promotion of tolerance, respect and contributions it makes to the empowerment of women and young people, individuals and communities, as well as to health, education and social inclusion objectives.

The African Union recognises sport as an element of culture and major contributor in human development and strengthening national cohesion and rapprochement of people. The functions of the African Union Sport Council include promotion of sport as a fundamental human right, defend sport development, advocate for funding of sport development and ensure that African countries develop sport policies, programmes, systems and structures.
 
Madam Speaker, the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as amended, requires the state to promote recreation and sport for citizens of Uganda, as stated in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII.

In order to implement the international organisations’ resolutions as mentioned, in order to fulfil the constitutional obligation of the Government to the citizens of Uganda, in order to unlock the sleeping potential of the Ugandan sport to the world and in order to provide socio-economic opportunities to the youth; the state has three major roles to play:
    1. Provision of pre-requisite sporting infrastructure;
    2. Funding the development, promotion, presentation of sport teams and athletes; 
    3. Legislation of modern laws and policies to support sport activities and persons.

It is, therefore, the constitutional obligation of this Parliament to make laws that create an environment for achieving these objectives.

Madam Speaker, whereas this House has on many occasions debated how sport can be improved in this country, it is going to be difficult without a proper regulatory framework.

In Uganda, the sport sub-sector has previously been regulated by a law that was enacted in 1964, as the National Council of Sports Act, Cap 48. This law has since become obsolete, cannot regulate the modern game and many Commonwealth countries that had a similar sport law have since enacted new laws.

The National Sports Bill being presented as a Private Member’s Bill has been drafted in accordance with the rules. This Bill is intended to be presented to Parliament for consideration as an action to repeal the 1964 National Council of Sports Act and replace it with the National Sports Act, once the Bill is passed into law.

The National Sports Bill is intended to address the challenges that are holding back the potential of Ugandan sport in the world and harness the opportunities available. The objectives of this Bill include:
    1. To recognise, register, incorporate the national sport organisation and community sport clubs;
    2. The governance, management and development and promotion and protection of amateur and recreational professional sport;
    3. To codify the obligations of the state under international sport governing statutes;
    4. To prevent match fixing, corruption, illegal manipulation, illegal betting in sport.

Madam Speaker, the sport organisations have no resources, expertise and tools to investigate and bring to book such sophisticated offenders in practices like match fixing an illegal betting.

It is also intended to encourage and promote –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise? Remember you are just seeking leave. You are not speaking to it.


MR MAGOGO: I am summarising. It is also to encourage drug-free sports, to protect the commercial rights emanating from sports events, to create a system of arbitration between the various disputes in sports, to provide a rewarding system for national sports associations, teams and athletes who excel.

I am raising this motion aware that the move of this motion as a Private Member’s Bill has come after calls on the Floor of this House for the relevant ministry to present a Bill for consideration of Parliament and this has not happened for decades.

At the beginning of the 10th Parliament, there was a Physical and Sports Activity Bill that was listed as the intended laws to be completed by the 10th Parliament and this was not done. 
There has been an explanation of the lack of the sports policy onto which to base the draft Bill. I hereby bring to the attention of this House that there is already an existing sports policy, which was done in 2004 and it has not expired.

Also to bring to the attention of this House that on 25 September 2013, the Cabinet resolved that the Physical and Sports Activity Bill be presented to Parliament for consideration with stipulated principles. I beg to lay on the Table a copy of this document to support my motion.

Madam Speaker, the Private Member’s Bill is intended to be presented with the same principles as resolved by the Cabinet and is indicated in the draft Bill presented with this motion as required by the rules. I, therefore, call upon Members of this House that many youth in the areas we represent are keenly following this matter and your support to the motion and Bill could turnaround lives. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Magogo.


6.05
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I would like to state that sports is health and wealth. As we are entertained, we are improving our lives.

The African Union Policy Framework for Sustainable Development of Sports in Africa 2008 to 2018 defines sports as a physical activity that is governed by a set of rules or customs involving specific administration governing bodies or organisations.

Sport, as you all know, is an important phenomenon that has the unique ability to entertain and employ many youths. As we speak, 77 per cent of Uganda’s population comprises the young people and with the high unemployment rate, we need to look out for different avenues of employment. Sports can help in employing a number of our youth who are out there with talent and yet that talent cannot be tapped.

Madam Speaker, I talked about sports being a health issue. As we speak, the Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) are on the increase and mortality due to the NCDs, as per the Uganda Demographic Health Survey (UDHS) 2016, states that 22 per cent of the people die from the NCDs. This can be reduced, if our people engage in sports for health reasons.

The 1964 Bill is out of touch with the current trends. In this House, time and again, we have been talking about funding the different sports activities. Last week, we congratulated the She Cranes and the issue of funding was extensively discussed. When you look at the old law, it is limited and therefore, the new Bill will open up new avenues of funding the different sports activities.

In other countries, the Government does not even put in money in sports. What happens is that a levy is placed on either the telecoms or fuel or somewhere and that money goes into funding sports. The multinational companies in the country are also tasked to contribute towards sports.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, with the restrictive clause in the current existing Act, I do support this Bill in order for us to move faster. I remember the minister was here and he said they were working on a policy. We cannot sit waiting for a policy we do not know when it will come. 

The ideal should have been that we have the new policy and the law comes after. However, since we do not know when the policy will come, we have to move with the Private Member’s Bill. Madam Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Opendi. Now, Ssolo.

6.09 
MR GODFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomasimbi South County, Bukomasimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank my fellow comrade, hon. Moses Magogo for coming up with an idea of this Bill. This is the core activity that this country has been lacking.

During 1964, when the Act, we have been following all the years was made, we had no professional sports. Nowadays, it is professional and it gives a lot of money to people and that has turned a lot of people’s lives. Therefore, we need this Bill as soon as possible.

When you look at the Act, especially Article 3(1), which states “the Chairman will be appointed by the Ministry and other members on board would also be appointed by the Minister, plus some four representatives all over the country.” This does not work now because we have 51 sports disciplines, which need to be represented at the National Council of Sports.

Madam Speaker, we need to change that immediately because during that period, it was easy to find a man from Rukungiri to come, another from Busia and they make a sports parliament for a small sport discipline. Now, we need a full sports parliament represented from all disciplines and sectors. I thank you, my brother and I am sure the House will grant you time to go and make this Bill a better one.

We find many issues especially when we do not agree here and there. We go to court. It is not a spirit of sportsmanship to go to the courts of law. Otherwise, sport has different laws that do not fit or relate with the laws we have here. Therefore, it is high time we put a court of arbitration for sport issues. Instead of going to these courts, we need a court of arbitration for the sportsmanship spirit.

With that, I would like to second this motion and ask this honourable House to accept - I do not know whether even the seconder can be accepted to go on leave because this is a very big issue -(Laughter)- that needs a lot of brains so that we bring the Bill in a better way. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Kayemba-Ssolo.

6.12
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I stand, first of all, to thank my big brother, hon. Moses Magogo and the FUFA President of Uganda for bringing such a timely Bill. It is a Bill that all of us Ugandans, who love sports, have been waiting for. It is long overdue and I implore all Members of Parliament who are around and those who are not around today, to grant hon. Moses Hassim Magogo leave so that he brings this timely Bill. I will support it, contribute to it and encourage all the other Members to support and contribute to this Bill because sports is life. 

What hon. Ogwal raised about wellness is also very important but it is embedded within sports. The sports I do is just walking. When I walk around for many kilometres, I sweat and feel that I have become a very strong person. Therefore, this Bill is good for this country, it is timely and I implore each and every Member of Parliament to support it. I beg to submit.

6.14
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion for the Bill. The first motion was about people with disabilities where sports should be emphasised to make them improve their metabolism. One gets unnecessarily fat because you are not able to do everything right. 

For that matter, if sports is emphasised and it trickles down to the roots of every Ugandan in a matter of policy, this is going to help them look forward to a date when they have sports. 

Secondly, concerning the Sports Bill and wellness, it is better that they talk about metabolic health in detail when they are talking about sports in Uganda. When you just talk about wellness, it leaves out a few and metabolic health is more scientific. Ugandans should know what level of fitness and health can match with their metabolic indices. When they are doing the sports and if it is taken seriously, this will ensure that at every opportunity, the purpose of this is one’s health so that people do not get non-communicable diseases in their life. 

I support this but add that we should emphasise metabolic health to all groups of people; the unfit, fit, disabled, old and young. Thank you. 

6.16
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a motion for closure of debate. Madam Speaker, we agree that hon. Magogo’s request to present a Private Member's Bill is very important. Indeed, we are very passionate and agree that we should have this Bill for this House to process. 

Therefore, I rise to propose, under Rule 81, that the question be put to close this debate. Madam Speaker, I move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Solo, hon. Macho, hon. Faith, the Minister of Education, hon. Dorcas, hon. Phyillis, hon. Dan, hon. Wakayima and hon. Margaret. 

Honourable members, the motion is that we close the debate. Under Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure guarantees the right of a Member to bring a Private Member's Bill and introduce it in this House. 

At this stage, however, we are not looking for the merits of the intended Bill. That will be sorted out in the First Reading of the Bill. For now, the Member is seeking for leave to introduce the Bill. 

I now, therefore, put a question that leave of this House be granted to hon. Magogo Moses Hassim to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The National Sports Bill.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Magogo, please, work with the relevant office to ensure that the Bill is ready for publication. Thank you, Members and hon. Magogo. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXAMINE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT MONITORING SYSTEM WITH M/S JOINT STOCK COMPANY GLOBAL SECURITY TO ADDRESS PUBLIC CONCERNS

6.19
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS on 23 July 2021, Government entered into an agreement under the Public Private Partnership arrangement with the M/S Joint Stock Company Global Security for the implementation of the intelligent transport monitoring system;

AWARE THAT the implementation of the Intelligent Transport Monitoring System is aimed at enhancing crime management through detection, identification and recognition of all vehicles and motorcycles operating in the country, among other benefits; 

NOTING that the Intelligent Transport Monitoring System will be installed in all public and private vehicles and motorcycles to facilitate the tracking of all vehicles and motorcycles;

FURTHER NOTING that in order for the Intelligent Transport Monitoring System to be implemented, all vehicles and motorcycles already registered will be required to be re-registered and obtain new number plates;

CONCERNED that the installation of the monitoring and tracking system in vehicles and motorcycles will create an additional cost, which will be incurred by the owners of vehicles and motorcycles in addition to the already high cost of acquiring vehicles;

AWARE that Ugandans pay a lot of taxes and dues while importing vehicles that include import duty at 15 per cent, Value Added Tax of 18 per cent, two per cent Import Commission of dutiable value, Withholding Tax of six per cent, Excise Duty at 10 per cent and Environmental Levy at six per cent;

CONSIDERING that the system to be installed in all vehicles and motorcycles for monitoring and tracking uses integrated communications and data processing technologies and as a result, there is a likelihood of intrusion into people's right to privacy;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament urges Government to judiciously examine the implementation of the Intelligent Monitoring System to ensure protection and preservation of people's freedoms and there is value for money in this whole process. 

Secondly, Parliament urges Government to consider installing the ITMS on government vehicles, motorcycles and passenger service vehicles, including taxis and assesses its effectiveness before rolling out all vehicles. 

We urge Government to meet all costs required for the installation of the intelligent transport monitoring system in all vehicles, as indicated in (2) above. 

Madam Speaker, lastly, we recommend that the motion be referred to the relevant committee for scrutiny. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Batuwa, hon. Solomon, hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Ssolo, hon. Kiwanuka, hon. Tom Bright, hon. Timuzigu, hon. Dorcas Acen, hon. Magogo, hon. Faith and hon. Didi. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter was debated on the Floor of this House and all these issues, in this motion, arose from the Members’ contributions. 

In July, the media was awash with reports of the award by the Government to this joint stock company, Global Security. It was reported that Government had awarded a 10-year contract to this company to install this device on vehicles and motorcycles. 

Immediately, thereafter, there were a lot of reports about this company and how - arising out of court cases - it was supposed to be - there was a case in court in Moscow, where the company lost the case. Of course, it was facing bankruptcy. 

As Parliament and as people's representatives, we cannot sit back with such reports because previously, as you are aware, Government has gotten into contracts with different companies and at the end of the day, there is actually no value for money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon.Opendi, before you proceed, when you say “Parliament urges Government to judiciously examine and implement; Parliament urges Government to consider installing the ITMS; Parliament urges Government to meet the costs vis-à-vis - the motion should be referred to the relevant committees”, you are contradicting yourself. I would like you to amend your prayers for either Government to take on or it should be forwarded to the committee.
MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. Following your guidance, I will drop recommendations one, two and three and request that this matter be referred to the relevant committee for scrutiny. As you are aware, the Government has signed a memorandum of understanding with this company. This Parliament needs to know what is contained in that memorandum. That can only be done when the committee takes this up. 
We have had various contracts where Government has got involved and at the end of the day, a lot of resources are wasted, and instead, it is the taxpayer to foot the bills. 

It was even reported that there was due diligence carried out. I remember the Permanent Secretary, Minister of Works, indicated that they did due diligence, but if there are bankruptcy issues, then that is a new issue that has arisen. 

Therefore, I do propose, arising out of the various contributions from the members in this House, that this matter be scrutinised further by a committee of Parliament because there are security issues, which we all appreciate. However, when it comes to privacy - because you can be monitored by wrong elements and at any one minute, they will know where you are. Madam Speaker, we need to actually look at all of this. 

While we are talking about security, most of the crimes that have been committed within the city - majority of them have been on the boda boda. Therefore, in my view, it would have been prudent, first, to start by mounting these on the boda bodas and government vehicles, before we roll out to other private vehicles.

Lastly, as I did indicate, majority of us already have our vehicles. We already paid for the number plates; we already paid the taxes. To tell us to go and acquire new number plates, and again meet the cost of that gadget, is an additional cost on Ugandans. Madam speaker, it is for this reason that I brought this motion. 

I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Opendi. I will allow the Leader of the Opposition.

6.29 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my sister and honourable member for the motion well-delivered to the House. 

The shadow Minister for Internal Affairs delivered a statement to this House on this very subject. At the time of its debate, the Opposition in the House had taken leave for matters we ably explained. I followed the debate and I thought that members had duly examined the intricacies in the approach by Government. 

I even listened to the response by the Minister and it was not convincing as to how they had moved. Issues of legality; both procedural impropriety and illegality were raised in procuring the company. There was no plausible response as to how we would condone illegality in our faces, as legislators, in this land. Issues of rights violation were raised and the response was flimsy and unconvincing. 

Madam Speaker, the better place to fully understand and report the House on the nitty gritty of this procurement will be the House of Parliament via a relevant committee. I would like to ask Members to see a sense in this motion and support it without regard to the sides because it touches key issues in our country. All of us must be convinced. 

First of all, there is no debate about the need for security on all sides of the House. Like the honourable mover has ably observed, we probably are not taking this to the key vulnerable areas of our security. Probably, a well-considered discussion in a committee and an ensuing debate in the plenary by the entire House will give settlement and advise Government the best way of dealing with matters of our security, without using underhanded methods that can eventually result into huge costs to the country and also compromise the security they purport to be protecting. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important motion. I would request you to reserve your debate until the committee presents. I am referring this motion to the committees on Infrastructure, Internal Affairs and Defence; two committees because they are security matters and then there is the other matter.

6.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Since the overall minister in charge of this matter is the Minister for Security, I do not know whether his committee should also be involved; just seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon. 

MR TAYEBWA: Since the overall minister is the Minister for Security and he is not under any of those committees, it would be good for you to guide but he wanted to make a comment on this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will give his input to the committee because now for us to allow the Minister to talk now, you are getting the Minister off-guard on this thing.

6.34
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition made a comment about the statement made by the honourable Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs about his statement. Therefore, would it be in order for me to make a comment because I also responded -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That does not stop this from going to the committees.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: No, I have no objection

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have a right to respond to what has been alleged.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, can you sit as the Minister is speaking?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, it is correct that hon. Abdullah Kiwanuka the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs made a statement in Parliament and I responded on the Floor. If there were any areas, which were unsatisfactory, they must have been responded to by Parliament.

Having said that, we made it clear that the intention of this artificial intelligence mechanism was solely for the security of our people and I did enumerate very many instances where we lost people because of non-monitoring of this system. I have no objection with this matter going to the committee. I rest my case. (Hon. Olanya rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, I made an order. I have already forwarded the issue to the committee for further scrutiny. Your issues will be answered. If you have an issue, then you will go to the committee and make a presentation there.

I would like to thank you for today’s sitting. I, therefore, adjourn the House until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)



