Wednesday, 21 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am delighted to be with you again. First, I would like to amend the Order Paper. Item No. 4 will appear on tomorrow’s Order Paper because under our Rules of Procedure, that is when private members’ business takes precedence.

I also want to inform you that in the last few weeks, I visited two members’ constituencies. I visited Obongi, and among the outstanding issues is power and the roads, but there was also a concern about the fate of the PRDP funds. However, I was not able to provide an answer on when we shall resolve that. I hope that soon the issue of PRDP will be resolved to satisfy the people of the North.

I also visited Ntoroko. Among the outstanding issues are the infrastructure, electricity and other services. They also wanted me to remind the Minister of Tourism to deal with the issue of the burial grounds in Kanara Sub County. They have nowhere to bury people because they are between the national park and Lake Albert. I hope that at some time, you will be able to resolve that issue for them.

I also would like to inform Members that Bank of Uganda has organised a residential workshop to take place at Imperial Resort Beach Hotel on Friday, 23 November 2012. Reporting is for the evening of 22 November, which is tomorrow. The workshop is for all chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of standing and sectoral committees together with members of the following committees: 
•	Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
•	Committee on National Economy. 
•	Committee on Natural Resources. 
•	COSASE. 
•	The Budget Committee. 
•	Committee on Legal and Parliament Affairs; and 
•	The Public Accounts Committee.

The topics for discussion are:
•	The role of the Central Bank and the essence of its independence. 
•	Monetary policy formulation and implementation in an inflation targeting regime. 
•	Financial regulation and financial inclusion.

Committee clerks of the above committees should endeavour to attend and they are also urged to inform their members accordingly.

I also want to inform Members that this morning, as Parliament we participated in the National Road Safety Week. I hope that we shall raise awareness about road safety and the need for reforming some of the laws. Thank you very much.

2.55
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week, the Minister of Finance appeared before this august House and presented a report in respect of Uganda’s candidature to the Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC). However, the information the minister gave was lacking. Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to update the minister but also request the ministry to take some action on some of the issues relating to this matter.

Last week, our candidate managed to go in the company of the Minister of State for Regional Cooperation at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to attend the OIC meeting in Djibouti, which the ministry refused to fund. The purpose of this meeting, among others, was to create a new post of Assistant Secretary-General of the OIC in charge of Africa Affairs. 

As you all know, Uganda had nominated a candidate for this rotational chair of the OIC, but it was decided that this new post be created and filled by Uganda. We have taken a step forward as Uganda; our candidate was accepted as a nominated candidate for this new post. However, much as the post has been created, we need to keep the pressure on by following up on this matter. If we show any sign of laxity, this vacancy can be taken by any other country in Africa.

Madam Speaker, we are following up this matter for two issues. One is for the Shs 10 billion Poverty Eradication Fund, a grant that will be enjoyed by member states. Secondly, there is the anticipated road infrastructure development plan by the OIC. If we are fully paid members in respect to our subscription, we should be able to enjoy these facilities, let alone the outstanding benefits we are getting through, for example, the Islamic University in Uganda based in Mbale.

Madam Speaker, our request to Government is to assist our candidate, to continue harmonising and getting in touch with our countrymen in West Africa and getting in touch – (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I would like to give information. It is true that Uganda has a candidate for that prestigious post of Secretary-General of the OIC. However, of late, there are some fears that Saudi Arabia developed an interest to also present a candidate. Indeed, the rumour we have heard is that the government may be trading off that position in favour of Saudi Arabia. 

Therefore, honourable member, you were right to bring this matter to the Floor so that Government can come out to tell us whether we still have a candidate as far as this post is concerned.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I had earlier said that when Saudi Arabia showed interest, Uganda ceded to the interests of Saudi Arabia to take up the post of Secretary-General but allowed the creation of a new post of Assistant Secretary-General in charge of Africa affairs, which Uganda would take. On this, I would like to call upon Government to assist our candidate to be able to travel to all these countries. 

The Government should also pay up the subscription fees. Having been in a position to enjoy all these but then we do not pay our subscription fee puts Uganda in an awkward situation. People are wondering whether we are still serious about being members of OIC or we are not interested.
 
However, I would like to thank the President for all these efforts, despite the frustrations that our candidate has got from the Ministry of Finance. The President has come up to assist our candidate – (interruption)  
 
PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Madam Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor is more or less repeating exactly the position of Government, which is voiced through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He has added that he would like to thank the President, who is the chief foreign officer of this country, for what he has done. But he is at the same time calling upon Government to be interested in the OIC position. Is he in order to seemingly confuse himself on the issue of the position of Uganda vis-à-vis the OIC and sponsoring of a candidate for deputy secretary-general? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the House and the country is aware that we had a candidate for Secretary-General and the reason we do not have it is that we have not paid up. He is also informing us that we have now got in through a window to the office of Assistant Secretary-General. He is saying that now that we have got a small foot there, could we do the needful so that our candidate can get the deputy position because we have missed the other one. That is what he is saying. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Madam Speaker - (interruption) 
  
MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable minister in order to continue dwelling on a matter on which you have already given a wise ruling? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is not. Let us move on to the next item. (Laughter)

3.03
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the management and running of the affairs in the capital city. 

The Minister for the Presidency, who is also the Minister for Kampala, hon. Tumwebaze, issued a directive to KCCA to constitute a physical planning organ. This directive is defective because it does not follow the KCCA Act, and it touches properties on 1,910 plots. 

It is in total violation of the Act because the KCCA Act provides for a similar body to be constituted with members appointed by the minister. As far as I know, the members had been appointed by the Minister in charge of Kampala then, hon. Muruli Mukasa. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to table a letter from the Minister dated 10 April 2012 to the Lord Mayor of KCCA when he appointed the following: 

•	Mr Ian Kyeyune, an engineer, to head the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority; 
•	Prof. William Bazeyo, member; 
•	Mr Were-Higenyi Fredrick Milan, an engineer, member;  
•	Mr Kamese Godfrey Nasove, member; and 
•	Dr Nathan Batungi, member. 

According to Section 21 of the KCCA Act, these people were supposed to be joined by the Lord Mayor to represent KCCA to constitute what is called the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, which should be in charge of planning in the districts of Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi and Kampala Capital City Authority as provided for under the Act. Therefore, it comes as a surprise that now, the Minister in charge of Kampala, hon. Tumwebaze, has put aside the proposals as given by the former Minister. On 16 November 2012, he wrote to the Executive Director of Kampala urging her to urgently establish a physical planning committee for the city outside the law. He is now using the Physical Planning Act, 2010.
 
We gave KCCA a law, which is the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010. Under Section 7(a) of that law, it is provided that if there is anything on which the law is silent, then Kampala can borrow from another Act. But the law is not silent on this particular matter. It provides for the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority whose members have already been proposed and their names were sent to the Lord Mayor. 

The Lord Mayor replied and told the minister that he had no case against the names. In the letter he said, “I am touched by your gesture seeking my views about the proposed list before confirmation by Cabinet. It is my considered view that the establishment of the said Authority is long overdue and has indeed adversely affected the planning mechanism of the Authority.
Notwithstanding the fact that I have never personally interacted with the proposed appointees, their respective resumes can vouch for their competence, save for the proposed chairman who is a well known career politician.”
  
Madam Speaker, after people being appointed under the law, why is the new minister throwing away what the previous minister did  and coming up to request the Executive Director to appoint herself together with other directors to head such a very important organ? 

The KCCA cannot run away from its Act. They have an Act here and they cannot borrow from the Physical Planning Act because they are no longer a district. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this matter as a matter of national importance. It touches people’s property - (Interruption)  

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give is to the effect that when hon. Muruli Mukasa appointed those four members of outstanding qualities as per KCCA Act, indeed, the Lord Mayor responded as hon. Nambooze has ably put it.
 
The information I am giving is that while we welcome the new appointment of hon. Tumwebaze as the Minister in charge of the Presidency, where Kampala Capital City Authority falls, I think we should also remind him that we are working under a new arrangement under KCCA. We were greatly surprised because what he did, regardless of what the other minister did, contravenes the KCCA Act because Kampala ceased to be Kampala City Council as a district; it is now under a new kind of arrangement. 

The information I am giving to hon. Nambooze is that it is true that the letter was written where the minister appointed technocrats who are supposed to be supervised by other members as per the KCCA Act. Therefore, I would like to make a humble appeal; I think the intervention of the Speaker is of paramount importance here.
 
MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I request you, most kindly, to allow me say that in any case, even where the minister would have to direct the Authority, he would not give the directive to the Executive Director. The law, in Section 79, provides that: “The Minister shall have general powers to give directives on policy and general direction of the capital city and the Authority shall comply with the directives.”  Section 79(4) says: “The Authority shall give effect to any direction given by the minister under sub section 3.” 

Madam Speaker, this is elementary law which even a paralegal like me can interpret. The minister, when giving directives to KCCA, should do it through the Authority, and the composition of the Authority is very clear under Section 6. The Authority comprises of the Lord Mayor and the various councillors and not the Executive Director.
  
The whole country sighed with relief when hon. Tumwebaze was appointed the Minister for the Presidency and Kampala. We have had enough problems in the City and so we thought that he was going to open up a new page in the City. However, it is now very worrying that he is taking the same trend. This means we shall continue with the problems we have been having of sidelining the people’s elected representatives and giving the Executive Director powers over and above her mandate and making one person the institution. The Executive Director is not the institution of KCCA. 

Therefore, I pray that this honourable House makes the necessary interventions by calling the minister to order and requesting him to appoint the metropolitan authority because this is the physical planning authority we are waiting for in Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso. I beg to move. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we can get the services of the Attorney-General at some stage on this matter. 

3.12 
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of hon. Nambooze but I seek your guidance as to whether I should not respond with a substantive statement, because giving an off-cuff statement may not help the House. I am able to do that but I would prefer to come with a substantive statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister will come back to us with a substantive statement. I also ask the Attorney-General to take interest in the submission and bring us a report. Can the Government Chief Whip ensure that the Attorney-General gets this information?
 
3.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Yes, Madam Speaker. I will inform the Attorney-General and I will ensure that when the minister brings the statement, we also have legal advice from the Attorney-General. Thank you. 

3.13
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have mentioned the Road Safety Week in your communication and how today many people, including persons with disabilities, have come here to petition you about the rampant accidents happening on our roads. 

I would like to inform the House that last Friday night, a KKT Bus coming from Koboko to Kampala got a fatal accident. Seven people died on the spot and one person died later, making the total number of dead persons eight. Over 40 people got seriously injured and are languishing in the hospital.
 
This highway passes through a national park, which is inhabited by both human beings and animals. The animals have their right to stay there just like the human beings. However, my concern is that we do not seem to have road signs to show that animals are crossing. The KKT bus knocked an elephant and it died on the spot.  So, where are the road signs? This is a new road, along which we would have expected to have many road signs to help avoid accidents. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, accidents are happening because of over-speeding. We passed a law here that we should have speed governors in all vehicles including buses; what has happened to that policy? Many people are dying. My people of Koboko are now mourning, and a number of those involved in the accidents end up becoming disabled. Something should be done so that we can avoid these accidents. 

My sincere condolences to the people of Koboko who lost their dear ones and I wish those in hospital a quick recovery. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I direct the Government Chief Whip to ensure that those questions on the speed governors and road signs – (Mr James Byangala rose_) Oh, the Minister of Works is here. 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleague, hon. Baba Diri, to send my condolences to those who lost their dear ones.

This issue of road signs is really disturbing us. Any road we construct has an item for installation of road signs and road marking. But as soon as these are installed, they are stolen by Ugandans. We, as engineers, have tried our level best to protect them by perforating the poles but still, the people steal them. We have at times perforated and filled them with concrete but they are still stolen. So, I am appealing to all Ugandans, please, respect these road signs. We are now thinking of using plastic ones. (Interruption)

MS LEMATIA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable minister that the road between Karuma and Pakwach is very pathetic. I do not know who is supposed to maintain the road signs because in case you are travelling in a small car, you are covered by the grass which bends over. I do not know whether you are aware of that because all the road signs are covered by the grass. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

MR BYANDALA: I thank my colleague for that information. However, as I was saying, I am appealing to all Ugandans, please, respect these road signs and markings because they are put there for a purpose. They convey messages, instructions and orders. Like hon. Baba Diri said, people are over speeding, though throughout the roads we design, we ensure that we design speed limits, either 80 KPH or 50 KPH. If you steal these road signs, then the drivers will not be in a position to know the speed limit. So, I am appealing to everybody to respect the road signs. Otherwise, we shall continue to have problems. 

My honourable colleague, the Woman MP, talked about the grass. I am sorry about it and I am going to investigate. However, we send money to either districts or stations handling routine maintenance of national roads. Cutting grass is part of routine maintenance. I am going to see my engineers to find out why exactly this was not done.

Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, the law on speed governors is there. Speed governors were introduced but there was a problem; these speed governors were malfunctioning. On Monday, I had a discussion with my staff and the Police; we are going to look into the possibility of ensuring that these speed governors are installed by the manufacturers because when they are being sold here by different companies and people were complaining – (Interruption)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The Road Safety Act provides for the National Road Safety Council. What is this council doing if at all it is in place? What is its status? Very many accidents are happening but you do not hear anything about the National Road Safety Council doing any work. Apart from reading about it in the Act, what exactly is it doing?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you. I am sorry that you do not know that the National Road Safety Council has organised the Road Safety Week this week. It started on Sunday and it will end on 24th. Today, they were in Mulago and even reached the railway station where they were marching around. So, I want to assure you that it is not only on paper; it is functioning. Even as I speak now, there are functions going on that are organised by the National Road Safety Council.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I allow hon. Nambooze to lay her papers, join me in welcoming the Lord Mayor of Kampala, Mr Erias Lukwago; the Mayor of Kawempe Division, Mr Mubarak Munyagwa; and the President of the JEEMA party, Mr Asumani Basaalirwa. (Applause)

Also join me in welcoming Mrs Ada Eze, representing Safe Way Right Way Uganda, a coalition of private sector companies that are working on road safety. We were with them today in Mulago. We also have Mrs Barbara Mwanje, project consultant at Safe Way Right Way. Hon. Waira, the chairperson of the National Road Safety Council is here. Mr Zemedkun Girma, senior transport specialist at the World Bank. Mr Katende Willy, secretary Uganda Bus Drivers and Allied Associations. They are all here. (Applause) 

For the other guests in the gallery, I will let you know when I get their names. I wish to inform you that the flyers from the National Road Safety Council are actually here in Parliament. This is a sample I have. You can pick them and read them. Please, hon. Nambooze, lay your document. 

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the documents I was referring to during my submission. One is a letter from the Office of the President, written on 10 April 2012 to the Lord Mayor, Kampala. It contains the list of the proposed nominees for appointment to the metropolitan authority, headed by Mr Ian Kyeyune. It is signed by the Minister for Security, who was holding the portfolio of the Minister in charge of the Presidency and KCCA at that time, hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa. I beg to lay. 

The other letter is dated 17 April 2012 addressed to the Minister in charge of KCCA, written by the Lord Mayor. He stated that he had no issue against the proposed nominees. I beg to lay this on the Table. 

Lastly, I wish to lay on the Table a letter dated 16 November 2012 written to the Executive Director of KCCA. The subject is, “Urgent Establishment of the Physical Planning Committee”. It appoints the Executive Director and a number of directors to be members of KCCA under the Physical Planning Act, 2010. It is signed by hon. Frank Tumwebaze, Minister for the Presidency and KCCA. I beg to lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: She has made her submission and we have asked the Attorney-General and the minister to come back to us.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need your guidance. When is the minister or the Attorney-General coming up with this statement? You see, as far as 20 March 2012 during the proceedings of this House, we had agreed that the Minister for the Presidency then presents a report about KCCA. He did promise but up to now, we have not seen that report. So, I thought we would give them some time, maybe one day, two days or one week, within which to present their report. In the meantime, I would propose that the minister stays his action until the Attorney-General clarifies on the legality of his actions if they actually offend the legal regime that sets up KCCA. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when can you come back to us on this question?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I can bring the statement by next Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Attorney-General will also come with his on the same day.

3.28
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to over 300 girls who are currently stuck in Kuwait. Many of these girls have been sold into sex slavery after being promised good jobs by some people here in Uganda. Those who refused to succumb to the evil motives of those who took them there are either now stuck at the offices of the dubious job agencies or in jail where they have been thrown. 

Among these is 25-year-old Resty Namuli, who is a professional nurse. She was promised a nursing job in Kuwait but she was only shocked to learn on her arrival in Kuwait that the job that awaited her was either a prostitution-related job or working as a house maid. She refused to take up the jobs and is now stuck at the offices of an agency called IBN Calgun in Kuwait. She cannot come back because she does not have an air ticket and the job agency may soon throw her on the streets of Kuwait at the mercy of anybody who could find her.

Another one is Halima Nabirongo. She had just finished her senior six in Uganda before she was taken to Kuwait. Much as she accepted to take up the job of a housemaid, she was mistreated and later thrown in jail when it was discovered that she was trying to communicate with relatives back in Kampala. Her passport was also consequently confiscated by the agency.

These girls were taken by a one Kazibwe, who claims to be a presidential adviser on human resources. He is assisted by two others; one is Ahmed Makumbi and the other one is only identified as Khalid who operates around Dewinton Road in Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table photos of these girls. The first one is Nabirongo Halima who had just finished her senior six before she was taken to Kuwait. The second one is Resty Namuli who is a professional nurse and currently stuck in Kuwait.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government should take all the necessary steps to quickly secure these two girls but also other Ugandans who could be stuck not only in Kuwait but also in other countries. (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that I am receiving calls from China from my voters; some two girls are stranded in China. They were enrolled into the business and they were told that they would be given jobs, but they have not been given any jobs. They are now stuck. If Government can do something to rescue these girls, it will go a long way in solving their problems as they are held in slavery.

MR KASIBANTE: My second humble prayer is that President’s Office should be made to explain the roles of Ahmed Makumbi and one Khalid who is operating along Dewinton Road at some office. We should know whether it is connected to State House or not. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can I direct the Government Chief Whip to cause an answer to be made on those issues.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, immigrant workers abroad are regulated by a law on migrant workers abroad, which is No. 65. All recruiting agents should provide a contract but there are some people who work without going through these recruitment agencies.
However, now that this has come to our notice, we undertake to investigate the matter and come back with a report.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I find it a little bit uncultured to rise on a point of order. The honourable minister is fully aware that there is a petition that came to this House from ladies who were recruited by one of the recruiting agencies in this country which was given a certificate by the ministry. The girls were working in Iraq and they petitioned the Parliament of Uganda that the conditions under which they were working in Iraq after going through this agency were pathetic. Now, the same minister is coming to the House to say that it is only those who are not going through the recruitment agencies that are facing problems.

Is he in order to tell us that the recruitment agencies are doing a good job when, actually, there is already a petition being handled by this same House that one of the recruiting agencies has failed in providing safety to our girls who are working outside this country? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I thought you would be well versed with these issues. In the Eighth Parliament, this House demanded from you a list of the legitimate recruiting agencies because of the concerns raised about how they were conducting themselves. So, it is a matter within your knowledge. It is not about contracts; people are being trafficked and you need to do something about it.

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, we will present this list next week but for the case that has been raised, we will take interest in the matter and report back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask our committee to expedite the petition of the women who were taken to Iraq because this matter is not new.

Honourable members, in the gallery we have a visiting delegation from northern Germany. They are hosted by Mr Johnson Bitarabeho, Chairperson Local Government Finance Commission. The team was instrumental in the formation of Rukararwe Partnership Workshop for Rural Development in Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council. They are here to learn how Parliament operates. Welcome Ev Pagel, Klaus Onnasch, Helmut Fischer, Frau Fischer, Angelika Armborst, Susanne Krause, Gudrun Netter, Dr Hartmut Schultheiß, Michael Scholz; the Ugandan hosts Johnson Bitarabeho, Geoffrey Tumusiime, Ahimbisibwe Abel, Abby Ayebazibwe and Maria Kyamulabye. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have West Nile Civil Society Organisation for Good Governance, Madi Okolo Constituency. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Tembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall that during the budget debate of this year, Members raised concerns pertaining to our intended de-activation of the counterfeit telephone handsets in our telecommunication system. Members requested my ministry to come up with a statement and this is what I am here to deliver.

The Ministry of ICT, through the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), is implementing a programme that aims to see the gradual and orderly elimination of counterfeit mobile telephone handsets from the Ugandan market. Counterfeit mobile telephone handsets are handsets that do not comply with the minimum standards set by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

The need for this programme arose out of the developments in the market, intellectual property rights as well as the concerns by the general public and Government with regard to the general poor quality of these handsets. Counterfeit telephone handsets often lead to:
1. 	Negative impact on the quality of communication services. 
2. 	Potential health hazards to the users. 
3. 	Limited functionality of the handsets. 
4. 	Limited value for money to the users; and
5. 	Uncontrolled source of e-waste due to their short lifespan.

Therefore, the Ministry of ICT through the regulator, UCC, is implementing a comprehensive programme to address this problem and it is being implemented as follows:

Phase 1: Checking for Legitimacy of the Mobile Phone

The first phase of the programme aims at enabling the telecommunication service consumers to check for the legitimacy of their mobile phones. This would be achieved by setting up an application through which consumers would be able to check for the legitimacy of mobile phones by using the International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) and number of the mobile phone. 

The programme shall be implemented using one or a combination of the following methods:

Method 1- Over the internet 

The IMEI of the phone in question will be fed into an application that is already active on the UCC website. The application will return a response to the query on the internet page. This application is already active but is still under test. It will be commissioned soon. It is available to the general public under test conditions.

Method 2 - Over the SMS platform

The IMEI of the phone in question will be sent to a short code, 8883, through SMS. The short code is connected to the UCC application that enables the checking of the legitimacy of a mobile phone. The application will return a response to the query through SMS. Procurement for the service provider who will provide services that will enable the use of the application on all networks is in advanced stages. This application will also be commissioned soon.

Phase 2: Denial of Service to New Requests on Counterfeit Mobile Phones

The second phase of the programme aims at denying access to telecommunications service providers’ networks for new counterfeit mobile phones that have not previously been connected to the network. Through the call initiation process, it is possible for the service provider’s network to identify the IMEI of a mobile phone that is requesting access to the networks. If the service provider has access to the Global System for Mobile Communications Association (GSMA) database, their network is able to identify the requests that have originated from a counterfeit device. The service providers will, therefore, be required to deny service to any such identified requests. This will require some changes and upgrades to be made to the service providers’ networks. 

The proposed date for this activity is 31 January 2013. 

The Uganda Communications Commission will consult with the operators, as is a regulatory practice. The date will then be communicated to the consumers after the consultations with operators. A nationwide multimedia consumer education campaign will be carried out for a period of at least two months and will cover the whole of Uganda by making use of the existing UCC consumer structures such as the UCC regional offices which currently are in areas like Mbale, Mbarara, Masindi and Gulu.

Phase 3: Denial of Services to all Requests from Counterfeit Mobile Phones. 

The third phase of the programme aims at the complete elimination of counterfeit mobile phones from the Ugandan market. In this phase, the service providers will be required to deny access to their networks to all service requests from counterfeit mobile phones, including those previously receiving service. This may require similar changes to the operators’ networks like those I mentioned earlier. 

The proposed date for this action is 1 July 2013. The reason some time is required before this is implemented is that this phase directly impacts on consumers who may have been using illegitimate phones, some of them unknowingly. It is, therefore, prudent to give a period of not less than six months after the beginning of the implementation of phase 1 before phase 3 is implemented.

We shall also continue with the consumer education campaign that was started in phase 1, to enable the smooth implementation of the whole programme.

Other Interventions

In addition to the three major phases above, the programme will continue to implement the following subsidiary interventions to enhance the success of the programme:

Consultation with Stakeholders

Several consultative meetings have already been held with stakeholders. They include mobile phone manufacturers or their representatives, authorised dealers of telecommunications service providers, MDAs and consumer rights activists. The issues raised have been incorporated in the proposed plan for the implementation of the programme.

Consumer Education

The intervention will ensure that consumers are educated on all issues surrounding counterfeit mobile phones. A detailed information document entitled “Counterfeit mobile phones: frequently asked questions” has been developed to educate the public on issues related to counterfeit phones. 

Management of E-waste

This intervention will ensure that e-waste arising out of the elimination of counterfeit mobile phones from the Ugandan market is disposed of in a responsible manner in conformity with the recently approved e-waste management policy.

Collaborations

Uganda Communications Commission, the regulator, will closely collaborate with Uganda Revenue Authority, Uganda National Bureau of Standards and National Environment Management Authority in the planning and implementation of the programme.

Way forward

Public Information

Due to the numerous mis-representation of facts surrounding the counterfeit programme that has been seen in the print media, UCC will issue periodic public notices to inform the public about the progress of the programme as well as the associated timelines. 

Programme Risks and Mitigation

The ministry is aware that unscrupulous individuals can devise means with which to clamp a legitimate IMEI onto a counterfeit mobile phone. This has the potential to destabilise the programme. The UCC is already considering ways in which to mitigate these activities. These include automatic device detection, which allows the network to detect an IMEI that does not match with the main physical characteristics of a genuine mobile phone to which that IMEI is associated.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the programme intends to eliminate counterfeit mobile telephone handsets from the Uganda market. This will improve on the quality of communication services, mitigate potential health hazards, require availability of a standard functionality on handsets, limit uncontrolled e-waste due to the inherent short lifespan of counterfeits and ultimately demand value for money for consumers. Therefore, I would like to call upon colleagues, Members of Parliament, and the general public to support the programme. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think we will have a debate for about 30 minutes. It was raised by hon. Sebuliba.

3.48
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for making some effort to bring us this brief. I am the one who raised this issue and I am happy that the response has come, but there are certain clarifications I would like to seek from the minister. 

He says that he is going to collaborate with other organisations but I have not heard him say that he is going to work with other ministries that are concerned with this. I know it falls within your docket, but we also have the ministry in charge of trade. Also, how are we going to know a fake phone from a genuine one? It should be UNBS to help your ministry or you to help UNBS to intercept most of these fake products before they enter through our porous borders. 

Secondly, he should work with all the agencies and departments of Government to help his ministry so that people are not conned. Now many sets have been imported and then you are talking about - (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. Regarding the collaboration, which is on page 4, the Member rightly said, and the minister did emphasise here, that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is among the agencies they are collaborating with. 

Uganda National Bureau of Standards is an agency under Ministry of Trade and Industry and it is an implementing agency in as far as standards are concerned - monitoring and even setting standards.  So, I just want to inform the Member that that he should be assured that the ministry is very involved. In fact, beginning next month, we want to implement a programme in the training section to further strengthen the issues that have been raised. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, still, this is the property of Parliament; it should spell out clearly all the actors in this business. It is not only the collaborating groups they have put here that matter, but everybody. Much as the public is also going to be made aware, but everybody - police, immigration officers - should be part of this. What we are talking about is a serious electronic or engineering gadget. It has got health hazards, so even disposal is an issue. 

People have put in a lot of their money and by the time you start in January, so much stock will be around. How are you going to pay those whom you find with those fake phones when they are not aware? Have you prepared some money to compensate some people who have been gullible because they have been ignored? Even some of us have these phones and we do not know a genuine one from one which is not. So, what measures have you put in place to help the people who have been affected?

Lastly, the deadline you have put, I think, is too near; it is a short period. How are you going to monitor and evaluate and eventually come out with the exact period when you are going to overcome this entire problem?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Ochwa comes, join me in welcoming Mr Samuel Mulangira. He is sitting on this side, on the technical bench, because his wheel chair cannot go up but he is part of the team campaigning for road safety. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.52
MR DAVID OCHWA (NRM, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for bringing the statement. I have a few questions to ask. 

One, what is going to happen to those poor citizens in this country who have already bought these handsets and they did not know a genuine one from a fake one? When they are switched off, has Government come up with any measure to compensate these citizens who are going to be losing out because they have spent their money on these phones?

Two, when these counterfeit phones were imported into our country, where was our Government? What were you doing as a ministry? In all countries in the world, you will never again get these counterfeits. When you go outside this country – a few of us, honourable members, have had an opportunity to go out - there is no country which accepts these counterfeit products. But when you come to our country, you go to the shops and everywhere they are flooded with counterfeit products. 

It is worse with these electronics. Almost each and every electronic item you buy in our country is counterfeit, and it is giving us a hard time. You buy an item now, you go home, you plug it in the socket and it blows up. Some of these fire outbreaks which are happening are a result of the counterfeit products we are getting in this country, and the government is not doing anything good to save this country. So, my question to the minister is: when we are getting all these fake products coming to the country, what are you doing? Are you really in charge? If you are not in charge, then you should do something. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, we all know the countries where these fake phones come from. (Interjections) Are we sure we do not know the countries where these phones are made? (Interjections)- So, if we know, why can’t we arrest the problem from the source?

Two, I want to comment on the time limit. Like hon. Mutumba has said, why can’t we arrest the fake phones from the source and meanwhile give ourselves time in Uganda to – (Interruption)

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Majegere for giving way. The information I would like to give my brother is that there is no specific country that is a source of fake phones. Fake phones come from every country. “Fake” means something which is not genuine and it can be from any country.

MR WAIRA: But at least, there are some countries we have been hearing about, which I cannot mention on the microphone. We are saying that in the meantime, let these phones which are within the country be phased out as we try to arrest the importation of fake phones. 

Lastly, the Minister tried one time to initiate a programme of registering mobile numbers. People are using these mobile numbers - somebody buys a new mobile number, he goes and commits a crime and throws away that number. How far has the programme of registering these mobile numbers gone? I thank you.

3.56
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable minister for this presentation and for the research they have done so far. However, I am somewhat disappointed. Quite often, I have reported and talked about counterfeits and how we have failed to contain this problem. Uganda, it seems, is becoming a dumping ground for everything. I am worried. Today, we are taking about counterfeit phones, maybe at a later stage the honourable minister will come with a report about counterfeit TVs, computers, electronic appliances, name it. This is very worrying. (Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Reverend, and thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of counterfeits is historical in this Parliament. We have presented this here before and there is a Bill here which we are about to pass. 

Also, I wanted to inform people about this ICT thing. If you have the automatic device detection, it is not only limited to mobile phones. These are things which are going to even solve areas of other communications in aviation societies and unions. This is a matter which, of course, the minister of ICT is now handling very well. So, honourable Pastor, I want to tell you that we are on the right track. 

Madam Speaker, recently we talked about the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity to Standards Programme (PVoC). Nothing will enter here until it has been given a certificate from the place of origin before it is even accepted in the society. Uganda National Bureau of Standards has been directed to enforce that fully. Thank you. 

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for labouring to educate me but you have worsened the matter. It now means we will require a very comprehensive report at a later stage, which is going to harmonise all this. Otherwise, now we are handling only one item but it seems whatever we are wearing, whatever we are driving, whatever we are using in this country is counterfeit. What are you doing as ministers? The ICT ministry has been around for some time, but this is just coming up. Government should come out in with a very serious intervention. (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving me this opportunity to give you this useful information. I was in China in April and I posed a question to one of the presenters who had come to tell us about how they do things and how they are prospering in China. When I posed a question on why they allow counterfeit products to leave China to especially go to Africa, the answer the official gave us was that Africans have always accepted their products. So, for them, all they want is market for their products. As long as the African countries are willing to buy their products and allow their products in their countries, they will continue to produce them. 

Secondly, if you are entering Dubai, they intercept all counterfeit products.
 
REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you very much. As I wind up, the question is: what is going to happen to our consumers? Even we, Members of Parliament, I think we are carrying counterfeit phones. (Member timed out.)

4.01
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally want to thank the minister for the effort so far made because this is what was needed yesterday. Like my colleague, Rev. Bakaluba, was saying, this counterfeit issue is not new. Quite often, we have had challenges faced by our people and even ourselves. If you go downtown, you can buy a shoe which you will put on for only a week or so and it will get torn. In terms of telecommunications, we have already heard, and there are so many other areas. 

So, we have a lot of fake goods in our market and this beats our understanding as legislators, and we wonder why we should continue with this situation. Uganda is becoming a dumping ground for many of the fake products on the market – (Dr Mutende rose_) – Wait for me to make my point clear. The Ministry of Trade and Industry needs to do a lot more on this. I think they need to collaborate with others like the Ministry of Internal Affairs because there are migration issues at the borders and the rest – (Interruption) 

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. For the sake of this information, let me define a few things. There is a difference between substandard goods and counterfeit goods. We seem to be mixing up these words and using them synonymously. 

As a matter of fact, some counterfeit goods can be better in quality than the genuine goods for which they are trademarked. “Counterfeit” simply means you are producing on someone’s patent. Substandard goods, on the other hand, are goods which do not meet the quality standards. These are goods, which you say are cheap and parts of it may be falling off. I just want to make that clear, otherwise – (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. We are grateful for the definitions. That has inspired us to really understand what the Ministry of Trade is doing regarding substandard goods and counterfeits. 

Six months ago, they said that milk from China had melamine and the USA barred importation of milk from China. We would like the minister to give us further information on whether they accept such commodities because at least a counterfeit phone is not as bad; what about food items?

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, honourable minister. I need clarification from the minister, probably the one who presented this statement. What do we intend to do? Is it the counterfeit phones that we intend to control or is it the substandard ones? The minister is saying that some counterfeit phones are of better quality, much as they are counterfeit. So, what is the intention of this statement?

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, this may call for the minister’s full response since we are raising a number of issues. Otherwise, you will keep jumping in to give information to every presenter. 

Honourable minister, you can see there are issues coming from various circles. I want to say that we need to strengthen UNBS because it goes back to the quality of items we get. In China, for example, every quality is there; it depends on the amount of money you have. They put for you items, X, Y and Z and they are similar but with varying costs. So why don’t we regulate quality in that regard as the Ministry of Trade? 

Finally, I want to call upon the Ministry of ICT to increase on the information flow. Awareness – (Member timed out.) 

4.07
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I intend to start from where hon. Mutende has ended, and I think the minister should make this clear. Where I do not agree with Dr Mutende is on the word “substandard”. I think the appropriate word is “cheap”. A counterfeit Blackberry phone is one which has been produced without the authority of the manufacturer and yet you could have a very cheap phone, a Techno or something, which is actually sub standard. Those are two different circumstances. The minister should come out clearly to tell the country what exactly he is seeking to achieve. 

Madam Speaker, counterfeit is a legal issue. You manufacture a product that you are not entitled to manufacture and you offer it to the public purportedly in the name of a genuine product. Like you could have a Samsung phone, which actually is not a Samsung. The Samsung manufacturer can come up and sue those who are manufacturing and distributing that phone and that should be purely a business relationship. However, if you are protecting this country from what we are calling substandard phones, that is another issue, and that should be clear. What is a standard phone? You need to also tell the country what the standard is. 

Let me give another example. You could go downtown and find a shirt, say “Katuntu Shirt”. This Katuntu Shirt is a cheap shirt but manufactured and woven by Katuntu in his own way. Once you put it in a basin, five or six times, it will get torn. It is sub standard but it is not counterfeit, because I can produce a cheap shirt. 

Secondly, Government might complicate the issues because some of these counterfeits were imported and the ministry collected taxes from the importers. The following day you are switching them off, moreover you have already collected taxes from them. You were not responsible to the public. Every product imported here attracts a tax, meaning that before you do that, you have ascertained that it is a genuine product. So, as a genuine consumer, when I go to a shop that is licensed and buy this product, you owe me a duty of care. Have you taken that into consideration? You have allowed products onto the market and now you are now coming to switch them off yet you have already benefitted from their importation.

MS OPENDI ACHIENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of guidance. I know that my colleague, the minister, has come to the Floor of this House to inform us that the intention is to eliminate counterfeit mobile telephone handsets from the Ugandan market. However, you should be aware that there are other counterfeit products that are on the market. Further, you should also be aware that - if I recall very well – we have the Counterfeit Bill that is pending.

Madam Speaker, isn’t it time for us to have that Bill brought to this House so that we can handle it in order for us to deal with the counterfeit products that are on the market? That is the guidance I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is one of those we revived by our special motion because of its importance to the economy. I think the minister wants to reconsider his position, but what I would want to tell the committee in charge is to expedite the process so that we can debate because of these questions about what counterfeit is. Is it just substandard or not? All those questions would be solved by that Bill. Anyway, it is your sector and I think she has raised an important issue. So, why don’t we deal with all that comprehensively in that law?

4.13
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, my concern is about the five stated effects of these counterfeit telephone handsets. I think they are not really exhaustive. I would have expected something like symptoms and signs. The health minister, for example, usually comes out to say that the signs of Ebola are these and that. Probably, we should expect another statement because we would love to hear that from the minister. 

I also think that the measures that the minister has given come at the tail end. You are, in essence, going to harass the consumer yet it was your responsibility to protect that consumer. If I recall very well, UNBS has been in this country for a number of years. What have they been doing? How come our market is flooded with a lot of counterfeit goods?

Madam Speaker, I also would like to know whether the minister is aware that our borders are porous. Just two days ago, I was watching a documentary on NTV depicting how smuggling is a way of life across some of our borders. People do it freely and very comfortably. I do not know how you are going to control this, taking into effect the fact that smuggling is now part of life in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: It is not smuggling; it is regional co-operation. (Laughter)

4.15
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to first of all re-echo the sentiments made by my colleagues. A counterfeit is a duplicate of a known brand. A substandard good could equally be the same good under the same brand name but just below the known standards.

May I ask the minister: who uses these products? Is it the owner or the buyer? If a telephone set made in Japan is duplicated by a company in China, is it the Government of Uganda that is going to be the loser? Most of these duplicated products are sold at cheaper prices. I want to think that Uganda is not going to lose anything by having its people acquiring some cheaper products sold here as substandard. I have heard, for example, about the grading of some schools in Uganda. We have grade A and B schools but there are some parents who take their children to grade B schools. 

I have ever been a victim of these counterfeit goods. However, what I want to emphasise is the fact that what we have in Uganda are largely substandard goods and not counterfeits. Most of these commodities come from China. I once bought a telephone handset under the brand of Nokia. After two days, I realised that the telephone set was a KZG. I see many of these brands being sold in town but with the sellers not being arrested. I think the most important thing is that they are paying taxes. Now – (Member timed out.)

4.17
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for presenting this report. However, I am worried about this situation. In the circumstances, I will need some clarification from the minister as to when his ministry came to realise that Uganda has counterfeit telephone sets. 

I am also worried in the sense that the ministry is just joking with the lives of the people of Uganda. They are the ones who allowed these telephone sets to be imported in Uganda. The dealers paid taxes, as one member said, but now you are saying that the telephone sets have potential health hazards to the users. Now, can we know, from the assessment the ministry made, how many people have so far been affected or are in danger of being affected by these telephone sets? I am saying this because we may get rid of these telephone sets today but when many people are already affected. So, what do they have to say to this country?

We have been told that these telephone sets have limited value for money to the users. I would like to inform this House that Ugandans no longer take telephone sets as a luxury; it is a necessity. That is why even the rural people also now use these phones. In that regard, I do not know how much we have injected into buying these counterfeit telephone sets. We need to know how much Ugandans have injected into this. You have to give us the data analysis and the quantity. (Member timed out.)

4.20
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, what the country needs today is to address the issue of substandard telephones contrary to counterfeit ones. I am worried by the minister’s communication of checking for legitimacy of the mobile phones in phase 1. Who is going to do the checking? It is through the International Mobile Equipment Identity but what is it trying to ascertain? It is whether or not this phone was manufactured and sold by the original equipment manufacturer. This becomes an issue of intellectual property. This is not what the country needs today.

This statement comes out as though you are fighting for those big telephone companies which have names and trying to suppress the small upcoming ones which offer good competition to those big ones. Who benefits out of the competition? It is the service consumers of the telephones. So, you will suppress those upcoming companies but they could even be better, based on the minister’s explanation that at times counterfeits are even of a better standard than the original equipment because they try to improve it. 

This should not appear as if we are trying to fight for the big telephone companies. We need to review the issue of counterfeits vis-à-vis substandard. What the country needs today is to address the issue of substandard phones and not counterfeit ones. 

4.22
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister’s statement, but I would wish to approach this from a perspective of logical conclusions. When we are addressing this challenge, we should understand our society, and more so not act in a business sense and  take the risk of saying, “let the buyer be aware”, what the learned people call “caveat emptor”. 

Indeed, when you look at the challenges we have when we are working on substandard/counterfeit/fake goods, it is a matter of perception by an individual and perhaps based on where you are. Maybe one should be able to define what the standard is if we are to help out the country. However, we should not desist and run away from making it loud and clear here that much as we are talking of collaboration between the UNBS, Ministry of Trade and Industry et cetera, we have a limit when it comes to the law. As Parliament, we have a lot to do towards passing the outstanding Bills. 

I also wish the minister would appreciate the capacity of Uganda as a country. I would interest the minister in looking at more collaboration beyond what is listed in the statement here. We should, for example, involve tertiary institutions where you could find most of the vulnerable groups in as far as this is concerned. The young people in tertiary institutions could be a resource in information dissemination and besides, they could be a resource when it comes to using their creative skills in IT in wiping out counterfeit goods. 

I would also wish to say that this is such a diverse problem. It is making the cost of production in the country high and subsequently, the cost of living to go up. It is, seemingly, making it complex to do business in Uganda when it comes to communication. I would, therefore, urge the minister to keenly expedite the process talked about here but be mindful of the costs and losses our people are going to face in this challenge. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR GEOFFREY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a brief question to the minister because when he talks of counterfeit, I fail to explain it. I would think the honourable minister should be able to tell us whether they have equipment that has been imported to enable them measure electromagnetic radiation emission so that we do not only deal with counterfeits but be able to know some of the gadgets which are made using some components that are not compatible with the human body. Thank you.
 
4.26
MRS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The impression given here is that cheap products are only marketed in Africa. I think all of us have bought these cheap telephones and other gadgets from Europe and America. I think it is a question of the level of freedom in the market place. We should be a little conscious, when trying to eliminate these products, about low priced items because we are going to deprive many of our people of the items that they can really afford.
 
Madam Speaker, we should also think about whether we are really protecting the very expensive telephone brands and eliminating the cheap ones for our people. Who is going to determine that a Nokia made in India under licence or even in China under licence of Nokia is a counterfeit? We should let the market decide if the items are acceptable and there is a market here for them. We should let the market exercise that freedom. Thank you very much. 

4.28
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know two things from the honourable minister. One is to find out whether the service will be free of charge for the Ugandan. 

Two, whether the ministry cannot consider just phasing out these phones naturally instead of letting the poor people bear the burden. I know that since these phones are substandard, they cannot last long. Now, it would be the responsibility of the ministry to ensure that they embark on standards to bring in only those phones that are compatible as the others naturally phase out. 

This is because the voters are now asking us whether we are going to compensate them. They are saying, “We paid for these phones knowing that out country had taken the necessary precautions and now we are being told the country is not minding about us; is the country going to compensate us?” So, my suggestion would be that we naturally let these phones phase out as we take the necessary precautions, instead of saying the poor people should meet the burden of the disposal we are talking about. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just two questions; I do not know whether you are aware how many people are employed in selling those telephones. It is their livelihood and many of them are young people. So, I hope you can think of them as you phase out. It is a livelihood for many people. 

Secondly, a big economy called China has a city called Yiwu where everything is counterfeit, and it is a Government policy to manufacture the real one and also the counterfeit and they sell both. When you go to a shop in China, they ask you, “Do you want the original or a copy?” and you take your choice. They are making money; why don’t you want our people to make money from counterfeit?
 
MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much. I would like to seek guidance. We seem to be looking at the counterfeit phones only but counterfeit touches on two concepts. One will be intellectual property rights, which would involve the patent rights, and we have our Patents Act. Two, it also goes to the root of moral concern. 

There have been so many agreements, like the agreement on trade in counterfeits; I do not know whether Uganda is a party to it? We also have the convention establishing the World International Property Organisation (WIPO). If we are party to these international instruments, they clearly provide on how to trade in counterfeits and so on. Uganda also has its own guidance against counterfeits through URA, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards et cetera. The point of guidance I would like to seek here is whether it would be procedurally right for us to sit here and ban something, which should have been catered for internationally and nationally by the different institutions? Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Attorney-General and the minister will answer that.
 
4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (COMMUNICATION) (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleagues for the overwhelming support. From what I have heard, it looks like all of us agree that counterfeit and substandard phones are not good. The problem, as we have defined, seems to have clicked very well with colleagues. However, there are concerns which you have raised and some of them are very tenable. I will have to pass them on to the regulator to ensure that we enrich our implementation plan.
 
Madam Speaker, I will begin with your two good questions: “How many people are involved in the selling of these counterfeit phones?” We do not know the exact numbers; probably they are many or few. With deactivation, these people will have to migrate to selling the real good phones. Definitely, when we seal off all the avenues in dealing with counterfeit phones, they will have to migrate and start dealing in genuine phones. 

I have heard of that city referred to in China, but we have also heard about the pressure China is facing globally, because of that. In the World Trade Organisation, China is facing a lot of pressure and I do not think Uganda would want to take that route. As a minister, definitely Parliament has not given me those powers to say that we can deal in counterfeit goods in this country. The law is already in Parliament and we are awaiting your deliberations on the Counterfeit Bill. So, that is that.
 
The issue brought up by hon. Sebuliba was answered very well by my colleague. On collaboration, I must say that we have collaborated. He also brought up the issue of compensation and quite a number of colleagues brought up this issue. I would like to say clearly that in our implementation plan, we are not considering compensation.
 
Hon. Winfred Kiiza came up with some answer, which I already had. You know, in our phased approach, by the time we totally deactivate these counterfeit phones, most of them will not actually be functioning then. They really take a very short time. 

That takes me to the issue of “substandard” and “counterfeit”. What we are handling with here is counterfeit phones. “Counterfeit” is actually defined like I mentioned before. “Substandard” is a bit fluid; it is to the eye of the beholder. I will give you an example of a radio set where they put papers indicating that the output is 40 watts, but it is not; that is deception. You buy that radio set thinking that it can produce 40 watts when actually it produces less than what has been indicated. That is a substandard product. It simply means it is not at a standard that would convince you to buy it. 

Even for phones which are substandard, when you are buying them you look at the technical specifications but actually that phone does not have the capabilities to make it perform to the technical capabilities as inscribed on the phone or in the manual. So, that is a substandard phone. Actually, my technical people were telling me when we raised that issue that really, we could say that all counterfeit phones are substandard but not all substandard phones are counterfeits. So, you just have to take it that way. 

On the issue of countries, my colleagues brought it out very well. When you attach a country to a counterfeit phone, you have lost it; any country can produce a counterfeit phone.

Hon. Katuntu raised the issue of taxes. He said that we have collected taxes but now we are going to deactivate these phones. These are two different issues. According to the mandate of UCC as a regulator, as per the law which was passed by this Parliament, we do not do type approval of telephone handsets. You can imagine if a regulator started to do type approval of telephone handsets, it would bring in a lot of complications. It will bring in a lot of rent seeking behaviour and the rest. The regulator does type approval of some telecommunication equipment like transmitters and other equipment but we do not do type approval of handsets. We have left it to the market forces. 

This issue has just come up. Some colleagues were asking me, “Where have you been all along?” This issue of counterfeit phones is a new one. Our neighbours in Kenya have just completed deactivating all of them. By the way, I should tell you that if you have a counterfeit phone in Uganda, you are most likely not going to be able to make a call in the Kenyan system. All our neighbours are starting on this programme and so there is no way we can hide. We have to go ahead and deactivate these counterfeit phones. 

Who loses? Hon. Kasibante was sort of attaching a moral value by asking who loses. He said, “These are cheaper phones, why should we be bothered because people want cheaper phones”. Colleagues, you know that not all cheap things are actually cheap. Something can be cheap in nominal terms but in real terms, it is very expensive. You may buy it at an affordable price but you would need to buy quite a number of these handsets in a year. So, at the end of the year, you have actually spent more than what you could have spent on a genuine phone, notwithstanding other potential health hazards and the rest. So the so-called cheap phones may actually turn out to be more expensive than the genuine ones. 

I should say very clearly that there are a lot of very cheap phones which are genuine, and I will give you one example. I am not trying to campaign for any telecom operator, but the so-called kabiriti is a genuine phone but very cheap. [Hon. Member: “It does not have swagger.”] Okay, if you want swagger, you pay for it. Swagger, as you know, colleagues, is very expensive.

Hon. Kafeero brought up a very important point, and this has been coming up time and again. I think this is the last point I will handle. He asked, “Are we trying to protect the big companies?” The answer is, No. All genuine mobile phone manufacturers have come under one association, the GSMA. The big ones like Nokia together with the smaller ones are all part of that association because it pays to be part of it.  They run on the same platform and they want to achieve the same standards, but of course producing different phones with different technical capabilities. So, people who get out of GSMA are our first suspects because they are dodging this globally recognised association because they want deception. So, they are the ones we are targeting. That is why the database we are using is from GSMA. 

Honourable members, I thank you for the support. If you want to know the serial number – the IMEI – on your phone it is easy to check; just press *#06# and it will immediately appear on the screen. Please, keep that serial number because it is very important to you. Some fake phones will not show anything. However, some new counterfeits have started to clone. We know now that they have entered the database but we are planning to get software that will compare the IMEI with the technical physical characteristics of a phone, and we will be able to catch them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Honourable members, earlier in the afternoon we said we had been on a road safety campaign. The members of the Uganda Spinal Injuries Association have been here since morning. So, I am proposing that we move item No. 6 forward so that we can deal with it and they go away.

MR AMOOTI OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to question the varying of the next item but just in regard to the item that we have skipped, I had points that I wanted you to clarify. When I look at rule 35(5) of our rules regarding questions to ministers, it says that a minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member. I am just expressing my concern to you because I tried to pursue this administratively and I hit a snag.

Four months ago, in the month of July to be precise, I raised four questions for oral answer to the Minister of Foreign Affairs in regard to continental issues and to the Minister of East African Affairs in regard to EAC issues. Four months down the road, I have not heard from the ministers or from the Clerk. I have not seen my questions appear anywhere, not even in the order of business to follow. So, Madam Speaker, since that is in utter breach of our own rules, I seek your guidance on the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall trace the questions and put them on the Order Paper next week.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON ROAD SAFETY AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS

4.47
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move this motion, let me, on behalf of the Road Safety Forum of this Parliament, thank you for taking time off to go to Mulago, particularly to visit the emergency, the orthopaedic and the neurosurgery wards and the other wards where matters of road safety come alive in a very vivid way. We are also glad that you received the petition of accident victims, specifically those with spinal injuries, and that you committed that the House will follow up these matters. 

Madam Speaker, the motion I am about to move is constituted as a result of petitions. Some of them were forwarded through your office. There was a petition by the Yes We Can Alliance. There was another petition by the Uganda Bus Drivers and Allied Association and then our friends of Safe Way Right Way and then our own experience. I would, therefore, like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on road safety and other related matters. This is moved under rule 43 and I am doing it on behalf of the Parliamentary Forum on Road Safety:

“AWARE that Uganda continues to experience a very high number of deaths owing to road carnage, for instance, in 2009, 2,734 people died as a result of accidents; in 2010, 2,954 people were killed; in 2011, Uganda lost over 3,400 people due to road accidents and this problem is growing at a rate of seven per cent per year;

CONCERNED that Uganda loses two to three per cent of her GDP – that is about Shs 900 billion - as a result of road traffic crashes, more than the annual overseas assistance given to Uganda;

RECALLING that the United Nations declared the years 2011 to 2020 a decade of action on road safety;

The major pillars of this decade of action are: 
1) 	Strengthening institutional capacity to further national road safety effort.

2) 	Improving the safety of road networks for the benefit of all road users especially the most vulnerable, that is, pedestrians, cyclists and other motor cyclists.

3) 	Improving vehicle safety by encouraging harmonisation of relevant global standards and mechanisms to accelerate uptake of new technologies, which impact on safety.

4) The development of comprehensive programmes to improve road user behaviour through encouraging the development and adoption of model road safety legislation and sustained or increased enforcement of road safety laws and standards; through public awareness and education to increase seatbelt and helmet wearing and reduce drinking and driving, speeding and other related risks; through activities to reduce work related road traffic injuries and to promote the establishment of graduated driver licensing programmes for novice drivers.

5) 	Effective post crash response.

FURTHER recognising that in the month of May, the United Nations commemorates the Road Safety Week internationally and that 22nd November is remembrance for accident victims worldwide;

AWARE that the Government of Uganda is a signatory to the UN Declaration and has launched the Uganda Decade of Action for Road Safety, we note with disappointment, however, that at the national level there has been a general laxity on the part of stakeholders to take decisive action/ steps on road safety;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Government presents to Parliament an action plan for the implementation of the UN resolution on the Decade of Action for Road Safety.

2. 	The Ministry of Works and Transport presents to Parliament the road safety policy and strategic plan within one month. 

3. 	The Ministry of Works and Transport lays before Parliament the draft principles for the national road safety authority and makes an indication that this will be implemented in the financial year 2013/14.

4. 	That Government ensures enforcement of existing laws and regulations under the Traffic and Road Safety Act specifically for the use of crash helmets, seatbelts, reflective night ware and vehicle inspection, and that Government undertakes to review this Act to take care of all issues relevant for road safety promotion in Uganda.

5. 	That Parliament urges Government to operationalise and fund the activities of the National Road Safety Council as a transitional measure awaiting the creation of an autonomous lead agency for road safety.

6. 	In the short and medium term, Government should provide and implement procedures for identification and stringent regulations for drivers of public service vehicles.

7. 	Government puts in place a mechanism for standardising the training of passenger service vehicle drivers.

8. 	The Ministry of Health puts in place adequate and effective trauma and healthcare facilities on highways and for orthopaedics and neurosurgery departments in the national and regional referral hospitals and an effective post crash evacuation mechanism. This should also include targeted training for neurosurgeons and orthopaedics.

9. Government develops an integrated information/data system that supports the promotion of road safety in the country.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders? 

4.56
MR GEOFFREY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion. I am so glad that this silent killer called road carnage is going to be deliberated upon on the Floor of this august House today. In fact, I must thank hon. Alaso Alice and the entire forum on road safety for bringing up this motion.
 
As we are all aware, road safety is a critical issue in this country. I think if we refer to the records for the last two decades, you will come to a conclusion that if we do not do anything about this, then we are going to continue losing our relatives, our family members and in fact the next person will be you.

There are several factors that contribute to road crashes in this country but since it is a collective responsibility, if we can effectively work on some of these areas I am going to suggest, I believe we can reduce the road carnage in this country.

One, I still insist that human behaviour contributes more than 70 per cent to road carnage in this country. Human behaviour can best be tamed from childhood. If we are to agree today that all inner covers of exercise books that are used for primary education today should be printed with road signs and the outer cover be printed with multiplication tables as they used to do in the past, then we shall be introducing the young citizens of this country to road safety early enough.
 
Two, I believe we do not have enough road infrastructure. As I said, there are a lot of factors that are contributing to road carnage but road infrastructure, which is called road furniture, is really lacking in this country. I am happy to hear that some of our honourable colleagues were commenting on this. 

I also would like to give information to this august House that I personally happen to be an expert in making road furniture. I took a decision to negotiate with Uganda National Road Authority - I believe the minister is aware of this - and we said since people are stealing the road signs in this country, then we should be able to use plastic materials that they are not interested in. Actually, I am glad to mention that it is being piloted. I think three districts have already started getting this. I believe it is going to reduce the theft of not only the road furniture but even the road lights. 

In this modern world, with the modern technology in place, I believe that we can use intelligent photo electric technology, which is already in place and is actually cheaper than the ordinary traffic lights, which can actually be manufactured in this country. We can use this instead of the devices that we have been using to control the traffic flow. In fact, if we complete our national backbone infrastructure, we should be able to install solar speed detection display lights with cameras on them. If we put this with some down timers, then we shall reduce the number of traffic policemen on the roads. 

Some few hours ago, we went to Mulago Hospital and we were able to see one very important machine - we are also lacking not only road infrastructure but equipment. This machine does not have a power charge protector and it keeps on getting spoilt all the time and yet this is a machine, which is able to detect whether somebody who has got an accident still has hope of life. The doctor in charge told us that they need a minimum of three of these machines in this country. 

One other thing that I feel should be done to reduce this carnage is vehicle inspection. From the time vehicle inspection was stopped, the road accidents increased at a very high rate. I think we have the figures, and I know some of us are going to mention them on the Floor. I do not have them right now.  Vehicle inspection should be brought back so that we are able to know which vehicle is serviced when and if possible, these drivers should be moving with the service cards in their vehicles so that the traffic police are able to identify which vehicle was serviced and when.
 
I, therefore, support the motion that the ministry concerned should tell us the measures they are taking to ensure that the increasing road accidents are reduced. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have pupils and teachers of Buyuki Wabiwalwa Primary School represented by hon. Muyingo, Bamunanika County, and the lady Member. Please, stand up. You are welcome! (Applause)

We also have Kyerima UMEA Primary School, Kayunga, represented by hon. Suleiman Madada, Bbale. Stand up. These are from Bbale. Welcome. (Applause)

5.05
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion and I would like to thank our chairperson, hon. Alaso, for heading this forum.

I would like to give some comments on this subject. The result of an accident is either a permanent disability or death. I would like to talk about some of the causes and some of the challenges disabled people face while using our roads. When you look at the way the roads are made, the shoulders are so narrow for pedestrians. People like us who are using crutches need a lot of space and even wheelchair users. Sincerely, you have to struggle when you are walking along a highway. It is very difficult and you are actually highly vulnerable to getting an accident.

Secondly, the boda bodas must be regulated. As much as the shoulders are so narrow and some people like us can struggle to use these shoulders, but the boda bodas can also find you there. The other day I was around Clock Tower and a boda boda man knocked a disabled person and then he just commented, “I did not know that by being disabled you are also stupid. Why didn’t you see me coming?” That was very unbecoming! 

I just noted from the traffic police that they are the ones who are nearest to the accident scenes but they do not have good ambulances to take the victims. The only means they can use are the pickups but the pickups actually can make somebody get worse. The way they handle the accident victims - you know just throwing the person on the truck! Many people who have suffered spinal injuries are saying that if they were well handled at the time of the accident, maybe they would not get as injured as they did. Some of the resultant effects are terrible. 

If it is a mother with a disability- you have heard me talking about this before – they need accessible labour beds. If this  mother is to deliver, they will not find an accessible labour bed in the hospital but the ministries are not concerned at all about some of these resultant effects.

Madam Speaker, this morning when we visited Mulago, I had thought that you were going to visit the orthopaedic workshop because if accident victims are to use an appliance, the sole provider in this country is the Mulago Orthopaedic Workshop - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay half a minute to conclude.

MS NALULE: Let me wind up. The orthopaedic workshop is not funded. It is filthy and it cannot deliver the appliances they get. 

The other requirement these victims need later on in life is accessibility. The Building Control Bill is before the Committee of Infrastructure. I want to beg that the accessibility standards developed by Uganda National Action for People with Physical Disability are incorporated.

Lastly, these victims must be represented on the Uganda National Road Authority. I thank you.

5.09
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion and thank the forum for this report. 

One of us has just mentioned that many of the accidents are caused by human behaviour. I wish to emphasise what he is saying. Although we say the roads are bad, a very good road causes an accident and a very bad road causes an accident. I think it is the users who we should largely blame. The new roads that are being made are full of humps, a sign to show that we, the drivers, are very unruly and very careless. A good road should help you drive safely and smoothly and help you reach in time, but now all our roads are full of humps to ensure that speed is checked. 

In Uganda, do we know our official driving schools? Where do our people go to learn driving? Anybody can set up a driving school and we do not know whether they are good schools. This is where all these drivers you see on the roads go. Are they properly trained? 

Secondly, pedestrians do not seem to know how to use our roads. One may be a careful driver but because the pedestrian and the cyclist do not know how to use the road, the accident may occur. We should not assume that people know how to use roads. The onus should be on the government to ensure that people are taught how to walk on these roads. The boda boda riders have been talked about. We might not eliminate them but they are not properly taught how to use those motorcycles. They should also be included in this programme.

We have a problem of fake driving permits. I was told many of these policemen do not know how to identify a valid driving permit and a fake driving permit. So, Members of Parliament sitting here, your driver might be a holder of a fake driving permit and you are sitting in a very dangerous vehicle with an untrained driver.

I wish to thank the Police. Recently, Police have put in a lot of effort to curb the speed of buses. If you travel by bus or if you have somebody who has travelled by bus, he will tell you that for every 30 kilometres there is a police post and the police enter the buses and ask the passengers how the driver is driving. Many times it is the passengers who are urging the driver to drive very fast because they are late. So, if the Police can continue doing this, maybe there will be less carnage on the road. 

It is very important that every new road should have a lane for the pedestrians and a lane for the cyclists - (Member timed out_)

5.13
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for bringing this motion about road safety. 

I would like to inform the House that my committee is considering the petition brought by the Yes We can organisation and very soon we shall be bringing it to Parliament for discussion and deliberation. At the same time, we are considering the Building Control Bill. We are sorry we are somehow late but it is because of the many petitions that we are considering. Very soon it will also be tabled before this Parliament for passing.

What is important, I think, is No. 4 where they have recommended that Government should ensure enforcement of existing laws. I am sure as we talk, there are many existing laws that are meant to help curb this menace of road accidents but the issue is enforcement. 

Two, the behavioural change of our people; some of them are not well trained; others run away from villages and start driving cars and motorcycles. So, it is incumbent upon Government to put up an official driving school whereby they can certify these drivers and motorcyclists.

On road furniture, we have monitored; we moved around Uganda and we found them stolen. So, I am happy that the Minister of Works is here. I think they should consider using concrete furniture. Hon. Omara has suggested plastic, but plastic is being recycled in our industries around. Some people will continue to steal that plastic and bring it to make cups and whatever. So, I think we should think ahead. In our submission, as we are considering the, “Yes, we can petition”, we shall still come with our suggestion, but the Ministry of Works should in the meantime think of a long-lasting solution.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe for information, when he talked about recycling, the vandalism of electricity wires in Busoga has been very extensive. They manufacture saucepans and some of the saucepans we may be buying may be those from the electricity wires of Busoga. (Laughter) I just thought you should know that.

5.16
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Alice Alaso for bringing this motion, which is spot on. For the time I have been in Parliament, I have lost 10 people to serious road accidents in my district, ranging from school children, to teachers, to lawyers, to even the retired and the elderly. And the reason is overspeeding, the use of DMCs, name it.

As my colleague has just put it now, some of these roads do not have road signs. The minister told us last time that it was because these road signs are being stolen. Don’t we have engineers who can think beyond using those road signs that can be stolen? We can use concrete. Before we started using these iron plates we were using concrete and no one was stealing them. So, can we move forward and use that? 

The road users need to be sensitised. I remember in 2010, before I came to Parliament, I travelled in a bus that was coming from Sudan. Immediately they passed Kafu these buses started competing and the people in the buses were cheering so that these ones should not out-compete them. They were cheering and shouting on top of their voices and the two buses were speeding side by side. I got up and went to the driver and told him to stop immediately or I leave him at the next Police station. People started booing me and saying, “You woman, won’t you die in your sleep?” I told them, “If you think the driver does not know what he is doing you tell him to proceed.” The driver had to slow down. So, I think the road users also need to be sensitised. They should be told their rights if the buses are over speeding.

I returned from my constituency yesterday. A bus knocked elephants in my district and eight people died on the spot. Twenty seven got stuck in the bus and they were removed and others are still continuing to die as we talk. 

Another problem in that area; we all know that from Karuma Bridge up to Packwach Bridge you are driving within the park. But the drivers seem not to know that and Uganda Wildlife Authority has not bothered to put speed limits within that park. As far as I know, whoever is driving within the park should drive at least at not more than 40 kilometres per hour, but they drive as if it is “To Whom It May Concern.” I do not know whether UWA has forgotten that part of the national park is a community or it is “To Whom It May Concern.” So, my appeal is, please let us try to sensitise the public.

And then I want to buy the idea of my colleagues who proposed that Government should set up a public institution where drivers are trained. I have a brother for whom I paid to learn how to drive in a private institution. He was issued with a driving licence, but he cannot even drive. Suppose he was one of the drivers currently driving? (Member timed out.)

5.20
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion. It has come at an opportune time when we are approaching the Christmas festivities and we are yet to see what this motion is about. Uganda is a country known for making good laws, but is poor at implementing those laws. We have good laws and if they were being enforced, we wouldn’t be having the accidents that we are seeing today.

Madam Speaker, it also applies to the attitude of the people. We seem to take things for granted. Because when someone makes a mistake on the road and they are arrested, they do not know their rights on the road. Even the Police that are trying to enforce the laws at times they do not know the laws. We have Third Party Insurance, which is supposed to protect us, but we are just giving money to the people who are doing that business privately. Today, if you ask even the Members of Parliament here what Third Party Insurance means, there would be very few people who can tell you what it is. Yet it is supposed to help us. It is in our law. 

Then the seatbelts, they are meant to protect us and those who have used them have been protected in many ways. I know it cannot stop you from dying, but it can protect you. But how many of us use our seatbelts? 

The speed governors - I remember one time it was done intentionally to make money for some people in this city. Everyone was asked to buy a speed governor and those road signs. Then after a short while it died a natural death. What happened? If speed governors were put in the buses, and people are told to use their seatbelts – in every taxi or bus you board, seatbelts are so dirty! Even seatbelts in our own cars are so dirty that you cannot even use them. So, the attitude that we have has also caused –(Interruption)

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. These seatbelts save a lot of lives. A typical example is myself. I was being driven somewhere, but because I had done a lot of work the previous day, I was from the constituency, I forgot to fasten my seatbelt and I was dozing - I was almost pushing the driver off the steering wheel! But thank God, there were Traffic Police nearby who stopped the car. When I woke up, I saw the Traffic Police. The guy just looked at me in sheer courtesy and respect. He said, “Can I have your driving permit?” The driver produced it; but the driver was using his seatbelt. So he told the driver, “Please mind your seatbelt so that you can drive your boss well.” Actually, he was referring to me. I quickly got hold of my seatbelt. 

Then on speed governors; they are useful for all cars: small and big. The same day, I fell asleep again –(Laughter)– you know how far Yumbe is. The guy was over speeding and these guys had their equipment. They detected the speed and stopped us. I woke up and they were writing a receipt for him already. I asked, “What is the problem? They replied, “Don’t you know that in such an area you drive at 50km per hour? He was driving at 80. So, these things help us a lot. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you so much for the information. I think you agree that the attitude is important. Madam Speaker, there is also the aspect of drinking and these days drivers of buses take something called “Mairungi”. It is a certain weed, which they say keeps them awake. But it is a dangerous weed. Passengers see drivers chewing it and they do not talk about whatever is happening. He is driving your life, but you do not talk about it. So, the attitude should change. I think we should get a lot of sensitisation for us to know that these accidents are caused partly by –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion. I got interested in these issues of road accidents. When I was doing my research, I found out that 90 percent of road accidents happen in developing countries of which Uganda is one. It goes further to say that these developing countries have less vehicles. That defeats my understanding because we would be expecting accidents to be more in countries that have many vehicles. So, what is the problem with us in the developing countries? Who is going to bring sanity to the people of developing countries, and particularly to the people of Uganda? 

When you are crossing Jinja Road and you see how boda boda men behave – people have put prayers to the Ministry of Works and other sectors, but there is no response. Where is KCCA in this petition so that they can play their role in terms of manning, especially these boda bodas. 

Madam Speaker, when you take statistics within your Parliament, most of us are becoming obese. The reason is that we do not have active transport in the city. People fear to walk on the streets of Kampala simply because they will be knocked by vehicles just as hon. Safia said. How are we going to keep healthy when we cannot walk or even drive safely on the streets of Kampala because we fear a boda boda may knock you? 

I do not know where the laws about holding boda boda accountable for causing accidents are. They knock you and claim they were in the right; they do not have any case to answer. So, I do not know how the boda bodas are going to be organised so that they can ride in an organised manner. I do not know whether it is Ministry of Works or KCCA that is responsible for that – (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Nyakikongoro, for allowing me to give you this information. Madam Speaker, the boda boda cyclists can only be helped by the Ministry of Works and Transport by them making good roads, which provide pass ways for boda boda cyclists. In the current situation, we are all struggling for space - boda boda cyclists, pedestrians, bicycle riders, motor vehicle drivers and wheelbarrow pushers are all struggling for the same road. So, we can only have this cleared when the roads we are constructing have provisions for all these categories of road users. When we do this, we will be able to reduce the number of accidents we are experiencing as a country. (Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you so much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give about these boda bodas is that to me it is a bit different from what the honourable member has just said. And here I don’t even want to involve the Minister of Works; it is purely the Traffic Police. For example, when using the same lane with the vehicles, a boda boda will come in front of a Police officer, make a u-turn and the Police officer will just look on despite the fact that the rider might be loaded with three or four passengers. Yes, the Ministry of Works may come up with a policy, but without the Traffic Police enforcing the laws, we will be wasting time. Thank you.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I understand you visited Mulago Hospital, but in all these hospitals, especially the causality wards, you will find that most accident patients are boda boda victims and this –(Member timed out.)

5.32
DR SAM OKOUNZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this motion though I have a few things to add. There is what we call black spots, but you may not know where they are located. I happened to have read a report on black spots in this country, when I was supervising a masters student who was doing a research on these black spots. In his research, the student convinced me that black spots are not actually an act of witchcraft. They exist, but we don’t know why accidents occur in certain places more frequently than others. 

The student marked black spots along Kampala-Jinja Road, Kampala-Entebbe Road and Kampala-Masaka Road.
In his recommendations, the student suggested that the black spots be identified by use of sign posts to warn drivers. However, one of the reasons these black spots exist is about the structure of the roads, which may not be safe. That is why it is important we put right things that have not been done right.

So, as a general recommendation to this motion, I would like to move that a survey be done in the whole of Uganda to identify all black spots using sign posts. This will act as a warning to the drivers as they approach these spots.

Secondly, I want to talk about the human behaviour of especially pedestrians. There is one specific behaviour, especially in the rural areas, where pedestrians drink, get drunk and walk carelessly on the road. This is very common in West Nile along the road from Pakwach to Arua. 

In that regard, I want to recommend that a byelaw be passed to apprehend all those who are found walking along the road while drunk. They can drink but keep in their homes. This will help in curbing accidents.

Thirdly, I think it is wrong emphasis to say that we improve the Department of Neurosurgery and Orthopaedics. It is good to have it, but it is the tail end in the management of accident patients. When a person is injured in an accident, the interest should focus on controlling blood loss and shock, and on improving the breathing by ensuring that the heart is beating. So, you need emergency units. We need OPDs that are functional. Yes, we can improve on those, but later on. 

So, I want to recommend that we work on the addition of emergency units and facilities in Mulago and other referral hospitals. There is also need for us to have more functional OPD units along the highways. That is how you can save lives of those who get involved in accidents. 

But you also need to note that we cannot do this unless there is a general improvement of the health system as a whole. I will be very doubtful if anybody in Government can be convinced to improve the health system because people are dying of accidents; people are also dying of many other things. Probably more people die of other causes than accidents. So, it is better to improve the health system as a whole by focusing on equipment, human resource and supplies. These things have been talked about in this Parliament several times but little attention has been paid to them.

We tried our best, as a health committee, to get more money for the Ministry of Health but we failed –(Member timed out.)

5.37
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion as presented by hon. Alice Alaso. I am a Member of the Road Safety Committee. I undertook some research and found out that about 400 children, mostly pedestrians, die in road accidents every year. This means accidents are also a scourge just like HIV/AIDS.

My research also found out that road accident injuries are the major causes of disability. Most people living with disability are as a result of road accidents.

Madam Speaker, it has been realised that road accidents are largely caused by either poor road designs – Madam Speaker, you also noted the same point when we were in Mulago – a situation where there is no space for the pedestrians. How would you expect them to move? As a result, they end up sharing the road with vehicles.

We also realised that there is failure in observing traffic laws. For example, where are the helmets? How about the speed governors? And where is the routine vehicle inspection? You realise that most vehicles move in dangerous mechanical conditions despite the Police presence on the roads. 

There is also the general lack of information; most people are not aware of how they should use these roads. You find vehicles, motorcycles and the pedestrians all sharing the same road. There is no road discipline at all! The population needs to be educated on how to use these roads. 

There is also the issue of double parking along our roads. People park on both sides of the road a situation which causes traffic jam and sometimes accidents. We feel that the Police should take action so that we can reduce on some of these accidents.

How about over speeding and even overtaking? Somebody comes to overtake all of a sudden when the Police are even observing. Madam Speaker, these are the major causes of road accidents and we feel that they should be catered for and if possible reduced. (Member timed out.)

5.41
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. The issue of road accidents is one that affects almost all lives, and most specially all of us road users are prone to road accidents. There are some accidents that are caused by the road users. But one other cause that I realise is on the way the roads are planned irrespective of the drivers being very careful; sometimes there are cases when the demarcations and the plan of the road can lead to an accident.
 
I am referring to the rampant road accidents that we have had on the Jinja-Kampala Road most especially in Mabira, which has become a death spot. I don’t know what the Ministry of Works is planning? That road is too small to contain the traffic that plies along the road. And maybe this would also call for the Ministry of Works to look into changing or increasing the size of the road so that we can reduce on the accidents that are occurring there because of the narrow road. 

I have also come to realise that there are accidents that occur due to the very sharp humps that the Uganda National Roads Authority is building on the roads.  We have just made repairs on the surface of the Busia–Jinja Road, but when you look at the humps that have erected there, I believe that we are soon going to realise an accident on that road because those humps are very sharp. Irrespective of the speed at which you are driving, you feel their impact. So, we are requesting that they should have a particular style of building the humps so that they don’t affect the vehicles and road users. 

Madam Speaker, over the weekend, when I was in the constituency, I went to Tororo Hospital to visit a friend who had an accident on a boda boda and as I was talking to the nurses, I realised that over 60 percent of the accident victims are caused by boda bodas.  In fact, there is a ward in Tororo Hospital which they have named Bajaj Ward. It is really funny to learn that such a situation has arisen. I think there is need for all of us to get involved in sensitising the boda boda riders despite the minister coming out to say that it is a Police matter, all of us leaders should get involved. Boda bodas are now contributing to the highest percentage of accidents in this country and the earlier we regulate on how they operate on the roads the better for us, if we are to reduce the occurrence of accidents on the roads.

Madam Speaker, I was invited to attend a simple function in the constituency and the boda bodas requested me to buy for them reflectors to use at night. When I went to the shops, I realised that night reflectors are so expensive for them to afford. When I attempted to get them from across the border so that I could pay taxes, I found out that URA is charging very high taxes and this is an item that would really help us here locally. 

So, I would also invite the House when the Minister of Finance is here to request for these reflectors to be imported tax-free so that we could have them in abundance in the country to help our people secure their lives. This is something that we should take seriously because they are not just being brought for business but to secure our people’s lives. 

5.45
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. It would have been very nice if we had the Uganda Police in this Chamber as we are debating this motion. As the hon. Bakabulindi said, most of the issues we are talking about would have been understood better by the Uganda Police if they were here.
 
In the Eighth Parliament, we lost two colleagues; one was from Budiope in Kamuli and another from Isingiro. They died because of road accidents. All of us here, as we debate this motion, we should know that we are potential candidates because most of us either travel at night or rush when we are going to attend functions. And if the roads are not good, then we easily become victims. 

When we talk about the post-crash evacuation - I always commute between Masaka and Kampala. One time I found an accident around Mitala Maria and I put the injured in my car and took them to Mpigi Hospital because that was the nearest place, but the Police nearly put me under arrest. They asked me questions as if I was the one who – in fact, this was a taxi that collided with another car and I offered my car because when I called the Police they were just asking me, “How many have died, what happened” and it became so difficult for me since I became a victim of circumstances. This kind of behaviour deters people from helping accident victims. So, Government should come up with a policy about what should be done to evacuate people, who get accidents on the road.

We have big trucks on these highways. You at times find them stuck on the road for five or more days. Somebody one time joked and said, “A big truck gets stuck on the road and somebody goes from here to Mombasa to buy spare parts and then comes back to repair the truck.” What happens in developed countries? This truck must be removed from the road so that other road users are not distracted and end up hitting the truck. (Member timed out.)

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for the motion and I actually do support it. 

The Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works, has done a lot in improving the road network in this country and you realise that we have very good tarmac roads currently as compared to what we had previously. However, we are still having road accidents, which are majorly caused by human error.  

I listened to one of the Members who was making a contribution, and said that there is need to have signposts in most of these dark spots. But you realise that there are signposts in most of these dark spots. However, the challenge is that when you get to these places, because of carelessness of the drivers, people are rushing and at the end of it all you find them getting involved in an accident. 

I have had the occasion to travel by road in some of the developed countries like Turkey, Thailand  et cetera, but you note that as you are getting closer to the dark spots – maybe 200 meters away - there is a road separator. And I think this would go a long way in helping us especially around corners where you cannot see what is coming from the other side. If we had road separators that would keep somebody driving on the left to keep to the left and the one on the right to keep to the right, and that would help us to reduce on the road accidents. 

The humps are also quite useful and they have helped us especially on Tororo-Bugiri-Iganga Road. 

Madam Speaker, most of the roads that are being constructed lately have trenches at the side. And with our big trucks on the roads it sometimes becomes difficult for one to manoeuvre when they are driving at a high speed and so, some of the accidents are as a result of this because as you move to -(Member timed out.)

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and let me start with the information I gave to my colleague about motorcycles. It is true as the honourable member said that it is not only the policemen; I can add also the politicians. 

I was in Kigali last week and you could see how motorcyclists had helmets; both the rider and the person being carried. Sometime back in the Eighth Parliament, a proposal was brought, but was defeated politically with arguments like people were going to fall sick and what have you. But the question is, the majority of Members of the Ninth Parliament have the privilege of visiting Europe where you should be seeing motorcyclists putting on helmets, why don’t they get sick?  We are here politicising the issue at the expense of people’s lives. It is high time that we removed politics from this issue and looked at the safety of people’s lives.
 
DR BAYIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue was not political. You know how unhygienic it can be if at all you had to sweat in those helmets. They are not cleaned and somebody else also does the same. The fact that it is done in Rwanda shows you how advanced our people are when it comes to caring about their personal hygiene. (Laughter) That is the information I wanted to give.
 
DR ONDOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the Shadow Minister of Health to promote the idea of boda bodas not using helmets and not knowing that the effects of not using helmets including head injuries are more dangerous? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very serious motion. We have been to a ward today full of people with broken heads - those who are still alive - and certainly those who are not alive are dead because they did not use helmets. Let us not joke about this matter.
 
MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact, the emphasis of my point was, let us remove politics from this. Those who are putting on helmets are saving lives and once we do that, we shall be supporting the motion of my sister.
  
The second point I wanted to raise concerns lane discipline and when I used this term last week, I was very shocked. I told somebody that he was driving badly because he wasn’t maintaining his lane and he asked me what I meant by a lane.  Just two weeks ago, while taking Entebbe Road - facing Clock Tower - somebody who was supposed to be going to Nsambya used the outer lane and scratched another person’s car. When he was told that he had used a wrong lane, he could not even understand what he was being told. 

If you are going to turn on the left or the right, on which side are you meant to be driving? That is the indiscipline we have here. People don’t understand what lane discipline is. Madam Speaker, having raised the point of lane indiscipline, I would like to raise another point. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is something called a shower cap, which you can carry in your bag and put on before putting on that helmet and save life. I will send a shower cap to you, Dr Bayiga. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The other point that I would like to raise – I think all of us might be in this category - we don’t have the discipline of not using mobile phones while driving. Some of us become so emotional when we are talking on phones that we raise hands saying, “Oli otya” and forget that one is supposed to be holding the steering. These are things we need to look at when we are talking about road safety. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to commend the Road Safety Forum for coming up with this motion. It is timely, but the bottom line here is improvement of the road network in Uganda. The line ministries responsible should try to help Ugandans. We could raise all these issues, but as long as our roads are in a bad state, the situation will continue. 

When I am travelling to Ngora, immediately I reach Mbale, I develop a headache all the way to Ngora because of the nature of the road. One day as I drove from Mbale to Ngora, I witnessed two trailers overturning; they knocked down a boda boda man and he died on the spot. So, I think that the bottom line is for the line ministry to take note, especially the Ministry of Works. 

It is also imperative that we learn from other countries to justify why we travel. I have personally been to Rwanda and seen people comfortably wearing helmets on boda bodas, but for us in Uganda we are saying we can’t manage. I believe that there is nothing that is not manageable. I have been to Germany and the people there prefer using bicycles. There is an arrangement whereby pedestrians and bicycles use their own lanes and the motorcycles and vehicles use their own. And I think this can be replicated in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, today when we talk about road safety it perturbs me. One time I was driving from Ngora and from nowhere, a train appeared; no sooner had we crossed than the train also passed. That was really scary because there was no sign and yet it was late in the night.  We need to take note of these small things because that is really the beginning of every bad thing. How can you have no sign showing a railway crossing? Even if you are a very careful driver, there is no way you can know that you are approaching a railway line at night. The Ministry of Works should take keen interest in most of these simple things. (Member timed out.)  

6.01
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Alaso for bringing this motion. Indeed, motor accidents are claiming many lives. Each time you leave your house, you are not sure of whether you will arrive safely until you go back home. Even if you have a good driver, somebody somewhere on the road can cause an accident for you. So, it is a very serious problem. I wish we had more time to talk about this.

Madam Speaker, one of the worst causes of accidents are the heavy vehicles which carry goods. At times they break down and they are parked on the road side, without any lights or reflectors; and another vehicle may come and rams itself against this vehicle. Is there any way of removing these vehicles immediately they break down? Or is there a way of indicating that there is a broken down vehicle ahead so that the other drivers can see it? So, that is one big problem we have along our highways. 

Coming to the boda bodas, I think they are a real menace as much as we like them for quick transport, and they are causing a lot of accidents. The riders do not follow the traffic rules; they ride anywhere. Why don’t we make them follow the rules so that they do what vehicles do; drive in the right place and cross at the right time? For them they can cross from anywhere and at any time they want. They are the main cause of accidents.

Madam Speaker, I went to visit my niece who was a victim of a boda boda accident. When I went to Arua surgical ward, five people from Koboko came saying, “Honourable, I am also here.” When I asked them what happened, each of them said it was boda boda accidents. I discovered that the ward they were admitted to is called “Senke Ward”. In our area, most motorcycles are imported from DR Congo and they are called “Senke”. So, you can imagine the ward gets that name because of the accidents motorcycles cause; and very many people are becoming disabled because of these boda boda and motor accidents. (Member timed out.)

6.04
MR PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the mover of this motion. I happen to be a man of two worlds. I use roads and at the same time water transport. So, I know the experience we go through. And it is against this background that I would like to move that this resolution should include road and water safety because we have also lost many people on water. And in our case there is no breaking of limbs and whatever; either you die and your body disappears completely or it will float after some days. So, this is my humble request.

When we talk about water transport carnage – I will restrict myself to water transport – we lack boat inspection. There are no Traffic Police officers. I have often talked to Mr Kayihura about the absence of his officers on water. It seems they are only interested in places where there are lorries ferrying charcoal and wood. 

We lack life jackets. It is a risk to me whenever I board boats and I am the only one wearing a life jacket. One time the other passengers told me that should the boat capsize they would hang on me to save their lives. I am calling upon Government to intervene; we need help. We do not have ambulances on water and neither is there any post-crash evacuation; in case the boat capsizes, where do you run to? What centre do you go to? Is it Koome or Buvuma?

We have a problem of sub-standard boats. Our people are poor and cannot afford standard boats to use on water. There are boats carrying excess goods, fish and people at the same time. You can imagine travelling in a boat that is carrying a cow, sheep, beer, people and other goods at the same time. So, those in the NRM and the Opposition should come to our rescue because you need our votes as well. So, save our lives. 

At times our ferries are in poor conditions; you must have heard of what happened in Bukakata, where the ferry reached a certain point and stopped. The passengers were in a state of panic; either there was no fuel or it was in a poor mechanical condition and the ‘Kazindas’ of today had eaten all the money and had left us on the ferry at the mercy of God. (Laughter) So, these are the issues we want to articulate when we are talking about road and water safety. (Member timed out.)

6.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and too thank hon. Alaso and the Forum on Road Safety for bringing this motion. It was heart-rending, seeing all those road accident victims in wheel chairs here in Parliament; men and women who should be going about their business, and contributing to the economic development of this nation. 

I would like to agree with the recommendations made in the motion, especially recommendation No.4, that Government should enforce the existing laws. The Police should be checking vehicles thoroughly before they are licensed, and the drivers should be thoroughly checked before they are issued driving permits. 

And I propose that drivers should be checked at the point of departure, mid-way on the route and then at the time of arrival so that we are sure they have not taken alcohol or any other drugs. The Police should enforce the mobile phone rule – that drivers should not be responding to calls while driving or indeed make calls.

Madam Speaker, Members have mentioned helmets. The problem with the proposed law here is that the burden was being put on the rider to provide the helmet for his passengers. In those other countries that have been cited, like in Rwanda and Europe, individuals carry their own helmets so that hygiene and health issues are taken care of. And we could easily have this law passed so that the burden is shifted to the passengers.

Madam Speaker and Members, the Ministry of Works should make sure that roads are clearly marked. In some cases we have very good roads but because they are not marked, when people are driving at night and there are no lights, vehicles run into each other. 

The lanes should be clearly marked. There should be pedestrians and riding lanes as we see in other countries. The Ministry of Works should widen the roads. Some roads are very narrow especially at those points which we are saying are dark spots; it is because there are sharp corners and the roads are narrow.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before hon. Kwiyucwiny comes, I just wanted to clarify on the issue of Rwanda. I think they have boda boda companies or associations. The phone number of the company is written in large letters on the helmets of both the driver and the passenger. So, it is the rider who has two helmets; one for himself and one for the passenger.

6.11
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much Madam Speaker, I want to support this motion and when I see this data rising from 2009, only 2734 people died, but in 2011, 3400 have died and this data does not capture maybe everybody who has died because some of these cases could have not been reported especially where there is no mechanism or no Police or no hospital, somebody just died on the spot or in the village. So, I think this data could even be more than this. 

I used to ride a motorcycle when I was working in that place and hon. James Baba was my boss. There was no riding on the right or overtaking from the left or riding on the opposite direction of a one way. So, I am wondering who is training these boda bodas these days; is there any school? I see a recommendation here to train vehicle drivers, but not boda boda drivers. But I think the boda boda rise should also be trained. 

Resolution No.5 is urging Government to support the national road safety activities, but I am asking myself and especially this week when they are having a road safety week, what do they have in the district? In Zombo District, what is happening as they have their functions here, I think there has to be a link with the structures in the district as well.

I want to echo the fact that roads are a cause to these accidents as well. In West Nile the roads are very narrow, the bridges are ancient, they are made of wood and they are rotten. Last year alone we had three major accidents where people died because of rotten bridges.  I would like to ask the Minister of Works, to please help us with those narrow roads and narrow bridges so that we can also save our lives.

Nyagak River, everybody knows that yearly there are accidents there; on Omori River and Ola River, every other year, because the road is bad and the bridge is rotten. Can we ask the Ministry of Works, to please support the district in those areas.

6.14
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I wish to express my appreciation to honourable Alaso for bringing this motion which is long overdue. Before we take a decision, you need to appreciate that the level of accidents increases, but to me there are many factors that contribute to accidents in this country.  The element of drunken driving, over speeding, the mechanical condition of the vehicles and finally the road conditions in this country.

We have got the figures that last year we lost 3400 people on the streets of Uganda because of accidents. But this is too much compared to other countries. In Sweden, for example, in the preceding three years to 2011, they lost only three people in accidents. Three people in three years, while in Uganda in one year we are losing 3400 people. If we go by these statistics you will find that the majority of people who are lost in accidents in Uganda, over 90 percent are the youth.

The youth are the people that contribute most to the economy of this country. If we are going to start losing our youth at this rate, some of the youth who have just completed the University like my nephew I lost in 2010. He had just come out of Nkumba University and before he could get work, we lost him; and he is not alone, there are thousands in that line.

So, Madam Speaker, it is very imperative that the Ministry of Works takes a very proactive move to safeguard the lives of innocent Ugandans. 

I wish also to go to the point of boda bodas. What is the classification of boda bodas? Are they PSVs? We need to get this clearly. What is the definition of a PSV? It is a vehicle that is supposed to safely transport passengers from point A to point Z. Can we really classify boda bodas as PSVs? (Member timed out.)

6.17
MS MOLLY LEMETIA (NRM, Woman representative, Maracha): Madam Speaker thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I want to add my voice to the rest of the people to thank hon. Alaso for coming up with this paper.

I want to address myself to No.4 where they are talking about Government ensuring enforcement of existing laws. I do not know what we can do. When the issue of seatbelts came, I was a victim. I happened to have travelled to Ntinda and before we reached Ntinda I was stopped in a taxi; a policeman pulled me out and said the people should go because I had not put on a seatbelt. 

I was like, here they are, they are now enforcing this law very well, but today, this law is no more. I do not know why. 

The same goes with these long vehicles. Some years back the Government had introduced a law that long vehicles should not travel at night. Many motor accidents happen at night due to these long vehicles knocking people because they drive very recklessly at night; at times they move without headlights. I wish this law could be enforced so that safety can be realised.

Often people die from three things; haemorrhage, injury to the bones and then to the nerves. If the victim is not handled very well that is the end of them. Therefore, I wish we could come up with a law  that ensures that our policemen are trained in First Aid so that they are there to save these people’s lives. 

On several occasions I have stopped to try and help, but the people around just grab these accident victims carelessly, and they often die on arrival in hospital because of that. In many countries Policemen are clinical officers, specifically to take care of this problem of deaths resulting from accident injuries. This is very important, I wish we do not only end here but to ensure that a law is put in place to save Ugandans.

6.20
MR OMWONYA STANLEY (NRM, OKORO COUNTY, ZOMBO): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank hon. Alaso for coming up with this motion. Actually, this is a very serious motion which should be given the seriousness it deserves. A number of causes of accidents have been identified in Uganda. One of them is of course the road infrastructure. 

First of all, I would like to thank the government for trying hard to improve on our roads. Particularly, I would like to thank the government for working on our road; the road between Kampala-Karuma and Arua and of course, part of Nebbi. At least these days, we take about six to eight hours and we are at home unlike when we were taking more than one day. 

However, I am concerned about the road between River Kafu and Karuma. This is one is really a death trap. The road is narrow, the sides are eaten up, overtaking is a big problem and part of the road is corrugated. I would like to request the Minister of Works to really do something about this because most of the accidents on that road occur between River Kafu and Karuma.
 
On the side of boda bodas, I would like to echo what hon. Bakabulindi said that in Rwanda, the boda boda riders are really organised. I was in Rwanda recently. There is organisation. A boda boda rider will not ride unless he has a helmet. The same is with the person he is ferrying -(Member timed out.)

6.23
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Madam Alaso very much for this motion and indeed it is very timely. I think all of us agree that these accidents on our roads are being caused by human error and behaviour of the drivers. Now that we are seriously looking at this problem, I think we should look also at a very serious national solution to this problem. 

I would like to propose that the authorities should think of remedies such as instituting a programme to retrain all the drivers so that we have competent drivers on our roads. 

We all know that most of the drivers that are on the roads did not really earn their licences or permits by correct methods. Some of them simply paid for them without any training. I think it would be very helpful to all of us to request that a programme be instituted to retrain and to re-licence all the drivers in the country. It is a tall order but, Madam Speaker, with the magnitude of the problem; I think we should be able to look at a programme such as this. 

Secondly, most of the driving schools teach drivers just to drive, but they do not teach them defensive driving. So, I would like to request that the driving schools be instructed to teach drivers not only to control the vehicle, but also to teach them defensive driving -(Member timed out.)

6.26
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my sister hon. Alaso for being smarter, because I once raised this in oral questions. I had raised most of the issues to the Minister of Works and Transport in oral questions and that is why, Madam Speaker, I would encourage that the system of oral questions be abolished if it cannot be improved because it is giving ministers a lot of time to enjoy in saunas. (Laughter)

I wanted to also inquire about the status of National Council for Road Safety because it is silent. It is only coming because tomorrow is an International Accidents Day but if you look at this report, accidents are increasing every year. Where is the National Council for Road Safety? If there is a problem, let the minister come with a statement so that we can, as Parliament, be able to assist and improve the National Council for Road Safety.

Secondly, is the issue of boda bodas. The transport sector of boda boda is really growing very rapidly and I would expect the ministry to come up with a policy on how they are planning, regulating and managing the boda boda transport sector because there are so many accidents associated with boda bodas. There are so many robberies associated with boda bodas; either the boda boda riders are being hit and their boda bodas taken away or the boda bodas themselves are being involved in robbery. So, the Minister of Works and Transport should come up with a detailed statement or a policy on how to regulate boda bodas because we need them. It is bad that they are  causing a number of accidents but we need them. It is a cost effective transport and it is quick. 

I would suggest as I conclude that, maybe as Parliament, we create a national body for boda bodas because Police is overwhelmed. It cannot manage the indiscipline of boda bodas, but if we create a body which has structures from the top to the grassroots - parish, gombolola and national - then these boda bodas can be able to sensitise themselves and manage themselves. By the way, these boda bodas can financially manage themselves. (Member timed out.)

6.30
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for this motion. It is quite timely. However, I have a few concerns to note. First, it is quite true that there is a law that outlaws trucks to load human beings as passengers. But it is quite unfortunate that many times as I move on the highways I find quite a number of trucks loaded with people, and in case of an accident many lives are lost. This law should be enforced so that no truck should be encouraged to carry people.

Another thing is that there are quite a number of people who have built along the roads and more especially around the corners. And there are times when cars have rammed into these houses and people have lost lives. If there is a law that forbids people from building very close to the roads or even around the corners, this could also be a lifesaving remedy. Otherwise, we are losing so many people.

People who have built along the road have businesses along those roads and the children come to also market their goods around that area and when vehicles come at full speed these people lose their lives. Therefore, a law should be put in place to see that people should not be selling their products along the road. 

We also have people who graze along the road and many times vehicles have run into livestock and people have died just because people are not aware of the rules to graze along the highway. This has caused a lot of deaths and if at all there is a way a law can be enforced, we are going to save many lives. Otherwise, we are losing many lives along the roads. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in connection with people who get drunk on the road, I think we should ask the Minister for Local Government to stop the weekly markets; these markets we find on the roads, at 7 o’clock where people drinking and are selling things and people get killed. 

6.33
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin also by thanking hon. Alaso and the Parliamentary Forum on Road Safety for bringing this important motion on road safety to Parliament for debate. I have a few points. 

One is about the driving schools and the instructors themselves. We do not seem to have proper standards for these driving schools and the instructors who are operating these schools. 

Another thing which I noticed is that in many other countries other than Uganda, before you get a provisional permit to allow you to go to the driving school to start driving, you have to first go for the lessons on theory to teach you the road signs and many aspects about how to use the road, for example about dimming your lights when there is an approaching vehicle. Many times when I am driving on the road at night and there is an approaching vehicle with full lights, I dim mine and maybe as a warning I put them in full and dim them again, but the fellow does not seem to understand that when you are bypassing each other you should dim your lights. The point I am trying to put across here is that we need the drivers to attend have lessons on theory before they start the actual driving. I think that will help improve on the driving standards in the country. 

The other issue is about speed limits. I should commend the Police that they have tried to catch over speeding drivers by using speed guns, but many times the drivers - especially on the highways like Masaka and Jinja roads - where most of the accidents happen, get to know the spots were the Police normally ambush them and when they are approaching these spots they slow down. Therefore, this method has stopped being effective because after they have passed that area they increase the speed. 

In other countries what they do is that they have Police driving unmarked cars also driving along the highway and if you are over speeding you will just hear a siren behind you and the Police officer in an unmarked car asking you to pull over and he issues you the speed ticket, and it is very expensive. (Member timed out.)

6.36
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think whenever we are talking about issues like road safety or any illness people must look at the cause. So, I thank hon. Alaso and the members of the forum for bringing this issue. 

This time I will dwell on my region, much as I am a Member of Parliament who is supposed to look at issues nationally. One of the ministers said that the roads should be marked. I do not know how we can mark roads in the villages. That is why I am saying that this time I will address myself to the roads in the villages. 

On that note, I would like to ask the Minister how long it takes for a contractor to accomplish his work. We have talked about the Kamuli-Jinja Road up to today. We do not know for how long that contractor was given that contract, because I have some Members of Parliament like those of Buyende who pass through Iganga via Kaliro then they go to Kamuli. 

I also always travel to Mbale, but if you are using the road from Tororo to Mbale it is hell. The road from Mbale to Soroti is also hell. In that respect I am speaking as a person who has had very many people dying along Jinja-Malaba Road. One time I reported here that we lost 20 people at Kakira just because of the bad road. I have a junction in Iganga called Walugogo. Motorcyclists turn from there and collide with buses heading to Nairobi. You know how those drivers speed. 

We are talking about accidents because of the bad roads. If the roads were not so bad, even the pedestrians and the cyclists would have somewhere to use but we are speaking of roads which take years without being completed. At least we ask the minister to handle issues of contractors.  The Minister is on phone, but I hope he is listening. (Laughter)    
 
6.39
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Definitely road accidents are causing loss of life in this country. They are also a big burden to our health service system in this country. That is very clear. So, we need to do something about it. 

Now, about the causes, we have talked a lot. I know my colleagues have talked a lot about the human element, but I would like to start with the fact that these accidents start right from home - right from our bed. You get somebody who has quarrelled the whole night and yet he is going to transport people. In that sort of mood, he cannot drive effectively. 

The other element, which I want us to handle are these long-distance drivers. They drive vehicles for over 500 km. It is one person driving and he gets tired; as a result, he loses control on the road and that is why we have these trucks ramming into people’s houses or overturning. So, we need to do something about that too. 

On the issue of Boda bodas, we note that boda bodas are really not bad. The issue here is that the riders have not been exposed to any kind of training. They do not know how the roads should be used and that is why they are causing these accidents. We should put in place some training system for the boda boda riders coupled with law enforcement. When this is done, I think the situation will improve. 

The other factor which is that of animals on the roads. Animals are not supposed to be on the roads. We should put in an effective law so that animals are removed from the roads; they should be in the grazing fields, somewhere very far from the towns. Those are some of the problems. 

Definitely, road traffic accidents are causing a lot of problems; we are losing dear ones, both young and old. And I am told they are leaving behind a lot of consequences. –(Member timed out.)
			
6.42
MS ANGELLINE OSSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I will not go without appreciating my chairperson, hon. Alice Alaso, for this good motion and I rise to support it. We are talking about the same things. But I want to point out one thing, and that is observance of traffic laws. Many times, when you are travelling on a road, even within Kampala here where there are traffic lights and there is a Police officer just by those lights, when the light turns red, the Police officer lets the motorcycles go on while the vehicles stop in observance of the law. 

Madam Speaker, you may note that repetitive behaviour most times becomes a culture; it becomes a normal thing. While we cry that these people are causing accidents, they are used to ignoring the traffic rules. When the lights are red, they think it is okay to continue because the Police have allowed them. So, they end up colliding with the rightful user of the road. How I wish that the Police would encourage the motorcyclists to observe the traffic laws because they apply to all of us as long as you are a road user. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to propose that recently, there have been these teargas trucks stationed at every round-about or junctions of most of the roads. And I know that in the recent past, Police has brought in a number of ambulances. Why wouldn’t we have Police ambulances stationed strategically on these roads instead of teargas trucks?

Madam Speaker, it is also amazing that there are still DMC vehicles on our roads in spite of the constant presence of Police. One time, I witnessed a policeman stopping a vehicle. But you know what they do, when the driver stops, they know what they usually do. And these taxi men know that when they falter, they say, out of the Shs 50,000 they make, Shs 15000 is for the Police officers. 

Madam Speaker, there is a common saying which has become a joke, that a Traffic Police officer cannot have his family go hungry because he will tell his wife to put water on fire and then he goes by the road side and comes back with a kilo of rice –(Interjections)– my time might not allow you, honourable colleague. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to note that our roads are full of potholes, actually we have roads in potholes, not potholes in roads. –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MS OSSEGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank safe Way and Right Way for the equipment that they donated to us this afternoon in an attempt to help the victims of accidents in this country. We really need to appreciate them. Thank you.

6.45
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The importance we attach to road safety can be seen by the attendance in the House this afternoon. Issues that directly impact on our people are not given priority even here in Parliament. It is very bad that we are discussing a very important topic, but on both sides of the House, we have very few Members in attendance. 

However, this is a very good motion, but I have been saddened by the constant reference to Rwanda as a model. What is happening in Rwanda that is not happening here? There are so many good examples around here, but we are not picking on them. Madam Speaker, every institution is collapsing in Uganda. Today, we are talking about road safety; we may talk about maternal health tomorrow, or immunisation and water transport. It seems that the whole country is going to waste. 

Madam Speaker, when we sit here in Parliament and debate, we do not legislate in vain. I propose that through you, Madam Speaker, we devise a means of following up on our resolutions. Wonderful resolutions are made in this House, but we do not have the capacity to follow up on them. We legislate for a whole evening, talking about road accidents; wonderful resolutions are passed, but at the end of the day, their implementation is not followed up.

So many people have talked about boda bodas, but this is an industry. In Mukono alone, I have 5000 of them registered. I have 3000 in the Central division and 2000 in Goma division. I wonder what would happen to these young men if we are to abolish boda bodas. I think this is the time for Government to come in and organise them instead of banishing or condemning them. They are giving a service, which is needed by all of us. But Government is failing to come in and organise these people, having betrayed them before. These men would be working in industries which do not exist. Now, through their own initiative, they have come up with their own industry. 

So, we should task the minister here to come up with a transport policy. For example, should everyone who can buy a motorcycle can go on the road and ride it? Does it mean that anybody who can buy a taxi can come and drive in Kampala? Look at these pioneer buses; are we waiting for an accident to happen? They have a capacity of 25 seats, but they carry 60 passengers. They even went on the road without number plates. What is the policy here, especially in the metropolitan area? 

Madam Speaker, there are some things that seem to be at the peripheral, but they are very important. (Member timed out.) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was traveling with a child this morning. Namanve has become a toilet of some sort. We do not have toilets along the highways. You find people undressing along our highways. For example, buses stop at Namanve for people to ease themselves. If someone is traveling from Busia, there is nowhere somebody can stop to ease themselves. At Namanve, opposite the Coca Cola plant, you find all sorts of people undressing themselves. So, I request the minister to provide for public facilities along the highways, especially around Namanve. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.50
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my sister, hon. Alice Alaso, for moving this motion. Yes, colleagues have talked about human error in the cause of accidents. However, I want to point out that the roads in this country are the first and major contributors to accidents. I am saying this in respect to those that are fairly good and those that are in very bad conditions.

Madam Speaker, take the example of the new road being constructed; the Masaka-Mbarara Highway. That road is very narrow and I know it is going to cause so many accidents. You know that it is only in Uganda where, when drivers want to overtake, they must first peep to see whether the road in front is safe. By doing that alone is enough, if there is a close vehicle from the opposite side, to cause an accident.

But there are also these bad roads. Look at Kampala-Jinja Road around Mabira Forest. I am very worried about its state in this coming festive season. I hope the minister is going to do something. I don’t want to be a prophet of doom, but I anticipate very funny situations happening along it because it has peeled off, but with too many potholes. You can go use that road and find no potholes, but after a day many develop.

I want to request the current Minister of Works to give Ugandans a gift of the first duo-highway carriage in this country. Mr Minister, if you don’t construct such a highway during your leadership, I don’t think Heaven will be happy with you. That is very important because all the highways we have are very narrow. Can we see you do something? Can something be done by this government?

On the issue of boda bodas, I think this is a problem all over the country. I think something must be done either in form of sensitisation or just having punitive measures for those who break the regulations.

Let me talk about the black spots. Why can’t Government at least – in each district where there is a black spot – position an ambulance? People get involved in accidents in such black spots but there is no single ambulance to take care of referral cases may be to Mulago or other referral hospitals. Why can’t we do something? We were talking about many teargas –(Member timed out.)

6.53
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to state that I am a regular user of the boda bodas and unashamedly for one reason that I always want to keep my appointments, but also to maximally utilise the time. This is because of the regular traffic jams everywhere in the city. But I also use them when in my constituency. 

Most importantly, I want to state that I can recall very well the number of accidents that I have averted while being ridden on a boda boda. I can tell how people ram into accidents. For example, in the rural areas, people construct humps on the main roads including those of UNRA but with no notifications being erected. This means that an unusual rider will ram into that hump; many of people have found their deaths in such a way.

Madam Speaker, it is very worrisome on how accidents are claiming the lives of our people, and also, how much of the Ministry of Health’s Budget is being consumed in caring for accident victims. It is also worrisome on how much time in our theatres, especially in Mulago Hospital, is being consumed in treating accident victims yet the manpower of that ministry is still compromised. Therefore, this motion is very timely. I want to thank hon. Alaso for tabling it. 

When I was giving some information here a few hours ago on something, the health minister hurried to raise a point of order. But certainly what I was talking about had been misconstrued. 

Anyway, I wanted to talk about traffic regulations in respect of helmets. Those regulations were such that the boda boda riders were supposed to have two helmets, one for themselves and another for the passenger. But little did they cater for the hygiene. That is why many people ignored them including myself who uses them very regularly.

So, unless these regulations are accompanied by some hygienic measures issued by the Minister of Health who is seated right in front here, it is very unlikely that people will abide by them despite knowing the dangers that come with boda boda accidents. And this is the point I wanted to stress because these boda bodas are claiming a lot of lives.

But further on the issue of road carnage, it is all about the state of our roads. Certainly, motorists can speed and people can be allowed to really drive at any speed. For example, we were driven from Birmingham to Heathrow Airport in London in just two hours at high speed, but every lane had their own speeding vehicles but with no accidents. That is why everybody is able to reach wherever they are going within a certain set time. -(Member timed out.)

6.57
MS SANTA ALUM OGWANG (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam):  Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to speak in support of this motion. I would like – it is good the Minister of Health is present – to start by mentioning issue No.8 which concerns that ministry.

I would like to state that Uganda lacks neurosurgeons. Even physiotherapy that is so much needed by the accident victims is almost impossible to get. In that regard, I would like to suggest that if we are to handle this road safety problem, we must invest our minds and resources into those critical areas.

Many Members have talked about the narrow roads and long vehicles. I would like to ask the Minister of Works and Transport, what have you planned in terms of having the alternative use of the railway? Yes, some Members have proposed that we ban those trailers, but we need to note that these vehicles are doing a good job.  That is why we need the minister to tell us what is happening to the railway transport system.

The other issue is the quality of the driving schools we have in Uganda, which leave a lot to be desired. Many of these schools are in the hands of the private businessmen who are just yearning for money. They issue licences and permits without minding whether the person being issued the permit has learnt driving. Last year, for example, I sent my driver to get a driving permit and he got it within just a few weeks yet he had not undergone a test –(Interjections)– good enough he is no longer my driver having been dismissed after committing many mistakes. So, this is a critical area that we must look into. (Member timed out.)

6.59
MR IGNATIUS MUDINI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also join colleagues to support the motion. The challenge we have is about road furniture. There is this issue of selling scrap. Many people remove those road signs and sell them as scrap.

Recently, I got the opportunity to move around with the Commissioner General of URA to assess some of these companies which are getting exemptions. We went to Roofings - that is in Namanve - and when I asked the proprietor as to whether he buys scrap, he said “Yes.” When I asked him whether they buy road furniture, he said, “No, we are strict on that.” But when we moved around his yard, I saw it and when I asked the Indian what it was, he said, “I don’t know how it came in.” So, this is a challenge and Government has to come up with a policy of regulating the use and sell of scrap. Otherwise, we are losing lots of good investments. I have seen even in some areas where people steal saucepans to sell as scrap. 

So, Madam Speaker and honourable members, people have talked of the state of the roads, but many of us have not talked of this, but we have not done our role as politicians. We, politicians are failing some of these programmes. You know when a person wants to go somewhere, he has to mobilise many boda bodas.  

At one time, we came from Nairobi with an honourable member who is in this House right now. When we talked about abolishing the use of boda bodas in Kampala -(Hon. Nambooze rose_)- yeah she is there - hon. Nambooze said, “Should you do that, we are going to burn the whole of Kampala.”  Now, if we Members can say such, what are we lamenting about? So, we should separate politics from national issues. Others want to do this in order to get support, but as Members of Parliament and leaders, let us try to separate the two. (Member timed out.)

7.02
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank hon. Alaso and the Forum for bringing this motion before us for debate. 

Madam Speaker, I think this motion has been long overdue. As you realise, all Members of Parliament who have so far spoken have been lamenting about the experiences they have faced in their constituencies. 

Maybe I should also start by informing the Minister of Transport that there is a problem in my constituency mostly along Mbarara-Ishaka Road in a trading centre called Rwentuha. We lose a person almost every week because we don’t have any road sign indicating that it is a busy trading centre through which people should drive slowly.  

We have got a memorandum from the taxi drivers and boda bodas saying that if no action is taken by putting up road signs and humps, they will close that road, and I have already informed hon. Byabagambi. So, if you hear there is a problem in Bushenyi next week, Madam Speaker, I have already brought it before Parliament and something should be done by the Minister. 

A lot has been said. We have to look at both the short-term and long-term solutions to this problem. The short-term solutions, much as they are saying there are laws, I think we have enough laws to enforce on the people who break the traffic laws.  

We are, however, lacking commitment. For example, the Police; we are saying all this in the presence of the Police. Along Mbarara-Ishaka Road, you will find a taxi that is supposed to carry eight people carrying 20 people. You find more than 20 policemen on the road but there is no commitment from the policemen to enforce the law. But when you ask them, they tell you that, “When we are deployed here, at the end of the day we must produce results or else I will not be deployed the next day.”  So, there is also corruption in respect to enforcing these traffic laws. 

A long-term solution to this is that we shall put there humps, we shall put there laws, and we shall put there the road signs, but are we addressing the problem of poverty? Poverty is the major cause of this problem. 

7.05
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked hon. Alaso for the motion she has presented. Madam Speaker, I have two issues to rise. 

One, is about the culverts. On most murram roads the way culverts are planted are part of the causes of accidents. They don’t follow the required standard practice of planting culverts. The three quarter where you have to heap the murram or whatever you are using on top of the culvert, they just heap as if they are heaping potatoes.  

Then you come where there is supposed to be a culvert they put a hump and in the end, lives are lost. I don’t know what exactly this road engineer - especially on a murram road – what knows about planting culverts? If you could rectify that, it is another way we are going to resolve problems of planting culverts. 

Another point that I would like to raise, Madam Speaker, is about the truck drivers. I don’t know whether we have any place where these people are taken for training? It appears as if they get the training from the bus parks and taxi parks and upgrade themselves from there and then eventually find themselves driving on the road.  

Most of our accidents arise from the truck drivers who move long distances. When you go close to them you find them taking marijuana and mairungi and yet policemen are normally close to them. A solution must be sought by getting a place where we can check these truck drivers so that we can constantly upgrade them.

The other point, Madam Speaker, is about discipline. I think we Ugandans should start training ourselves to be disciplined. We are the ones who are neglecting some of these issues here. We don’t have a sense of responsibility, like the example, which the honourable Member of Parliament has just raised, where a driver went and obtained driving permit in one day. But as a citizen who is responsible, what have you done? I think we should not just sit and wait for somebody else to act, because we are the ones to enforce discipline among ourselves. 

Assuming that person who is driving with a fake driving permit rams into you. If it is a motorcycle and you are driving a car, people will say it is the driver of the car. If it is a bicycle that knocks a pedestrian; they will say it is the owner of the bicycle without knowing who has caused the problem. Sometimes even the one moving with a small machine like a motorcycle or bicycle may also cause the accident. (Member timed out.)

7.08
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to second the motion and thank the mover of the motion. I understand a good number of young people earn a living through service in this sector related to roads. 

Therefore, I would like to urge Government to appreciate the motion. Government should involve itself in the lives of its citizens through laws, and here Government should as well understand the society benefits and costs, and should prioritise on matters of road safety, personal safety as well as other related matters.   

I call upon all Government departments as well, the Police for example, to do the necessary regulation, enforce the licensing, operations, modifications and maintenance of public infrastructure especially the Ministry of Works. I see a missing link especially when it comes to gazetting statutory instruments on driving, training manuals, registration of driving schools and safety manuals. A number of things are lacking; for example, we lack a mass transport service and also a Master Plan on management of transport in Uganda. 

We lack organised bus terminals, stages for passenger service vehicles and most sincerely, issues concerning political patronage and interference have escalated in as far as road safety in Uganda is concerned. 

Many people have been quoting Rwanda as an example. The matter may not be about bringing in Rwanda as a comparative study here, but as an example of better service delivery which Ugandans need. So, I interest Government to understand it that way and ensure that the lives of our people are protected. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters raised touched a number of ministries. The Ministry of Health receives the injured and broken; the Ministry of Internal Affairs manages the roads; and the Ministry of Transport constructs the roads. let us briefly hear from the Minster of Health and then from Internal Affairs and Transport.  

7.11
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable members for raising the concerns.  It mainly hints around point No.8 where it says, “The Ministry of Health puts in place adequate and effective trauma and healthcare facilities on highways and for the orthopaedics and neurosurgery departments in national and regional referral hospitals an effective post crush evaluation mechanism.”  

Madam Speaker, the government has in place a plan which I did present here sometime back of rehabilitating all the general hospitals along the highways with their health centres IV especially equipping the emergency units with adequate equipment and also training the staff in  managing trauma and accident victims. 

We also have in place a plan to train health worker cadres who are in short supply in the country. And this includes among others anaesthetists, biomedical engineers and technicians who will be servicing and fixing the equipments that we are going provide to the hospitals; and also extra paramedics and radiologists to be able to handle the accident victims. Included among others are also plans to train more neurosurgeons, physiotherapists and other cadres that we need, but are currently in short supply. 

Madam Speaker, we also have plans which we will effect early next year, of equipping all the regional referral hospitals with high-tech equipment like MRIs and CT scans and the latest X-rays. And so, I will come with a paper sometime when we are ready to inform Parliament on our progress. 

As mentioned, I would like to urge the honourable. Members of Parliament that prevention is better than cure. Currently, Mulago Hospital alone uses more than 62 percent of its budget on accident victims. And, most of our health supplies that are consumed along the highways go to accident victims. So, this puts us in an awkward position when the concerned health facility exhausts its float from National Medical Stores. 

So, if we can prevent these road accidents, it will be better than embarking on treatment because sometimes the victims lose their limbs; they have more complications; they end up in wheelchairs and are not as productive as before. So, my message again is that let us all combine efforts to increase the preventive aspects of road accidents. 

Lastly, one Member mentioned about the Motor Third Party Insurance. I would like us to look at this very seriously. We could bring a law or byelaw where the owners of the vehicles or the boda bodas take charge of the victims so that most of the medical bills are met by them. Maybe they will be more careful and orderly.

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I too would like to thank hon. Also and members of the Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety for this excellent motion and I would like to give it my very strong support.  Specifically for my ministry, it should and must help us in enforcing the laws as pointed out in the resolution No.4. I appreciate that very much. 

Of course we are trying our best to enforce some of these laws, but some are more difficult than others to enforce like on the crush helmets, drunken driving, on seatbelts, but the Police are trying their best. 

Madam Speaker, the biggest challenge we face is incapacity. For example, many honourable members have talked about ambulatory services on the highways. We have about eight ambulances on the highways to rescue injured people, but these are not enough and they are also used by the other health sectors. So, they are not permanently there. That is why sometimes the Police resort to using pickups and even commandeer transport from other people in their private cars to take injured people to hospitals.

The recent terrible accident near Pakwach in the park where the KKT Bus knocked an elephant, the ambulances in Pakwach and Gulu were very instrumental in rescuing the injured people and taking them to Anaka, Pakwach, Arua and Gulu hospitals. But we have that challenge of incapacity. 

We have Marine Police on the lakes, especially on Lake Victoria. We are trying our best to increase the numbers on the lakes, but again we have budgetary constraints.  But we have at least made a move to establish the Marine Police to not only ensure the safety of the people travelling on the lake, but also to check on piracy and smuggling on our water bodies. 

There is also a problem of human capacity. We have a standard ratio of one policeman to 500 persons, but at the moment our policemen each take care of more than 700 persons. So, we cannot be everywhere. We hope we can be allowed to recruit more so that we can address the challenge of human resource.

Finally, I think this applies to all of us, and we need to repeat this time and again. We need to have a behavioural change on boda bodas, people driving while talking on telephone, and drunken driving; let us all go and address this issue of behavioural change so that our roads can be safe and free from major accidents. Thank you very much.  

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just want to seek clarification from the Minister for Internal Affairs on the issue of the nature of how Police have been sensitised on drink-driving, most especially on the aspect of breathalysers because I have ever fallen a victim despite my not drinking alcohol.   But I realised that these people use the same machine on several people and you find the machine soaked with a lot of saliva. So, I am wondering whether they have been sensitised on the health aspect to ensure that the machine is disinfected before it can be used on another person. And if that machine is not disinfected, it would not cause a disease to another user. Maybe they can share that information since we have the Minister of Health in this House – whether Police have been sensitised on that aspect and whether other drivers would not generate diseases and they end up having other contagious diseases like Ebola, which are worse than the accidents.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I have not seen the machinery itself and neither have I been subjected to it. (Laughter) I do not drink. But I want to believe that some of the components are detachable before they insert it into somebody else’s mouth. But I will find out and let you know. Thank you.

7.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here, to support the motion by my young sister, hon. Alice Alaso. I also want to take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker, because I know your feelings about road accidents.

Madam Speaker, I want to state it very clearly that the major cause of accidents on our roads is human behaviour and attitude. If we got that clearly, then we shall be on our way to solving the problem. This anti-social behaviour and attitudes are manifested through careless and reckless driving, over speeding and overloading, careless pedestrians, driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, and so forth. 

Let me take this opportunity to give some statistics of where most accidents come from because some people have been talking about bad roads and so forth. Careless driving constitutes 41.5 percent of all accidents; reckless driving constitutes 29.3 percent; over speeding, 3.7 percent; careless pedestrian crossing, 3.9 percent; driving under influence of alcohol and drugs, one percent; defective vehicle conditions, 3.2 percent; and road conditions contribute five percent. So, you can see that the rest of the factors due to human behaviour contribute 80 percent. 

Madam Speaker, the above statistics show that the responsibility lies in influencing – if you are going to do anything on this we have to influence the behaviour of our people. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you require in order to finish your statement?

MR BYANDALA: Three minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three more minutes for the minister.

MR BYANDALA: This cannot be done by Government alone –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that the minister would like to give us a bit more information on accidents. But I would like that as he responds he could next seek responses to our prayers because there are issues we are asking him to do, for instance, the issue of the National Road Safety Authority. And, Madam Speaker, you made a commitment that if he brought it here we would pass it the next morning. So, is he going to bring it for us? 

There is the issue of standardised driving, then the policy – because they have been saying for very many years that the road safety policy is before Cabinet. Could we have some more specific answers than just the general education on road safety?  

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, my young sister, hon. Alaso. Let me go to the resolutions. Government is committed to implementing the UN decade of reducing accidents by 50 percent. We are committed and I am sure we shall achieve it. On the road safety policy, we already have it in the ministry and I will be tabling it here in Parliament. (Interjection) I think we shall keep the one month you said; I will bring everything within one month.

On the National Road Safety Authority, Madam Speaker, draft principles have already been done; I had submitted them to Cabinet, but there is a concern now that there are very many authorities. So, I was sent to the Minister of Public Service to get clearance that we can form that Authority. We are in discussion and I think the Ministry of Public Service will have no problem for us to form that Authority. 

I am also soon bringing here amendments to the Road Safety Act; my staff are working on that one.

Then on the National Road Safety Council; yes, we are funding it as much as it is not enough. But part of the funding we are incorporating it in the road designs. As UNRA designs roads we shall make sure we incorporate road safety issues within there. (Interjection) Yes, council cannot do everything; they do not have engineers to design the roads and incorporate those issues. 

On number six - stringent measures on PSVs. Madam Speaker, I am glad to report to Parliament that recently – about two months ago – I signed a statutory instrument to govern anybody driving a PSV. That includes buses, matatus and boda bodas. Some of the salient issues in that statutory instrument are: 

1.	They will be tested annually – practically and theoretically. 

2.	They will wear badges because we have realised that the rightful driver starts at the Taxi Park here, and gets to Kyengera where another man – who is not qualified – jumps on the steering wheel. So, the right drivers will be wearing badges with photographs for identification. (Member timed out.)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable minister. When the minister was responding to this, I recalled a very big headline that appeared in one of the newspapers that Uganda would prefer other means of transport to the train. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because when we are talking about accidents, you find that even the boda bodas within town – at least for the places you have moved – there would be a reduction in accidents if we improved on the railway transport system. For example, people from hon. Nambooze’s place – Mukono, which is also my place because my mother was born there – we would be using trains to come to Kampala and those going to Mpigi would also be using a train. So, what is Government’s stand on the alternative use of railway transport in order to reduce the road carnage in town? Thank you.

MRS KASE-MUBANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister, in his explanation of how accidents are caused, mentioned over speeding. Madam Speaker countries all over the world have national speed limits. However, I have only seen speed limits in townships on our highways. I would like to clarify if there is a national speed limit for this country and if not, if the minister would consider imposing national speed limits on our highways because this is a major contributing factor to causing accidents on our roads.

MR BYANDALA: Before commenting on what my two sisters - let me finalise what is contained in the statutory instrument. I talked about badges and another important point in that statutory instrument; there are age limits on what you can drive. For example, if you are below 35 years and above 55 years, you will not be allowed to drive a bus or a vehicle carrying more than 60 people. So, we have graded them, from 0 to 7 to 18 years; we are grading them according to responsibilities.

With regard to what my sisters have said; first of all, I was misquoted about the railway. What Government is doing is to prioritise according to the funds we have. As of now, the monies we have can only handle roads. However, we are also engaging our development partners; even today, His Excellency the President, myself and other ministers were engaging development partners; we want to rehabilitate our railway system.

On the national speed limits there is nothing like that; what we have are designed speeds and if you go on our roads you see speed limits of say 50km/h, 80km/h or 100km/h and this is very important. That is why we don’t want you people to steal these road signs.

A road designed for 100km/h, the curves both vertical and horizontal are long. If it is 50Km/h because you are slow you can manoeuvre it. If you drive 100 miles per hour on a road designed for 50Km/h you will inevitably fail to negotiate the curves and get an accident.

Another statutory instrument that I have signed is on reflectors because we had fake reflectors. This one is already being enforced by Police. When I was talking to Police they said that they are going to start enforcing that statutory instrument on PSV drivers with effect from January next year. 

There have been many issues raised by people here about the humps. I am one of the people who hate humps, I do not like them, but it is a choice between safety and comfort; because our people misbehave, we have to compromise on comfort to enhance safety.

People have asked us to use concrete road furniture; all these we have used. They even break the concrete to take the bars. These are issues we have looked at.

On vehicle inspection; this is a very sad story; it is now three years. We were taken to court while trying to procure a company to do vehicle inspection. Those people who were not happy with the evaluation went to court; court is not deciding, it is now getting to three years.  So, I am sorry about it but there is nothing we can do.

Madam Speaker those were the major issues pointed out, but I want to assure you that my ministry has done a lot and that is why though the number of vehicles are increasing at a rate of 7 percent, the number of accidents are not increasing at the same rate because we are doing a lot of work. 

We are collaborating with Police; and Police is engaging the operators, the owners and the drivers to ensure that we reduce on the accidents. 

On resolution No.1, I said that Government is committed to implementing that United Nations Decade where we want to reduce accidents by 50 percent. All those I will be presenting in a month’s time which hon. Alaso proposed in her motion. I thank you Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I want to thank you very much. A lot of information has come in on this issue of road safety. We look forward to the ministers’ returns in a month’s time to complete the process. House adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.36 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 22 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
