11020SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTWednesday, 22 November 2023you have decided to be out, you will not enjoy the rights that you are supposed to get in the House.We are going for the East African Games starting 7 December 2023. As these games start, there are people who have deliberately decided to excuse themselves from the House, but they will want to go and represent Parliament in Kigali. I am also informing the Chairman of the Sports Club in Parliament that those who are out of the House must be removed from the list, whether they are goalkeepers or players. (Applause)  If you cannot be in the House, who are you going to represent? You should be able to represent your House first before you go and represent it in East Africa. Therefore, let us have those people out from the list. I would like to request Members who are in the accountability committees that where you have a missing chairperson in the committee, invoke Rule 203(5) of the Rules of Procedure and elect a member within your committee, for you to continue transacting. I am giving you powers to elect a member within your committee. If you have an absentee chairperson, we cannot continue without them in the committee. Therefore, elect your chairpersons in the committee because the rules allow you to do so. I have also got information that some of our honourable colleagues come, login and go back. It is about integrity. I am going to print IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 15TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to remind you that from the day I gave my directive, today is the fifth sitting. I will invoke Rule 112 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament as far as leave from the House is concerned. This goes to all the Members. Whereas we are cognisant that some Members are absent from the House, I am yet to receive individual letters asking for permission to be out of the House. It is a strict liability, not vicarious. We take personal liability because we were voted individually, not as a team. Therefore, I am yet to receive letters from persons who are formally absent from the House, then I will either formally give permission or not, depending on the circumstances. If Members have decided to be out of the House, that means that they should also not be in the committees because a committee is an extension of the House. This directive goes to the Clerk. Members who are out of the House should not be allowed to travel because if you are not in the House and 11021THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023the list of Members who have logged in, stayed out and pretended to be in the House, and I will publish the names of the people who do not have integrity in the newspapers. You are either inside or not. They should come to the House; nobody chased anyone out. Come back at will; free entry, free exit. Let us not pretend to be in when we are not. We should be accountable for taxpayers’ money. I have heard Rastaman  saying, how much money are we paid per day? We should account for that money by being in the House. If you are not in the House, you are voted all the way from Bukedea and you are not in the House, so, where are you?Those who go on social media, televisions and radios attacking me over what I am supposed to do; telling you to be in the House, do not waste your energy because I am now immune to your attacks. (Applause)  All I want are Members to be in the House to do the work that they were sent to do. Be productive, you are here to serve the nation. If you cannot be here to serve the nation, then the rules will apply. When we discipline one person, we are not disciplining a party. It will be personal liability.Honourable members, over the weekend I was driving around Kampala and I could see how the town is littered. I was surprised to see someone who was driving ahead of me throwing out a bottle of water. People need to learn how to keep our town clean. Now that the rains have started, issues of climate change are a reality. Roads are getting blocked, water is stagnated, bridges are breaking down and there is a lot of corruption in terms of fiscal planning in the city. We need to be responsible enough to have a good city, a good country and ensure that as representatives of the people, we take the lead in preaching the need for environmental conservation. I am waiting for a report from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the flooding in Kampala, and how people are building in the trenches. I hope we get it this week. It is just indiscipline that people start building in the trenches.I would like to welcome all of you, members and thank you for coming. I am happy, Hon. Anite, that you are trying to cut the 15 days off. (Laughter)  Thank you so much, members. I wish you nice deliberations. 2.11MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Specifically, about absenteeism, maybe your directives should also extend to the canteen. Also, the chairperson of the sports team that you are directing to remove others from the list is part of the absentees. You may need to appoint an acting chairperson in the interim. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Since I am the patron of the sports team, I will take action immediately. 2.12MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this chance. We practice the British Commonwealth Parliamentary system where there are supposed to be two sides of the House. The word “Parliament” comes from the Greek word, “parle”, which means to speak or talk.If there are contentious issues on the Floor of Parliament to be debated upon, they must be debated by both sides of the House. If the members of the Opposition are not here in the House, how shall we debate and come out with good points for the development of the country? THE SPEAKER:  What do you understand by the Opposition? They are here. This is the left side of the House; it is the Opposition. MR AZA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the issues that are being raised were not caused by Parliament. The Executive is the one supposed to answer. As parliamentarians, we are supposed to be here to wait and hold the Executive accountable. However, when we the parliamentarians run away, who is the Executive going to respond 11022SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTto? They will say that they have the report, but who is going to receive it?2.13 MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for your communication. It is very clear that the majority of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) comes from Kampala.In the last one week, it has been very difficult for people to move from one point to another. To move from Mbuya to the central business district is almost impossible; it takes many hours. There are a lot of infrastructure works going on. However, one of the good practices in infrastructure development around cities is that there must be continuity in terms of the flow of traffic. There are a lot of delays impacting both the business community and also Government because if you have to move a container of goods from industrial area to Nakawa for taxes to be assessed in today’s situation, it is next to impossible.We would like the Prime Minister to tell us - these contracts that you have signed with contractors, shouldn’t continuity and free flow of traffic be part, so that we have a seamless flow? We are approaching Christmas and many people will be travelling. The situation will only get worse. Madam Speaker, I would like Government to assure us about the measures they are putting in place to make sure that there is continuity. Thank you. 2.15THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This is my first time to see you and I congratulate you upon receiving those bouncing babies. We pray for them to come and sit in that chair one day.The Honourable Member of Parliament is talking about continuity of work on the roads. I want to get him clear.THE SPEAKER:  As we work on the roads, there should be continuity of traffic movement of goods and services from one point to another because as they work on the roads, traffic is at a standstill. They cannot move and yet time wasted in business is money lost.MS NAKADAMA: As the contractors continue working on the roads, people were giving alternative routes for the flow of traffic. Honourable members, just be patient and bear with the situation because the cars are too many. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Madam Prime Minister, you need to liaise with Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and see how best this can be handled. They can get an alternative way of doing it really. Either they work on one side - if you are giving an alternative route - if I am coming to Nakasero, but you are telling me that the alternative route should be through Kyanja - You need to liaise with them and see how best it can be handled. MS NAKADAMA:  I will call the minister to come here and give us the proper plan of those alternative routes so that members can know how those routes have been programmed, and so that there is flow of traffic. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. It should not actually be for the members to know. The public should be the ones to know because they are the ones that use these roads. 2.18MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  I hope it is on the communication.MR BYANYIMA:  Yes. I need to add my voice to that of my colleagues concerning Kampala. It is no longer Kampala City Council Authority COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Speaker]11023THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023now. I suggest that the Prime Minister picks an inter-ministerial committee so that the Ministry of Works, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), and any other entities get involved in making Kampala a better place, as we prepare for the conference. At the same time, we must be patient about these inconveniences. It is good to open up other routes that can help access Kampala which is in a bad state. Otherwise, we cannot have these people working during the day because they cannot work at night. It is not easy at night. That committee must make sure that all the roads that are supposed to be worked on are handled and that there are good engineers to supervise the work. We should also have other roads in the periphery of Kampala operational. The problem is the potholes; people are trying to avoid potholes. Let us team up and give them more money to ensure that roads are worked on because Kampala is the mirror of this country and soon, we shall be getting a number of delegates from outside the country. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to be briefed every week so that we can have seamless movement of the vehicles. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  We have already given some money. Let us first get accountability for what we have given other than saying you are putting all the money there. There is a broken bridge in Isingiro, there is another broken bridge in Kagoma. Do you get the point? 2.20MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to heartily thank you for always giving us positive surprises, when you said that you had driven through Kampala to see what is happening within. Some roads, away from the centre, like we said the other time, are really impassable.I would also like to extend my thanks to the Deputy Speaker, who I recently saw and heard was moving in the countryside with the committees. This is very good because you get to know what is happening and when we are speaking here, you can draw the picture. Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and efforts to drive further into the countryside of Bukwo, Sebei, Kisoro, Buhweju, Amudat and elsewhere so that when we talk here, you get the context of what we are talking about. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I can actually give you a better context from Bukedea because it is also a village constituency. All the bridges there are broken down and need to be worked on. It is not that I stay in Nakasero only. I am a village girl and stay in the village as well. 2.21MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my people of Aringa County, I take this opportunity to congratulate you. The issue of roads does not apply to Kampala City alone. When we do not work on the other roads in the neighbouring districts of Wakiso and Mukono, the traffic jam emanates from those districts. It is pertinent that we work on the roads in the neighbouring districts. If you only work on the city roads, there will always be traffic jam and we will never accomplish our mission. I submit.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Betty, the elder and Hon. Onzima. 2.23MS BETTY CHELAIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat):  Thank you, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  I will come to the Opposition. (Laughter)MS CHELAIN:  I am very grateful because of your concerns for our country. Kampala is a city and the heart of the country. The congestion in the country affects our image before visitors, so, as Parliament, we need to work on it.11024SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTOn the issue of Members who are not attending Parliament, we came here for a reason. We are not the ones to suffer, but rather, the people we represent. It is as if they have forgotten their roles. I request the people concerned to, maybe, take them for orientation so that they understand why they are here. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. We are not going to orient people on what they asked for. They asked for votes and were voted in to come and represent their people. The voters out there must see. I see that there are some Independents who have also gone out. I am the Dean of Independents. Mr Okema, tomorrow issue a warning to all Independents who are out – not you, Moses. Elder? 2.25MR JAMES NSABA-BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your statement. We continue to delight in your leadership, particularly on matters to do with our country. On 1 November 2023, there was a story headline in the Daily Monitor  which indicated that as a result of a research conducted by the Ministry of Health, 30 per cent of Ugandans are mentally unstable. Graphically speaking, it means one in three Ugandans are mentally disturbed. This reputation has implications on our nation’s ability to – THE SPEAKER:  Where is Hon. Macho? He is not in. MR NSABA-BUTURO:  Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter that has implications on our ability, as a nation, not only to attract friends, sponsors, funders and so on, but the image of our country is at stake. Is it possible for the Government to issue a statement that addresses this matter to its core?THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi will answer that. Yes, Hon. Onzima? 2.26 MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe):  Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon attaining the title of Nnalongo . Sometime back, Gen. Otafiire had suggested that you should leave the issues of – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Fox, if I had gone by your advice, I would not have had the twins. (Laughter)MR ONZIMA:  Hon. Fox should take the joy we have attained from that act. I would like to thank you for your communication. My submission relates to the issue of construction on trenches as well as in the swamps. The people in positions of responsibility should be held accountable for their inaction. When you move around, you see structures coming up in swamps. These structures, whether in a town council, municipality or city division, are supposed to be approved. I wonder why somebody would approve the construction of a structure in a swamp. Swamps are supposed to act as a reservoir for water. When you look at most of the areas that have been flooded, the challenge is that much of the water that should have been stored in the reservoirs cannot flow because the swamps have been reclaimed.Many times we come here and get reports of ordinary people having their food crops that can take about three months slashed. We saw seriousness in terms of fighting against the degradation of the swamps in the rural areas only. However, when it comes to the city, we shy away. These are double standards. We have always had communication advising citizens not to grow rice in swamps. However, if you go around, there are foreigners, deep in the rural areas, growing rice in swamps. I went on a trip with a friend who wanted to buy land in Kikyuusa, Luweero. I was surprised to find that Indians had established very large rice farms in the swamps. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Chalain]11025THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023Is the law targeting the local people only? As a country, we should stop double standards. When we come up with decisions, they should apply to the local people and foreigners alike. There is no way we can go upcountry to fight settlements in swamps yet in Kampala, we see people reclaiming the swamps. These are the challenges we have and all of us who have positions and duties to perform should take on our responsibilities. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Prime Minister, is the law targeting only the locals? In the villages, we are told not to grow rice in the swamps whereas the so-called investors of Hon. Anite are in those swamps. 2.30THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I have here the minister for investment and the minister for local governments. I would like to call them to come and respond. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Minister of investment, I have an investor who has encroached on land between Bukedea and Bulambuli. He has taken it and they are growing rice massively, yet it is a swamp. That is just one of them. Hon. Onzima has talked about another. It is all over the whole country. Namanve – 2.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite):  Madam Speaker, allow me take the opportunity to congratulate you upon becoming a Nnalongo . I can see it has made you look very beautiful. (Applause)  You are tempting me, as your sister, to follow in your footsteps, but I will need to come for coaching on how to do it. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Anite, you are most welcome. I can give you one Musoga here. (Laughter)MS ANITE:  No, Madam Speaker, you must do proper vetting because I have seen his face closely and he is not very appealing. (Laughter)Back to the issue, as a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of investment and privatisation, I would like to assure my honourable colleagues and the country that as I speak, we do not give licences to investors who have gotten land in a swampy area. Previously, the reference that you made, which is Namanve Industrial Park, was gazetted by Parliament. It was a known forest reserve and a swamp, but Parliament took a decision in 1991, when I was in primary one, that it should become an industrial park. What we have had to do is to preserve the swamp that we found there so that we only licence investors in the dry areas. We are now working very closely with the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that NEMA does not issue a certificate of environmental impact assessment to investors who would like to construct in the wetlands. If NEMA does that issuance, the investors will go there, but if they do not, they will not. On our part, we do not give them investment licences, and neither do we facilitate them with the incentives that are approved by Parliament to facilitate them to do their business in Uganda.2.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Ms Victoria Businge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know this is my golden opportunity to also say something. I gave you good luck because mine are many; triplets, double, double. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations. MS VICTORIA BUSINGE:  Therefore, Kabarole calls me maama w’abaana . I wish you the same luck. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MS VICTORIA BUSINGE:  Now, going to the question, Madam Speaker, we need a serious inter-ministerial approach to this matter. This is because we, as local governments, are the custodians of all the people and what is being 11026SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTdone on the land. We, however, have a fully-fledged ministry which is authorised by law to cancel any title in the wetlands. That is where Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development comes in. We have also learnt of very many investors being given authority by NEMA, which is also wrong.I, therefore, wish to compel all the ministries through the Prime Minister to give a stern instruction – Why are titles in the wetlands not cancelled yet the ministry is authorised to do that? Otherwise, as local governments, we pledge to continue doing our work. The law is the law, so let the law speak. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, re -garding issues of wetlands, reports should be submitted to local governments and the Prime Minister should constitute an inter-ministerial committee to look at all those areas and give us a report to that effect. 2.36THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  How much time do you need? MS NAKADAMA:  Two weeks, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  I will give you one month. 2.36MR HERBERT KINOBERE (NRM, Kibuku County, Kibuku):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my honourable colleagues to once again congratulate you upon becoming a Nnalongo . I also congratulate the Ssalongo  because it was a combined effort. (Laughter)I would like to join my honourable colleagues on the issue of roads in Kampala. Recently, on my way to work, I witnessed a very bad scenario in Kawempe where I stay. A young girl was going to school in the town. She was trying to dodge a car that was about to splash water on her, but instead fell in a trench. Luckily, there was not much water in the trench. If it had flooded, this girl would have had serious problems. It is unfair that town roads are not capped. If they were capped, this girl would not have gotten into such a scenario. Again, some time back, I was in my constituency in Kitantalo. DOTT Services – I do not know if they have finished the road. Recently, the women who prepare – in Lugwere, we call it kalo and nakibalo , which is abileng - mud fish were being chased by water because they did not provide channels for water in Kitantalo. I feel that the engineers and architects should improve otherwise, we shall continue repeating the same mistakes. The cause of all this is corruption – THE SPEAKER:  There is information from the chair of - MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, my brother, for giving way. I was restraining myself on the issue of Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and its roads. Madam Speaker, thank you, for driving around. I would like to invite you to dedicate one weekend; Saturday and Sunday, and move around Kampala. The issues we are talking about are not about to end. The minister is here and I do not want to pre-empt many things. The confusion in Kampala Capital City Authority is entrenched. THE SPEAKER:  One thing I should tell you is that I drove alone without security or a lead car and it took me four hours. (Applause)MR KIMOSHO:  The confusion is entrenched. When you sit with Kampala Capital City Authority officials, everyone looks at the other and no one knows exactly what is happening, Madam Speaker. The minister is here and yesterday we were with him. I can tell you that this matter is not going to be solved until we apply a lot of pressure. [Ms Businge] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11027THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023If we examine the Shs 6 billion and many other things - the minister can give us a snapshot. He told us yesterday that he is also - When he reached there, he said he does not know. (Laughter)  There is a problem with Kampala Capital City Authority. We must crack the whip or else we must accept that we shall talk and nothing will happen. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, tell us about Kampala. You said you do not know. 2.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kabuye Kyofatogabye): Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank you for giving me young brothers; the twins. I am now called Kigongo. I did not say, I do not know because I know. The challenge is that the level and magnitude of your knowledge matters a lot. When it comes to issues of finances, I will confess that I do not know because I do not control them. There is somebody who controls the finances and I simply wait for accountability because my role stops somewhere and somebody responsible continues. We received Shs 6 billion, which was meant for potholes, and indeed, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we can submit this – THE SPEAKER: I am not a Prime Minister. MR KYOFATOGABYE:  I am sorry, Madam Speaker. The challenge is, the Shs 6 billion was like a drop in the ocean. I will submit a full report on this. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, show us what you have done with the drop in the ocean. MR KYOFATOGABYE:  If you allow, I will submit this at an appropriate time because I did not come with detailed accountability of how the Shs 6 billion was utilised. THE SPEAKER: We want to see value for money. Do not tell us you worked on a road when it was not worked on. If you have been patching the potholes, let us see them. MR KYOFATOGABYE: Madam Speaker, when you give me an opportunity, I will submit at an appropriate time. On the other hand, for Kampala, we thank you for giving us some funds to work on more roads and other infrastructural challenges like drainages in the whole of Greater Kampala and the Metropolitan area. The processes are underway. We are finalising the feasibility studies and this will take care of about 300 kilometres of roads within Kampala and the Metropolitan area. At the same time, you are aware that there is already a facility which you approved of Shs 288 million, and road construction is ongoing. The challenge is that we expect to have a baby who is not yet due. We are now in the phase of construction in certain areas and that is why you find it challenging to drive along some roads which are closed; works are ongoing. I will present a full report on the status of what is going on at an appropriate time. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, since you said we should crack the whip, can we have a report from your committee? 2.44MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Indepen -dent, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Your communication was wise. You talked about an issue which we all know; the issue of roads. I do not know whether Members have witnessed this; there is this machine which you normally find on the road, very busy digging and opening up holes. There are people putting on aprons of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and others with jackets bearing name of engineering companies. They look like they are doing something very important and working on the road. Instead, they leave 11028SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTit open. We need to know from either KCCA or the Ministry of Works and Transport who sends these people to dig and open up the road and leave it the way it is. Madam Speaker, you talked about people building in trenches and encroaching on the swamps. The other day, you tasked the Minister of Water and Environment to give a statement on how those people get licenses. She said those people have no authority to give out licences, to the extent that even those ones who go to them are going to be cancelled. Much to our surprise, even today, in our swamps, you will see new buildings coming up. We need to know from these people. Madam honourable minister, Mama Mabira, with due respect, you got that name because of your calibre, the capacity, the time, the zeal and even the spirit you used to talk on behalf of the environment and how we can be able to restore the environment in this nation. What happened? (Applause)  We want to know exactly what happened to you. The other day you told us that you have cancelled all the licenses, but new buildings are cropping up. Who is this person who is giving out licenses to people we do not know and those you have stopped? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. As we said, we are going to have that discussed under the multi-sectoral - and they will report back to the House. The question still remains, Mama Mabira, what happened? As you were walking between here to and Mabira, what happened? You will tell us what happened in the report. After here, I am moving to the Opposition.2.47MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to join the rest of Ugandans to glorify God who gave you twins recently. May his name get glory everywhere in Uganda for that. Madam Speaker, you highlighted what Hon. John Musila talked about Parliament; that whenever we come here, we get an allowance of Shs 2 million. Indeed, we do not actually – THE SPEAKER: He withdrew that statement and apologised. MR TIMUZIGU:  Madam Speaker, I would like to mention it again because some people might not have heard that –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Musila withdrew the statement on the Shs 2 million and apologised, but the fact remains you are paid to sit in this House. Give accountability to the taxpayers outside there. Do not get the salary, stay in the streets of Kampala and in the corridors of Parliament while you are not working. That is where that statement came from. We want value for money. MR TIMUZIGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. That is why I am here. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, Hon. Angura, Hon. Koluo and Dr Acuti. 2.49MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every Member is congratulating the Nnalongo,  but without a Ssalongo , the title of Nnalongo  would not be in existence. I request that as we congratulate Nnalongo , some Members should equally congratulate Ssalongo . They are asking where Ssalongo  is. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you talked about the East African Games. We have some games which are played indoors and because it rains heavily these days, some games can only be played indoors. We have one facility which is Lugogo Indoor Arena. Currently – THE SPEAKER:  One facility belonging to the Government of Uganda, which has been given to some –[Mr Kangwagye] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11029THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023MR KIBALYA:  Madam Speaker, this facility belongs to the Government of Uganda and whatever we do is in the interest of this country. It is good that we have the minister here. The national basketball team is preparing to go for the international games, but they have nowhere to play from.The Parliamentary basketball and volleyball teams are preparing to go for the East African games, but they have nowhere to train from. Instead, the Lugogo Indoor Arena has been turned into a church. People pray from there, we do not know where they come from and what is happening. We do not have where to train from.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have we turned the Lugogo Indoor Arena into a church?MR KIBALYA:  As the minister comes, my second point is in regard to our honourable colleagues who are boycotting the Parliamentary sittings. Madam Speaker, this is the workshop of democracy; I request that we give them a benefit of doubt. I have shared with the Leader of the Opposition together with some honourable colleagues. Therefore, I request that we give a – THE SPEAKER:  Do not start to teach me the law. I am in charge of this House and it is my responsibility to make sure that the Members are in this House. You came here on your own. (Applause) Have we turned Lugogo Indoor Arena into a church?2.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank  you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to say that I am not aware of the facility of sports being turned into a church. I request you to give me a few minutes so that I cross-check with the responsible officer who is the General Secretary, National Council of Sports and then I report back.To the best of my knowledge, that facility is busy and it also has a number of games. As you may be aware, there are quite a number of indoor games and sometimes we try to give time to specific games beginning from 6.00 a.m. up to 9.00 a.m.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister,  do not plead ignorance. The church hired that facility and it is all over social media. The Members of Parliament even took pictures and posted them on the parliamentary forum. Therefore, you need to talk to the general secretary and let the facility be used for what was meant for. (Applause)MR OGWANG : Madam Speaker, I would like to go on record as the Minister of State for Education and Sports that I am not aware. THE SPEAKER:  Can you confirm and report back?MR OGWANG:  Let me confirm and report back. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  We are giving you five minutes. (Laughter) Dr Chris, you should be the one to whip because we are sitting for two hours. My doctor is here.2.54MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo South County and the Ateker community, we thank you for the double blessings.I had the opportunity to inform His Highness, Papa  Emorimor, immediately the news reached us. At an appropriate time, you know what he will request of you. (Laughter)I thank you for your communication –THE SPEAKER: Members, we have heard enough of the roads and we have given that assignment out. The report will soon be presented and we will continue with the debate on the roads when the report comes. Let us discuss something else.11030SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTMR ANGURA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have talked of moving around for four hours. What does that mean? We come here every day and go back, and many of us spend the same hours that you spent moving around Kampala. Just a few days ago, I spent three hours listening to news three times, from Lugogo up to Shell Petrol Station in Nakawa. That is what we call waiting in motion. That is calculated for you to understand and know how much you have lost if you are to put that time into productive activity.We do not need to take this lightly. I have had an opportunity to interact with some leaders, especially those from the entities responsible for roads in this country. It seems that some of the works which are being done by Kampala Council City Authority are not coordinated with other entities. I found a leader who asked why they were interfering with the junction going to Makerere Business School. What change do they intend to make there? I have been observant that, that change has not been of any impact. We thought that they were going to widen the road, but nothing was done. They are repeating the same works that were done last year. How I wish, if it pleases you, that a team comprising the Committee on Infrastructure would meet UNRA, Ministry of Works and Transport and KCCA engineers in order for them to ease the movement of our people within Kampala and in the neighbourhood.Otherwise, I thank you very much. His Highness is waiting jealously for that. Eyalama noi. Emuria koliai.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I am aware that the committee has met all those people and we are waiting for the report. 2.57MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  [Mr Koluo:  “He is not Koluo, I am the one.”]THE SPEAKER:  Let him finish.  (Laughter)MR MUZAALE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to mention two things that my honourable colleagues have not mentioned. One is why we are experiencing flooding in this city. The problem is entirely on the consultants that we have in this country. You find that all the roads that have been worked on are flooded. When it clogs, that is when these roads get spoilt so fast.Until this is handled – Minister of Kampala, yesterday I was at the roundabout of Hotel Africana in my small car and I was almost swept away. The problem is entirely on consultancy work; designing the drainage system is a big problem in this country.Madam Speaker, it is not only in Kampala, but also in our villages where the designs are not appropriate. The way they design the swamps are a big cause of road breakdowns because the designs do not take into account extra volumes of water. As we speak, the season has changed. Rain has been on consistently –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have said that issues of the roads will come in the report. Let us discuss it when it comes. We appreciate what is happening in Kampala and Buzaaya, and it will be handled.2.59MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank you for joining our team because I am one of them; a Ssalongo – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Anite, you should know where to -(Laughter)  First of all, I am very happy with the Front Bench today. (Applause) They have been a very good team, keep it up. Honourable members, let us finish on the communication. We have very good communication from Constitutional Affairs. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11031THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023MR KOLUO:  I have a very peculiar issue as per your communication and that regards the swamps bordering Lake Bisina up to your home in Bukedea. These swamps have been invaded by hippos. I contacted the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to come and sort out the situation. The hippos are killing cows, goats and sheep and even destroying crops, especially potatoes. One retired civil servant called Mr Otim Pampus and his four cows were killed. When I asked the UWA team for a solution to this and they said that they could not relocate these hippos to any other area and they do not have a solution. I do not know how these people can be assisted because as I speak, there is too much rain, the number of hippos is increasing and they are causing total destruction. I submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Prime Minister –3.51THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I will call the Minister of Tourism to come and give us the proper solution. THE SPEAKER:  Let him go to the locus, see it himself and come and report. MS NAKADAMA:  Much obliged. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Dr Acuti -3.02DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to react to your communication, especially on the issue of floods that have washed away bridges across the country. Yesterday, we received communication from the Minister of Works and Transport on the impact of the heavy rains on roads and bridges and they called upon the district leadership not to use the Shs 1 billion for the maintenance of those bridges because they will be washed away. However, the communication did not give us an alternative. We were also informed that they asked the Prime Minister to possibly clarify whether for districts that have had bridges cut off, we have to report to the Ministry of Works for them to handle within their budget. I would like to get clarification on this communication; how these washed-away bridges can be handled and whether this was from the Minister of Works and Transport. Thank you. 3.03THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Member who is complaining about the bridges had a meeting with the Minister of Works and he was giving them information – THE SPEAKER:  There is a press release from Gen. Katumba. Actually, ask Gen. Katumba to come and respond. MS NAKADAMA:  I wanted to say that since he was meeting with them, I do not know why he has brought it here and yet the press release - Gen. Katumba Wamala will come and give more information about his press release. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  I personally saw it. 3.04MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Indepen -dent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you so much. I would have slept badly if I had not used this chance to say congratulations. We are happy for you and Ssalongo . There is a place called Lwera on Masaka Road where some investors came - they looked like Chinese or Koreans – and planted miles of rice. This is a swamp and they are continuing. May we get to know how they got the licence and whether the licence will also be cancelled? They have even set up a factory because we buy rice on the road. They sell retail and export. 11032SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTCan it be added to what “Mama Mabira”  - Hon. Anywar - is coming to tell us? Can we get some clarification on what is happening? I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, as I said before, let us have all that information forwarded to “ Mama  Mabira” and the committee, including Hon. Anite, the investor. 3.06MR MOSES WALYOMU (Independent, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On your communication about the environment, we need to address the issue of the environment and good enough, Hon. Anywar is here. Before I came to know Hon. Anywar, I knew her from Mabira forest. (Laughter) That was the time when she was known to this country for fighting for Mabira forest. Madam Speaker, as we speak –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen. Some of you are thinking of other things, but Hon. Moses Walyomu is thinking about the Mabira forest. MR WALYOMU:  Madam Speaker, I remember when I was still in primary school, we used to have those questions. The biggest forest in the country was Mabira, but when you go there now, I think Mabira is simply a name. The actual Mabira is no longer the Mabira we used to know. We used to have natural forests before the creation of National Environmental Management Authority and National Forestry Authority. We used to co-exist with the natural forests, but after the creation of these authorities and agencies, the forests have disappeared. To make matters worse, they have changed the natural forests into commercial forests. Instead of preserving the natural forests, they are planting pine trees and after the maturity of the pine trees, they come and harvest them. The would-be forest turns into a desert. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as I said before, as legislators and leaders of this country, we should lead in preaching conservation of the environment. We should not leave it to Hon. Anywar alone, she needs help. Let us support her, but all the same, you should have a committee that is going to discuss those issues. Honourable Members, we are running out of - Dr Chris, are we not running out of time?3.09MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From Pader District, allow me to congratulate you upon the success that you and your family achieved. For a city to look beautiful, there should be an object that is conspicuous enough to attract people. You have ruled on the roads. We have only two water fountains in the capital city of Uganda and they are not functional any more. Taxpayers’ money worth billions of shillings was spent. A week ago, I found street children swimming in the water –THE SPEAKER: In the water fountain?MR KOMAKECH:  In the water fountain and they were basking in the hot sun. Isn’t it right that the minister in charge of Kampala presents an artistic impression of what Kampala Capital City should look like? This artistic impression will help us in attracting more investors and tourists. That means more revenue for Kampala Capital City itself. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister in charge of Kampala, you have heard. Our water fountains are being used as swimming pools. Let us have Hon. Akamba and then Hon. Linos.3.10MR PAUL AKAMBA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in regard to your communication on the matter of environmental degradation and the attendant effects of climate change.[Ms Kabasharira] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11033THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023The rate at which wetlands are being degraded around Kampala is worrying. People are putting up developments in wetlands and when we ask the authorities who these people are, they give the same answer that they used to give the minister in charge of the environment before she became a minister: the “big fish” – the untouchables. Even after she became a minister, she has failed to know who those untouchables are.Madam Speaker, it is until this country –THE SPEAKER: Is that what she has told you?MR AKAMBA: Until this country makes a serious move on the issue of conserving the environment and stops harassing the locals – For example, in my constituency, every village is separated by a seasonal swamp. Instead of concentrating on conserving the environment, the authorities go and demand that farmers stop growing rice in these seasonal swamps.Madam Speaker, I am a product of rice growing. If it was not for growing rice in these seasonal swamps, I would not be a Member of Parliament or a lawyer.My request is that instead of allowing big shots to grow rice in Lwera, Kibimba and all those swamps, they should instead support my people and all Ugandans who are growing rice in the seasonal swamps to find modern ways that do not antagonise the environment.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law is the law; we should not apply it in a discriminative way. 3.13MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Member sitting on the opposite side, we expect the Prime Minister to come and tell us that she is going to instruct Uganda Wildlife Authority to go and remove hippos from the swamps, instead of coming to – [Member : “Order.”] - No, I have refused. (Laughter)  Instead of coming to give us information that she is going to tell the minister to come with information, we expect her to issue instructions correctly. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not just a matter of saying, “Order”. Order on what? He has said he is sitting on the opposite side – opposite to you. What is wrong with that? (Laughter)  Isn’t that opposite you? It is a matter of English. (Laughter)Honourable members, as we talk about the environment, I would like you to ask yourself, as a leader, how many trees you have planted. Who of you can find a bottle thrown on the road and stop to pick it up? Let us work together, as a country, to conserve the environment. We should make sure we are all responsible citizens in garbage disposal.You find somebody wearing a suit and throwing a bottle and you wonder what kind of man this is. Hon. Peter Ogwang?3.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I now confirm that on 4 July, 2023, the Christ’s Heart Ministry International wrote a letter to the General Secretary of National Council of Sports asking to use the facility from 20-25 November. I would like to confirm that as part of the revenue sources for the council to the Government, they gave them the facility and they paid for it for that specific period. The question of how much is not indicated in this letter. It confirms the statement that as of now, the facility is being used partially by that church.Madam Speaker, we have come up with a new multi-billion plan to construct a state-of-the-art indoor arena in Lugogo. I will come here at the right time to submit the plan for the redevelopment of that place. I would like to plead with the honourable members –11034SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to interest you in one thing. Check on the audited accounts of your institutions and see how much non-tax revenue is being portrayed in those books. They do not even portray that they get money. How much money has been got from that?We are talking about a national team that is supposed to train. (Applause)  You are part of the sports team. If it is raining and we cannot train in our own facilities, what do we do? Where should we go? Hon. Kateshumbwa -MR KATESHUMBWA: Madam Speaker, the minister says we should support the development. I would like to put it to the minister that much as we want to support development, the Government needs to be organised. That tennis court in Lugogo –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery we have students and teachers of Transform Education Centre from Kyambogo – but I see a problem there. Is there a problem? My doctor, can you check what is happening? I have a personal doctor here. (Laughter)Students, please stand up, you are most welcome. (Applause)  Thank you for coming.MR KATESHUMBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Over the weekend, I met the people in charge of tennis. The different disciplines that use Lugogo have actually not been consulted or engaged in the whole process of development. For me, this is where the problem is. If you want to develop a facility, it is important to discuss the users’ requirements.What is the fall back position while developing that place? Where do you expect tennis to go and what requirements do they need? We need development, but when we are doing so, we must ensure continuity and it is important that the people who are using that facility are consulted in your martial plan to develop it. Do not just come to us, as Members of Parliament, to seek our support when the bodies have not been consulted. You need to do it for the sake of sports. THE SPEAKER: How do you seek support when the existing one is not supporting us? You are renting out the existing one to the churches yet you want us to continue supporting. Moreover, you will rent out even the multibillion one you want to put up, to international pastors.MR OGWANG: First, I would like to allay the fears of honourable colleagues. For instance, I address my answer to Hon. Kateshumbwa – THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you allay our fears, we are saying that we have a national team which is under training yet it is raining. We have Members of Parliament who do appropriation of the money for what you want, but they cannot train in that facility. We want an apology. ( Applause ) MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, let me be captured on the record saying this. Members of Parliament train from 6.00 a.m. to 8.00 a.m. However, because of our schedule to participate in the Inter-Parliamentary games, we are meant to have another raining from 5.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. That is the one with a challenge as far as the training is concerned. THE SPEAKER: And you have no problem with that? MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, that is the reason why I want to allay our fears and say the following: I am going to have a discussion with the Chairperson of the National Council of Sports and the entire management so we can begin to look at the available facilities we have in the city which can be used for the time being as the two to three days get concluded for this specific church to exit the facility. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Members deserve an apology from you. We cannot make our Members suffer like that. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I apologise. Thank you.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11035THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER:  Next item. BILLSFIRST READINGTHE JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, through this Bill, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs seeks to increase the number of Justices of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. He is going to move the Bill for the first reading, but after bringing his Bill, we want to know, one, why we are having piecemeal constitutional amendments. Two, when will we have a Constitutional Review Commission in place? I therefore invite the minister to table the Bill for the first reading. 3.23THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Nobert Mao): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time. Attached to the Bill is a Certificate of Financial Implications issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in respect of the Bill in accordance with Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in furtherance to Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I refer the Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2023 to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The Bill only has two clauses so I will require you to work and ensure that we have it in the House on Tuesday, 28 November 2023, for the second reading. Honourable minister – MR MAO: Madam Speaker, it is regrettable that the Constitutional Review Commission has not yet been constituted. At the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in light of the financial constraints that we are facing since we do not have all the money for the Constitutional Review Commission, we have decided to recommend to the President and the Cabinet that the Uganda Law Reform Commission takes charge of the process. It is a constitutional body and capable of doing that job. All that will be required is to beef it up with some additional members.I also wish to report that 80 per cent of constitutional amendment proposals are already on the desk – THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order. MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering whether the minister is in order to tell half the truth to Parliament. He is talking about the Law Reform Commission yet it is listed for rationalisation. The Bill was brought here and if we had accepted it, it would be already merged. Therefore, what would happen in such a situation? THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Uganda Law Reform Commission is one of the institutions to be merged. What the honourable is talking about is, assuming we had accepted the merger, what would have happened? MR MAO: Madam Speaker, your question was about constitutional review. I do believe that functions do not die with institutions. They would simply be transferred, should Parliament so wish. THE SPEAKER: Where will they be transferred? There is a procedural matter. MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I want to draw your attention to Article 127 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, that the Minister of Justice decides to avoid. It reads: “127. Participation of the people in the administration of justice.Parliament shall make law providing for participation of the people in the administration of justice by the courts .” 11036SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTHow do we appoint judges? Using this provision, if there was an enabling law, we would call for public hearings to avoid those judges who are very corrupt because this law is not in place. Can the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs tell us when this law will be in place to help the Ugandans act in fulfilment of Article 127 of the Constitution? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Now you have gone diversionary. You have diverted us; that will be done. We are talking about the Constitutional Review Commission. MR MAO: Madam Speaker, as a footnote, let me assure the honourable member that there are ways of – THE SPEAKER: Just before you go, I do not want a perception that Parliament is saying that judges are corrupt. That is a perceived perception. You cannot justify corruption of judges and it should not come from this House. If you have evidence to that effect that the judges are corrupt, please, come and lay it on the Table. Kindly, withdraw that statement of “corrupt judges.” That can be handled at the Committee Stage, when you are handling the Bill. MR KWIZERA : Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take your advice and I will not say, “all judges”, but some people in the judicial service could be corrupt. I withdraw where it offends them. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we want to help you. We have a number of constitutional amendments. You need to advise us whether we are going to have a Constitutional Review Commission or not. If we are not going to do it, then you should bring those amendments and move them. However, you said you are going to have a Constitutional Review Commission. That is all we need from you. MR MAO:  Madam Speaker, it has been the Government’s position that the Constitution will require major amendments. At the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we already have most of the proposed amendments. The Cabinet paper is ready and in due course, after Cabinet approval, we shall bring it here. We maintain our position that Parliament should bear with us. We will be back with a rack of constitutional amendments. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Next item. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL IN THE V ARIOUS SUBREGIONS OF UGANDATHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as part of our oversight role, which is the role of Members of Parliament, as enshrined in the Constitution, the Parish Development Model (PDM) was given to the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments to understand what is happening in the constituencies, its implementation, and the performance of the PDM. The committee is ready to report. As you are aware, this was constituted when the presiding officer was here. He personally went to the constituency to see what was happening in the districts on the PDM. I also personally went to the constituency and that is one of our roles on oversight. Committee chairperson, can you now come and submit? 3.32THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS  (Mr Mapenduzi Ojara) : Madam Speaker, let me start by joining my colleagues in congratulating you and your family. I wish you God’s blessing and good health. As a committee, we thank you for giving us the opportunity to present this report. As I embark [Mr Kwizera]11037THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023on that assignment, permit me to lay on Table the minutes and a copy of the committee report. I beg to lay. Madam Speaker, permit me to present the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments on the status of the implementation of the Paris Development Model (PDM) in the subregions of Uganda. During the First Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of Parliament held on Tuesday 3 October 2023, the Rt Hon. Speaker directed chairpersons of all regional parliamentary caucuses or groups to submit reports on their findings on the implementation of the PDM to the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments for scrutiny. The Rt Hon. Speaker further directed that the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments consolidates the original reports and reports back to the House within three weeks.  The committee embarked on this exercise in line with Rule 199 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda and we executed the assignment within the period we were given. In the interest of time, on page 2, I have provided a detailed background of the PDM, which I believe is not the first time for this House to receive, so permit me to move to the next page.The background indicates how the PDM started and its different pillars. Page 4 details the different phases of the implementation of the PDM. For emphasis, there are three phases:Phase 1: Establishment phaseThis phase includes the establishment of the PDM structures, developing the implementation policy, issuing implementation guidelines and mobilising and sensitising the communities across the country. Phase 2: Stabilisation phase This is the current phase, which started in July 2023 and includes the following: 1. Disbursement of funds to the last mile beneficiaries by the PDM SACCOs; 2. Strengthening the governance of enterprise groups and PDM SAACOs; 3. Deepening provision of business development services and other extension services to households and PDM beneficiaries; 4. Completion of household registration; 5. Refining and integration of IT systems; 6. Tracking of all PDM beneficiaries; and 7. Measurement of results. Phase 3: Sustainability and exit phase This is the last phase and it shall commence in July 2025. Under this phase, it is envisaged that the PDM will be entrenched in the communities and the parish economies will start to visibly show progress through improved production, value addition, sustainable income flows to the PDM beneficiaries from marketed products. Repayment of the PDM loans are also envisaged to start coming and savings will start to grow significantly. There will be a critical mass of viable PDM enterprise groups and SACCOs that shall consolidate their funds to constitute the Parish Development Bank. That is expected to be under the third phase. In the execution of the assignment given to us, we were given terms of reference and we have provided these details on page 5. Permit me, in the interest of time, to take you to page 6, which is on methodology. Methodology We had interactions with the different stakeholders. We held meetings with:1. The Ministry of Local Governments and the PDM Secretariat;11038SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT2. Chairpersons of the following regional parliamentary groups:i. Karamoja Subregionii.  Lango Subregioniii.  West Nileiv.  Bugisu v. Acholivi. Bukedivii. Kigeziviii. Buganda ix. Teso x. Busoga We made several attempts, but we were not able to have the following chairpersons appear before the committee: i. the Chairpersons of the Rwenzori Parliamentary Group, ii. Ankole, and iii. Sebei. We were only able to receive a written communication from Sebei. We also had interactions with commercial banks; the banking institutions that are involved in the implementation of this. They are key stakeholders. We also received written submissions from:i. Bunyoro Parliamentary Groupii. Sebei Parliamentary group iii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.Committee findings, observations and recommendationsThis part of the report considers the findings of the committee on the implementation of the PDM from the different regional reports as well as the observations and recommendations. TOR1: Approved funds that have been disbursed to various parishes In order to establish the approved and disbursed funds, the committee evaluated pillar 3 (financial inclusion), which aims at enabling access to appropriate financial products and services by households that operate in the subsistence economy. This pillar is implemented through provision of the Parish Revolving Fund. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Social Development(MoFPED) reported that by 30 June 2023, 10,585 parishes or PDM SACCOs were fully capitalised with Shs l00 million each, totalling to Shs 1,000,585,000 in the Financial Year 2022/2023.In addition to the 7,855 PDM SACCOs that had been capitalised, covering 171 local governments in the Financial Year 2021/2022, a total of Shs 67,208,000,000 was given. The committee also received a status update report from the Ministry of Local Governments (MoLG), which had different figures for the same parameters. Table 1 shows the figures of the PDM funds released and disbursed as presented to the committee by the MoFPED and MoLG. Madam Speaker, on page 8, we have provided a table showing discrepancies in the data provided by MoFPED and MoLG. When you look at the table, column one shows the SACCOs funded, column two shows the number of parishes and – (Interjections) -  column three -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, do you have the report? The network is down? I hope you are following. That in TOR 1, approved funds that have been disbursed, there is a discrepancy of Shs 886 billion that cannot be accounted for. The TOR 2  – Please, continue.MR MAPENDUZI:  Madam Speaker, the discrepancies in the data provided by MoFPED and MoLG or the PDM secretariat is detailed in the table. The MoFPED indicated that the total number of parishes that had been given funds is 10,594; that figure is the same when you look at what MoLG provided. However, when you look at the amount indicated by the MoFPED, it indicated Shs 1,058,500,000,000 while the MoLG provided Shs 1, 147,1 56,176,484.[Mr Mapenduzi]11039THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023When you look at the number of households that benefited, the figures we got from the MoFPED shows that they were 787,566 households while from the PDM Secretariat and MoLG 817,099 households had benefited by that time. According to the MoFPED, Shs 776,980,000,000 was disbursed while on the side of the MoLG, they indicated that by that time, they had already disbursed Shs 775,998,795,274. When you look at the balance that had not been disbursed in total, it amounted to Shs 371,157,381,210.However, Madam Speaker, the MoFPED also provided a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet on PDM disbursement performance and the committee observed that the total figures of the amount released, amount disbursed and number of beneficiaries deferred from its own table of summarised figures in the report. Committee observations The committee observed the following:(i) Some SACCOs still have arrears arising from Shs 17 million of the Financial Year 2021/2022 that they should have received. For instance, Otuke had 27 SACCOs pending payment under the first disbursement. In other words, these are parishes that never received money in the first displacement. (ii) Much as the SACCOs were meant to receive Shs 17 million each in the Financial Year 2021/2022, MoFPED released less amounts, ranging between Shs 7 million and Shs 10 million for most of the SACCOs across the country. However, there has been no clear explanation why MoFPED released less than what was appropriated.(iii) There were variations in the figures provided by the MoFPED compared to what was provided by the Ministry of Local Governments and PDM secretariat (as indicated in Table 1 above).(iv) The committee observed that nine parishes had not been funded and according to the MoFPED, this was due to the following reasons: a) Nadunget Parish in Moroto District, Kanabu Kei in Yumbe District   and Kitwe Parish in Bushenyi District were found to be non-existent, according to the MoFPED.b) Nyakitojo, Rwenkuba and Kitaka -THE SPEAKER:  What are you saying? Nadunget Parish in Moroto District, Kanabu Kei in Yumbe District and Kitwe Parish in Bushenyi District were found to be non-existent?MR MAPENDUZI:  Yes, according to the MoFPED.c. Nyakitojo, Rwenkuba and Kitaka wards in Fort Portal City did not have elected leaders and no proof of gazettement by the MoLG. That was an explanation from the MoFPED.d. Bukasa Ward in Kampala Capital City had leadership wrangles or challenges that affected the establishment of the PDM SACCO.e. Okwang Trading Centre Ward in Otuke District did not have proof of gazettement. f. There was no explanation why Kapelebyong Parish in Kapelebyong District missed out on the SACCOs for funding.Committee recommendationThe committee recommends that:(i) The MoFPED prioritises clearance of all the arrears for Financial Year 2021/2022 of Shs 17 million for all the pending SACCOs that received less and those that did not receive any funds.(ii) The MoFPED and MoLG should harmonise their figures and ensure effective coordination and management of PDM data.11040SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT(iii) The MoLG and MoFPED should ensure that all the parishes receive the funds as required by the PDM policy.TOR 2 Eligibility of the various categories of beneficiaries of the PDM FundMadam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will take you to page 10 which gives details on the status.The subregions reported that vetting committees and SACCO leaders have ensured that there is proportional access for the different groups. However, contrary to guidelines, some government employees and their families as well as richer persons were benefiting from PDM funds. This was reported in Buganda and Lango subregions. There were allegations of a ghost SACCO set up to benefit ineligible persons in Okwongo Town Council in Otuke District, where the beneficiaries were family members of the CDO and other district officials. In addition, a one Janet Akullu from the same district was known to be someone who was well-off owning a storeyed building, therefore, not part of those who were meant to benefit from this programme.Once reported, the disbursement of Shs 434 million was put on halt, and investigation proceeded, which helped in saving Government from losing the said amount to ghost beneficiaries. In Kole District, irregularities in payments to beneficiaries of Ogwangacuma SACCO were noted, with cases of suspected unauthorised withdrawals from the account. On examination of the SACCO account, discrepancies were noted in the bank statement of the SACCO account in Postbank. In response, Postbank explained that the discrepancies arose from erroneous export of data into Excel by one of their officers. On the issue of equity in the PDM implementation across the regions- with the same amount of funds to be given to all parishes across the country, stakeholders have raised a concern about coverage of PDM in areas with big parishes that have many villages, households and enterprise groups. Some of the examples cited include Koboko North, Gulu City, Wakiso, Mayuge and Kaliro districts. On the other hand, the Ministry of Local Governments had not disbursed any funds for Kampala City, due to the uniqueness of the city setting. The Ministry is, therefore, redesigning the programme for Kampala accordingly.On the aspect of adherence to quotas for special interest groups, The PDM guidelines provide for mandatory quotas for disbursement of the funds. The distribution is supposed to be 30 per cent for youth, 30 per cent for women, 10 per cent for the elderly and 10 per cent for persons with disabilities (PWDs).According, to the Ministry of Local Governments the quota system has been emphasised and is being realised, with women receiving the bulk of the money because they are found in all categories; that is women, youth, elderly and PWDs. All subregions indicated that the criteria were not being fully met, especially in regard to the elderly and PWDs. In some cases, the number of special interest groups in the enterprises were very low. For example, in Podo Parish, Koboko District, PWDs refused to get the money for fear of failure to repay, that is according to the regional report. Gender issues were also noted in some areas where women were denied funds unless a spouse guaranteed them. Mityana District had reports of sexual harassment hindering women from full participation in PDM. Committee observations The Committee observed the following: i. None of the sub-regions was able to present detailed data indicating the categories of beneficiaries from which the [Mr Mapenduzi]11041THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023committee would have deduced whether the quotas were adhered to. ii. Defining the urban poor in cities like Kampala and Lira is a challenge. iii. Selecting beneficiaries in areas with big parishes is difficult, causes conflict and leaves out many potential beneficiaries. For example, Kasubi Ward in Gulu City has a population of about 39,000 people with over 50 per cent of those in the subsistence economy. iv. There were allegations of sexual harassment in Mityana District and reported gender discrimination in some regions, although the details of those allegations were not provided as required. v. The Committee was not satisfied with the explanations given by Postbank Ltd in regard to the discrepancies in the bank statement of Ogwangacuma SACCO in Kole district.Committee RecommendationsThe committee recommends that: (i) The PDM secretariat should have a system to monitor adherence to guidelines, especially on the implementation of the quotas and report on this issue, with statistics. (ii) Put in place a transparent selection process, combined with effective oversight to ensure that the intended beneficiaries receive the funds.(iii) Review the practicability of the quotas for the special interest groups due to its limited implementation, especially for the elderly, some of whom have no interest in enterprise development. (iv) The allocation criteria for Parish Revolving Fund needs to consider factors such as the population of the parish, poverty levels in the regions and remoteness, among other factors that make some areas more vulnerable than others. (v) Create a safe and respectful environment and institute clear protocols for reporting and addressing incidents of discrimination and sexual harassment. Other discriminatory practices should be reported and acted upon. (vi) Operationalise or establish a national call centre for reporting incidences/cases related to PDM implementation. (vii) The police should investigate the alleged cases of sexual harassment as reported in Mityana District. (viii) The police should carry out an investigation into the irregularities in the bank statements of Ogwangacuma PDM SACCO to establish the truth.TOR 3 Effectiveness of Utilisation of disbursed funds by PDM.This is on the last paragraph of page 13. The subregions gave varied reports about how the funds so far disbursed were being utilised. West Nile, for example, reported that most beneficiaries have put the funds to the intended use, although some beneficiaries used the money to buy household items with the hope of replacing the money from the activities later. West Nile Subregion reported that enterprise groups have been formed in all the parishes and are engaging in agricultural activities, which are doing well.Common enterprises were food and cash crops, goat keeping, poultry, piggery; tree farming and apiculture. Group members who received PDM funds have invested the funds in farming and the crops are doing well, especially those who specialise in cassava growing. However, in some districts and parishes, for example, in Koboko District, heavy rains and hailstorm destroyed crops. But in some cases, the timing 11042SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTof release of funds was expected to have a negative effect. For example, where money for agriculture enterprises came after the planting seasons had passed. In Karamoja, funds were received around the same time when a cultural festival was taking place and there were reports that the funds went into merrymaking. In Kole District, it was reported that some beneficiaries died before receiving funds applied for.In other cases, people believe it was free money from the Government; they used it for household purchases, sharing with family, construction and gambling. Some referred to PDM as “Personal Drinking Money” and this is a case in Karenga district. ln a few cases, beneficiaries declined to take the entire Shs 1 million, opting for small amounts they felt could be repaid easily. The Parish Revolving Funds available for borrowing are likely to reduce due to cases of extortion, excessive charges and operational costs. For example, those in Karenga, Abim and Napak Districts in Karamoja have to travel over 100 km either to Kitgum, Kotido or Moroto District to access banking and mobile money services, which is extremely costly to the beneficiaries.Committee observations The committee observed that: (i)   It may be too early to conclude on whether funds were properly being utilised, since funds were being received in tranches and some beneficiaries had just received the money. However, incidents of misuse were noted. (ii)   Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development emphasised the need for all stakeholders to ensure proper utilisation of disbursed funds by the households.(iii) Ministry of Local Governments acknowledged most of the challenges and explained that some efforts were underway to resolve them. The ministry noted that the main PDM guidelines should be followed, while others were clarifications on the guidelines that were not properly understood.(iv)   It was observed that some banks have provided some gadgets to SACCOS, for example, Post Bank and Centenary Bank to ease the processes. In August 2023, Post Bank developed the Wendi platform as a mobile wallet to enable beneficiaries to access the funds without having to go to the bank. Other banks had also deployed apps for PDM and some were already rolling them out. (v)   Most beneficiaries, especially in Karamoja subregion were incurring a lot of expenses in the process of fulfilling the requirements to receive the funds. For example, the beneficiaries from Abim, Karenga, Kaabong and Napak have to incur costs on transport, accommodation and feeding as they travel to either Kitgum, Kotido or Moroto to access banking and Mobile Money services. This has a far-reaching impact on the success of the programme, since they have to refund monies they could have borrowed to facilitate all these processes after receiving the PDM funds.(vi) The beneficiaries from some districts, on top of travelling long distances to access banking services, have to spend nights on the verandahs due to the large number of clients that the banks have to serve. This example is in Napak where sometimes over a hundred people have to spend a night in front of the bank, waiting to be served the following day. The committee recommends that; (i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that all funds are released as planned and in a timely manner. [Mr Mapenduzi]11043THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023(ii) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that all arrears of PDM funds are fully released.  (iii) The Ministry of Local Governments, in consultation with Kampala Capital City Authority, should expedite the process of redesigning the programme for Kampala capital city to enable the targeted beneficiaries to access the funds.(iv) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Governments and all implementing agencies should ensure strict adherence to the PDM guidelines. (v) The Ministry of Local Governments and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give special attention to districts that are performing poorly, especially in Karamoja subregion in order to address their unique challenges. (vi) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Local Governments, in partnership with the banking institutions, should develop a more effective and efficient mechanism to deal with the challenges in accessing banking and mobile money services in some parts of the country. More emphasis should be on the automated/online financial systems. TOR4 is on the extent of adherence to the PDM guidelines and procedures by the various actors in the implementation of the PDM. The committee noted that there were several guidelines that were being issued by different entities, thus causing a lot of challenges. In the interest of time, I will take you to our observations on page 17.Madam Speaker, all regions expressed concern over the untimely release of guidelines and operational manuals by the responsible MDAs and stakeholders. This has been escalated by the several changes that have been made and scattered in different documents. In addition, there is a huge communication gap between the key stakeholders, including the PDM Secretariat, districts and lower local governments whereby changes are not effectively communicated to the different players, thus causing confusion, frustration and bitterness among the implementers and beneficiaries. For instance, in Lango, some of the districts reported that they received information on the directive that every beneficiary should get Shs 1,000,000 in the newspapers, but even then, lesser sums had already been disbursed. In West Nile, the said directive caused bitterness among beneficiaries who received less than Shs 1,000,000. They accused SACCO boards, vetting committees, parish chiefs and the districts of cheating them, yet the payment of the lesser sums was based on the guidelines existing at the time, which provided for access to funds based on capacity to repay the loan, the size of the project, the business plan of the beneficiary and the recommendations by vetting committees.In Karamoja subregion, monies were lying idle on accounts or used for unintended purposes because players were waiting for proper guidelines to accompany the release of money. To date, Karamoja is the worst performing region in disbursement of the funds to the beneficiaries. Buganda, Busoga and Bugisu subregions also reported the challenge of untimely and unclear guidelines and made a plea to publish clear guidelines to make the PDM programme more equitable, efficient and beneficial for its intended beneficiaries, ultimately leading to the success of this development initiative.  On page 18, the explanations provided by the Ministry of Local Governments before the committee that the many guidelines and directives issued by the different players are the same, was not satisfactory. When the committee interacted with the banks that are participating in the Parish Development Model 11044SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTprogramme, they re-echoed the same concerns. For instance, the participating banks had arrangements with the Government to avail easy access to financial support by integrating their systems with the systems of PDM, providing mobile money and agent banking services, opening savings accounts for the SACCOs and the beneficiaries, paying interest of not less than two per cent on the remaining balances on the accounts having a minimum balance of Shs 100,000. In return the banks would maintain a minimum balance of Shs 10,000 and charge the following fees;1. Shs 3,000 as withdrawal fee 2. Shs 500 for statement per quarter 3. Shs 5,000 monthly administration fees4. Shs 500 mobile money fees However, the presidential directive that all the PDM services are free and that the beneficiaries should get all of the Shs 1,000,000 has left the banks in a dilemma and demotivated.The committee observes that; (i) There are several guidelines and directives from different MDAs and stakeholders, despite Parliament’s resolution to the Government to harmonise and consolidate all guidelines that will help in the implementation of PDM. The varying guidelines have caused confusion across all regions; for example, the President’s guideline on the grace period of 24 months, which has been misconceived and misinterpreted. In some areas the 24-months grace period has been taken to be the period of having the money without paying it. In other areas, it is taken to be the period within which to start paying. In other areas, it has been interpreted as an additional period over and above the 36-month payment period. The valid version of the guidelines, if any, remains unclear. (ii) None of the guidelines that have been amended or overtaken by other guidelines or directives have been withdrawn. The guidelines, if not expressly withdrawn before new ones are issued, lead to confusion and increased challenges in the PDM implementation. For instance, in Karenga District, the guideline that required that each beneficiary who applies for the loan should pay Shs 5,000 to the SACCO to cater for stationery was not withdrawn. (iii) The implementers of the PDM across all regions have not yet appreciated their mandate under the PDM Implementation guidelines. A huge number of the implementers fall short of understanding what the PDM is all about. It is generally noted that the PDM programme was not effectively communicated to the masses and it was vastly misunderstood. (iv) Cognisant that banks are profit-oriented entities, they face a challenge of contradictory guidelines that interfere with their opportunity to make profit. Without making profit, the banks may lose interest in supporting the Government in the programme. Further, banks have opened many accounts for SACCOs and beneficiaries basing on the prior arrangement with the Government. The banks remain relevant in the programme if the beneficiaries and the SACCOs continue using these accounts and continue keeping them active. However, due to the new guidelines, the beneficiaries are withdrawing the entire Shs 1,000,000, leaving the accounts empty and redundant or dormant. On the other hand, repayment of the loan will be directly to the SACCOs’ accounts and, therefore, the beneficiaries’ accounts cease relevance from the time the beneficiary withdraws the Shs 1,000,000 PDM fund. Henceforth, vast accounts shall be rendered dormant in a very short period of time, thus risking closure by the banks. [Mr Mapenduzi]11045THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023The committee recommends that; (i) Government should update and reconcile the PDM implementation guidelines into one handbook and lay the same before Parliament within three months from the date of adoption of this report.(ii) Government should withdraw and render invalid all the subsisting guidelines and directives other than the PDM implementation guidelines that have been laid before Parliament. (iii) The Ministry of Local Governments should make PDM implementation guidelines readily available to all key players for easy access of the same by the beneficiaries and translate the guidelines into local languages.(iv) The Ministry of Local Governments should arrange for training or sensitisation and monitoring for all key players involved in the implementation of the PDM in all parishes across the country.(v) There should be an engagement between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Governments and the banking institutions to address the concerns arising from the departure from their earlier terms and conditions with the banking institutions.Madam Speaker, permit me to now take you through the general committee observations and recommendations.The committee made the following observations;1) Whereas the PDM Fund is supposed to support 39 per cent of the poor people in Uganda, the fund is distributed equally across every parish despite the varying poverty levels across the country. The UBOS Multidimensional Poverty Index Report, 2022, indicates that at the regional level, multidimensional poverty is highest in the northern region with 63 per cent, followed by the eastern region with 45.7 per cent. At the subregional level, Karamoja has the highest levels of multidimensional poverty intensity. The other subregions with high incidences of poverty are Acholi with 64 per cent, West Nile with 59 per cent, Lango 57 percent and Teso 56 per cent. The least incidence of poverty was reported in Kampala with 0.4 per cent; Buganda South, 18 per cent and Buganda North,30 per cent. 2) In addition, there was need to ascertain parish needs depending on the population size, infrastructure needs, differences in financial literacy, among others. Parishes in the urban settings have high population settlements that cannot be effectively covered with an allocation of Shs 100 million, compared to some rural areas that are sparsely populated.3) A lot of effort is being put on the Parish Revolving Fund, which is Pillar 3, that is, financial inclusion of the PDM, yet there are other pillars, which are equally important for the success of the model. The interventions under Pillar 3 are intended to promote savings and investment by households in activities with a potential for generating a production surplus. The committee noted that Pillar 5 on Community Mobilisation and Mind-set Change, which would ideally put people at the centre stage in decision-making on issues that affect their lives and participate in determining their pathways out of poverty is not being given priority. This is likely to trigger PDM to suffer the same fate as previous Government programmes.4) The committee noted cases of extortion of money by some of the CDOs who demanded for payments as high as Shs 10,000 in order for the beneficiaries to access the passwords necessary for them to access the system. In Kole District, the 11046SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTcommittee was informed that the CDO collected Shs 5,000 from each beneficiary for loan application entered into system, and another Shs 5,000 for loan appraisal and another Shs 2,000 for beneficiaries to receive the money. The town agent also received Shs 2,000 to collect data from each beneficiary.5) There were cases of irregular arrests of the district commercial officer, the SACCO chairmen and some enterprise leaders on claims of stealing SACCO funds. This issue was cited in Sebei and Lango subregions. Specifically, in Kole District, the accusers failed to heed to Police summons for a month to make statements on the file of those who were arrested. The SACCO leaders are facing corruption charges in the Anti-Corruption Court in Kampala, while the district commercial officer who is the focal person for PDM, was stopped from his duties. 6) In most parts, the PDM funds came at a time when beneficiaries were returning children to school, and ended up diverting the money for school fees instead of the intended purpose. In some parts, especially Karamoja, the money started trickling in at a time when there was food scarcity due to the prolonged drought and the beneficiaries ended up prioritising food since the planting period had passed, instead of sticking to their business plans. 7) In some sections of the community, there is negative attitude towards the PDM money compared to other similar Government poverty eradication programmes like UWEP, NUSAF, YLP and Emyooga , among others, which are generally perceived by some people as failures. Further, some people also perceive the PDM money as a “thank you” token from the President for voting him into power. Others view it as personal pocket money. As I said, in Karenga for example, some people were reported to be referring to this money as “Personal Drinking Money”. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Akello, are you listening? (Laughter)MR MAPENDUZI:8) Lack of resources to facilitate the process - In all the subregions, it was noted that the technical officers lacked working tools like IT equipment or gadgets. In addition, there are no operational funds for SACCO leadership to conduct meetings for approval of loans, printing, and stationery and so on. There was a proposal in the guidelines to deduct Shs 5,000 for such expenses from every loan, unfortunately, the guideline was rescinded. 9) SACCO leaders expressed lack of office space and challenges in storage of documents. They further expressed concerns on lack of administrative budget to address communication, mobilisation, transport costs among others -  that they have had to incur at their own cost.10) Limited internet services in some areas affected the PDM processes. Therefore, leaders have to move to internet cafes, hence the risk of allowing strangers to access the system.11) Limited capacity in computer use for key officers involved in the implementation such as the parish chiefs, CDOs, SACCO leaders has affected the implementation processes. In some cases, some of these officers resorted to hiring private persons and internet cafes to bridge the gap hence availing their passwords to outsiders.12) It was also noted that the recruitment of the parish chiefs from other localities outside the parishes they are supposed to serve in has tremendously affected their performance as limited time is accorded to this work. In some cases, there are parish chiefs who were recruited in areas where they even do not understand the local languages. 13) Karamoja was the worst performing with the best district standing at 15 per cent and the worst at 2 per cent. [Mr Mapenduzi]11047THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 202314) There are districts that were performing exceptionally well, for example, Kisoro, Tororo, Rukungiri, Ibanda, Kumi, Apac, Kakumiro, Bukedea, and others, with performance standing at above 90 per cent.THE SPEAKER:  At least clap for Bukedea. (Applause)MR MAPENDUZI:  Recommendations The committee recommends the following: (i) Karamoja Subregion should be given special attention and support to ensure effective implementation of PDM. (ii) Government through the Ministry of Local Governments should review the PDM policy to effectively deal with the varying poverty levels and population sizes, among other unique factors of each area to ensure equitable distribution of resources.(iii) The Ministry of Local Governments should put more focus on mind-set change. The question of mind-set change is not only limited to the PDM beneficiaries, but also PDM implementers.(iv) During recruitment of the parish chiefs, consideration should be given to those who speak and understand the local language of those areas, to ease communication and service delivery.(v) Government should ensure timely release of the Shs 100,000 monthly facilitation for the parish chiefs to facilitate them in their mandates in the implementation of the PDM. (vi) The ICT capacity building activities need to be undertaken for both the parish chiefs and the SACCOs to ensure effectiveness. (vii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the PDM monitoring fund of Shs 10 billion, as earlier planned, to facilitate the Ministry of Local Governments in the execution of its mandate in so far as the implementation of the PDM is concerned. Madam Speaker, we would like to emphasise this because without it, the Ministry of Local Governments cannot do anything.(viii) The implementation of the PDM model should be integrated in all Government sectors and efforts should be made to use existing infrastructures in local governments.(ix) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that funds are provided to local governments for retooling and gadgets for effective implementation of the Parish Development Model (PDM). x)  All persons involved in fraud and extortion of the PDM funds, including the bank employees, parish chiefs and civil servants, should be investigated with a view of possible prosecution. xi)  A thorough, conclusive investigation into the actions of Aboke Town Council CDO, the RDC, and the LC5 to establish the truth surrounding the alleged illegal arrest of SACCO leaders with a view of preventing embezzlement of the funds. TOR5 Report any other matter incidental thereto and make recommendations for corrective action Challenges faced by the chairpersons of subregion caucuses The committee observed that chairpersons faced challenges in executing their mandate over their members of the respective groups. The Chairperson of Teso Parliamentary group - I do not know where he has disappeared to - struggled more than seven times; appearing and disappearing before the committee. He alleged that his members were not very cooperative. 11048SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT(Laughter)  It was particularly difficult for some chairpersons to obtain information from their members.THE SPEAKER: Where is Hon. Okiror? The inefficiency of one should not be put on others. I know the members of the Teso Parliamentary Group are very cooperative, including myself. (Laughter)MR MAPENDUZI: We almost invoked Rule 208 of the Rules of Procedure and almost held the Chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group for contempt of Parliament. However, we cautioned him. It was particularly difficult for some chairpersons to obtain information from their members, especially the ministers and those who hold positions that keep them very busy. Recommendations The committee recommends that Members of the respective parliamentary groups should cooperate with their chairpersons and support them to perform their tasks effectively whenever they are called upon. The committee is mindful of the fact that these regional parliamentary groupings are not provided for in our Rules or Procedures of the Parliament. Hence, challenge in ensuring effective participation by all the Members. The committee, therefore, is of the opinion that Parliament finds it fit and explore possible avenues through which these groups, loose groupings or caucuses may become formal entities with clear mandates, since they prove to be useful in the coordination and strategic leadership at regional level. (Applause)Conclusion Through the PDM, the Government is, for the first time, channelling money from the Centre directly to the common man and woman at the grassroots. If properly managed, it shall be a panacea to the socio-economic needs of our people. Much as there are challenges that have been highlighted across the country, there are clear indications that with all our efforts, this programme will succeed and Uganda will move to greater heights. (Applause)  This Parliament will be remembered for making this possible, and we call upon you, honourable Members of this Parliament, to take full responsibility and play your oversight role and other roles effectively. I pray that this report be adopted by this House. I beg to move. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Mapenduzi. I sincerely thank the Members of Parliament for taking a lead in making sure that the PDM performs, unlike other programmes of Government. Like the committee has said, we will be remembered for it. We should make sure PDM works. The local person down there must get the money. The money is not for drinking. I also ask the leaders to go back on ground and talk to the electorates and tell them that this money is meant to be a revolving fund and elevate them from poverty. This is what Government can contribute. If we did that, as leaders, this would really help us. The Government should stop giving confusing guidelines. Give us the guidelines and we will follow them. However, when there is inconsistency in the guidelines – the Government cannot give instructions and say banks should not charge any coin. There is what they call, “management fee.” The banks live in liquidity and profitability. You cannot expect a bank to perform its role without charging any minimum amount. These are not government banks. Even if they were, they have to pay salaries and rent. You cannot remove such payments. Shillings 500, Shs 3,000 - these are management fees for banks. You cannot operate a bank the way you operate other institutions - Post Bank is a government bank, but we need to grow it. We can only grow it by supporting it and ensuring that it gets what it is expected to get out of us. I am now opening the debate. We will start with Hon. Alex Ndeezi. Let me first start [Mr Mapenduzi]11049THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023with the Members representing Persons with Disabilities. 4.25MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for consideration and approval of this report on the PDM. However, as you know, all of us are in a celebratory mood; we are celebrating the coming of twins. Therefore, I take this opportunity to congratulate you most heartily upon attaining the blessed and most important title of Nnalongo . (Applause)The report is very good and useful. However, I note some gaps. Some points need special treatment because of the inherent dangers. Due to time constraints, I beg to focus on two. The first one is on handling gender issues. There is mention of gender issues, but there is no detailed analysis of these issues, and yet if these are not adequately handled, we may get a lot of problems. The second point is handling of elderly persons and people with disabilities. There is an insinuation that older persons and people with disabilities are not interested in this important programme, and yet the reality is different. What is missing is mobilisation and sensitisation. Making reference to page 12, the second paragraph reads as follows; “Gender issues were noted in some areas where women were denied funds unless a spouse guaranteed them. Mityana District had reports of sexual harassment, hindering women from full participation in the PDM.” Madam Speaker, I have read the recommendations in relation to this serious matter. I am of the view that no sufficient efforts have been made to address the question of gender and sexual harassment.First of all, I wish the committee had condemned in the strongest possible terms, this gender-based discrimination and sexual harassment. As Members of Parliament, we must condemn these evils whether it is in Mityana or other districts, we must condemn this in the strongest terms possible.Madam Speaker, we need to have a detailed analysis of gender arising issues. Once the issues arose from the implementation of the PDM, how does it impact on women? Having done a detailed and comprehensive analysis, we can propose what to be done.Therefore, I beg this august House to urge Government together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to work together and carry out a detailed analysis of the arose gender issues in the implementation of the PDM. By carrying out a detailed, comprehensive analysis and identifying the rise of gender issues and come up with solutions to mitigate these challenges.If we are not able to address these issues, there is no way PDM can succeed.Secondly, they mentioned sexual harassment somewhere in Zana, but we do not see the recommendation to the effect that these cases should be investigated and proper action taken. Action should be taken against perpetrators of this Act. We should not just say there was sexual harassment in Mityana and we forget to point out that whoever is involved should be investigated and punished.My last point is on page 11 and I would like to quote: “Adherence to quotas for special interest groups”. There is a paragraph, which reads as follows and it worries me. It says, “All subregions indicated that the criteria were not fully met, especially in regard to the elderly and PWDs. In some cases, the number of special interest groups in the enterprise were few. They also pointed it out and I quote. For example, in Podo Parish in Koboko District, PWDs refused to get the money for fear of failure to repay.”You have said that people refused to get the money for fear of failure to repay, but you have not told us why they are scared.  What did you do to address their fears?11050SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTMadam Speaker, there is a very serious recommendation in relation to the question of quotas –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ndeezi, can you wind up? MR NDEEZI:  Only one minute, Madam Speaker. The recommendation says that review of the practicability of the quotas for the special interest groups is due to limited implementation, especially for the elderly and PWDs. They mentioned that elderly persons have no interest in enterprise development. The situation we have learnt in our constituencies, meeting with PWDs and the elderly persons is that we have not adequately sensitised them.Therefore, we refuse to agree with the recommendations to release the quotas. I remember some people opposed the quotas, but we told them that the quotas are very important to us. We told them that these quotas are a constitutional command in relation to constitutional provision on affirmative action.My request is that before we release the quotas, we should first go and sensitise our people. In this case, we are requesting the Minister of Local Governments together with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to go on the ground and sensitise the older persons and PWDs to embrace this very important programme.  I thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, feel free to make amendments on the report and bring good suggestions not critiquing the report.I want suggestions on how we can improve this fund. This is our baby and we must make it grow. (Applause)4.33MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam  Speaker. I would like to start with the suggestion that we cannot review the quotas unless we are reviewing to take them higher because -THE SPEAKER:  Which kind of quotas?MS KUNUSHU:  For the women, youth and PWDs; the 30 and 10 per cent. Madam Speaker, unless the review is making them higher because whenever there is a marginalised group and they are not given quotas, it is a problem. Uganda is already on the map for giving quotas in Parliament and it is one of those countries that is giving quotas. My first suggestion is that we might have to review the quotas and give them more percentages. The other suggestion I would like to make is that this Parliament should -THE SPEAKER:  The title of the report is a review on the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments on the status of implementation of the PDM. MS KANUSHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: My presumption is that it was passed in determining the quotas. Now, we are looking at the real implementation; did this money reach? How much reached? How is it performing? Do we have value for money? MS KANUSHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance.The suggestion I would like to make is about this Parliament supporting the Ministry of Local Governments in regards to pillar on mind-set change.All the challenges that are being cited regarding “drinking the money” and thinking it is “thank you” from the President is because we did not fully embrace the mind-set change. Unless we do that, if we run into financial inclusion, but when people are not aware, we will not succeed. Therefore, I suggest that we support local governments to make sure that both the implementers and beneficiaries are aware.Lastly, people are saying that there are no people with disabilities in their districts or parishes. Madam Speaker, everybody here is a representative of people with PWDs. I heard someone making that comment on the Floor.[Mr Ndeezi]11051THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023The five of us here were elected by people from the districts and the subcounties, but those people are elected by another structure which starts from the village. Therefore, you cannot tell me that you do not have people with disabilities in your districts.All of us here were voted by a certain group of PWDs. For someone to say that they looked at their parishes and they were no PWDs, no elderly people; again, it is about information and communication because people are not aware. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. On the issue of mind set change, it is not Parliament to help local governments. It is you and I, as the leaders of this country, to ensure that we change the mind-set.First of all, we need to change our mind-set first because some of us even believe that this thing will not work; this is a Kasimo.  Now, let us first change our mind-set that this is a revolving fund and the money should be brought back to people to benefit from it.Remember, you are representatives of 43 million people out there. Once you change your mind-set, go outside there and talk to the population, then you know the project will work out. Minister, you said that you have information. MS MUTUZO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The pillar under mind-set change is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The report made mention of supporting local governments to improve on that pillar. I clarify that it is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. THE SPEAKER:  That pillar is not cast on stone. It is cross-cutting on everybody and that is why I am saying it is on you, the leaders. Let us start with the members of Parliament first. It should not be put in one ministry. ( Member rose_)  My chairperson, unless you are disabled, I said let me finish with – (Laughter )4.39MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for prioritising us. I join the rest in appreciating the report of the committee. My major concern is about the arrears, which have accumulated. We had a very good interaction in Adjumani District, but the loan officers are highly challenged because they have enrolled people who cannot pay them. I, therefore, agree with the recommendation that the Government must ensure that the arrears are paid.Secondly, on the issue of the guidelines, some people are ready to borrow less than Shs 1 million, but the latest guideline is tying people to Shs 1 million and they are getting lost. I also support that the earlier approved guidelines, laid here in the House should be the ones used because when you sent us, we sensitised our communities based on the first guidelines, which were approved here. Lastly, 39 per cent of the people are very poor and many of them did not even go to school. Filling these forms is very tedious, needs computer literacy and therefore, most people are opting out. I propose that the Government devises means of ensuring that a simpler way is used to enrol our people in a faster way. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ababiku. Honourable minister, you need to take note of this issue of the Shs 1 million and that is on capacity. You may want me to borrow Shs 1 million, and yet my capacity is only Shs 200,000 that I can consume. It is about consumption. You must look at that seriously. Let me first get a chairperson who reports others. Hon. Okiror – 4.41MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. Unfortunately, I had stepped out for a health break, but I have summarily 11052SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTbeen briefed on what my brother put across, which I want to –THE SPEAKER:  It is not about a defence.  What is your contribution to PDM? MR OKIROR:  Most obliged. First of all, I would to take exception to a certain kind of character, which is not me, but my particular contribution as Teso Subregion, we did make a presentation. What is very fundamental is that there are cross-cutting issues. Yes, I cannot lie to you that we picked each and every district, but we used the districts that we presented as the classical cases that would be used to demonstrate a similar experience because the implementation of PDM in Teso was the same like in most of these districts. We highlighted very exceptional issues, which were distinct to certain areas, which we submitted. The biggest challenge we faced as a region is that at the further north of Teso, in the districts of Amuria, Katakwi and Kapelebyong, the implementation of PDM was hampered by the fact that we did not have a financial institution such as a bank within the vicinity of the people. People had to trek to the neighbouring district, which is Soroti, in order to access some of this, which we highlighted, Madam Speaker. Teso was fully, adequately and effectively represented in the report presented by the Chairperson. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, you may really have to think about mobile banking. You must deal with banks that are able to take money to the beneficiaries to avoid trekking and people sleeping on the verandas overnight. 4.44MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kole South, I would like to extend our sincere gratitude and congratulate you for becoming a “ Minrude”,  which is Nnalongo . I thank the chairperson for the good presentation on the PDM. However, my concern is about facilitation. In every group we visited, cases of extortion are coming out as a result of lack of facilitation. In some groups, leaders went as far as collecting more than even Shs 10,000 per beneficiary. Madam Speaker, I strongly suggest that both the civil servants; the parish chiefs, the community development officers, and to some extent, the subcounty chiefs should be facilitated so that this programme can be handled properly. The guidelines are saying that all the process should be free, but if you get into the actual procedure, you will find that there is some money involved. The worst of everything is that there is some extortion which is beyond, like the SACCO leaders. The programme took a lot of time to be implemented and some people even lost interest. But when they learned that the money was released, some people started coming back. In that process, some were deleted and even some people asked that their contribution for registration be refunded. Now, SACCO leaders started demanding for money to put back them. Including the names that were not in the group. When they started distributing money, SACCO leaders were demanding Shs 50,000 from all the beneficiaries even Shs 100 and this was practically-THE SPEAKER:  Can you summarise?MR OCEN:  My proposal is that those people should be investigated and punished for extorting money from the beneficiaries. If we do not do that - thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mpindi?4.47MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the Government for the PDM programme. I also thank the chairperson for this report.[Mr Okiror]11053THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023In the report, the chairperson mentioned that according to the report they got from the ministry, persons with disabilities are benefiting from this programme. That picture does not represent what is on the ground.During recess, I moved to 17 subregions of Uganda and met leaders of persons with disabilities. All of them said they were not benefitting –THE SPEAKER: That means you moved throughout the whole country because there are 18 subregions.MR MPINDI: Yes, Madam Speaker. I combined Sebei and Rwenzori.THE SPEAKER: So, you moved throughout the country.MR MPINDI: I moved throughout the country. Persons with disabilities are not benefitting. They say they are being denied the opportunity to –THE SPEAKER: Are you saying all or some?MR MPINDI: Madam Speaker, if it is in terms of percentage, about 98 per cent have not benefited. (Interjections)  I am speaking with authority because I moved around.THE SPEAKER: Please, listen to Hon. Bumali.MR MPINDI: They are telling them to join other members of the parish, but this has become difficult for them. They are asking families to nominate one person per household. You know that in a household where there is only one person with disability among 10 members of the family, it is very difficult for them to nominate the person with disability to benefit from that. (Applause)Others say that the form they fill in is very complicated, with a lot of pages and a lot of English. A person with a disability cannot fill in that form. As a result, they are failing. If they are to be helped, they are asked to pay Shs 30,000 or Shs 50,000. When I went to Kigezi subregion, there was a woman with a disability who even cried because they blocked her from joining others in the parish to get that money. Madam Speaker, you asked us to give a solution to this. The Government gave us 10 per cent of the PDM budget. What we are asking for is this. We have our people with disabilities within the parish. Let us form our SACCOs within the parish and get our 10 per cent –(Applause) - other than asking us to join other members, which has made it very difficult for persons with disabilities to access what they are supposed to get. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, take note of that. In most cases, you do not find people who are not disabled comfortable with those with disabilities, whereas those with disabilities are comfortable being together with their colleagues. You need to take note of that.4.51MR FRANCIS LORIKA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the elaborate report. I would like to begin by bringing to the attention of this Parliament, especially the Ministry of Finance, that Nadunget Subcounty exists. It is in Moroto District and it has five parishes, with 60 villages. Secondly, it is also very clear that almost the entire report is looking at Karamoja Subregion in terms of failure in the implementation of this programme. It is true that it has been a bit of a challenge because of most of the difficulties that people face in the region. However, as leaders, we have tried our best to sensitise people, especially on their mind-sets, that this is a programme to transform their livelihood and also improve the situation in the Karamoja Subregion. 11054SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTThe challenge that we face is mainly on the changes in guidelines because they are a bit contradictory. Sometimes, people are told this and when they do that, they come back. They have also been complaining about the network. Their details are sometimes not captured because they never fill in the forms due to the difficulties regarding literacy levels. Most of the people are not able to understand, so, it takes them time. They are later forced to compromise, which has become a big challenge because when they fail to meet the demands, they sometimes go an extra mile and borrow money from moneylenders. By the time they get this money, they have somewhere to take it and do not have what to invest, in terms of what they demanded for. The issue of Shs 1 million is true. We have situations where Shs 1 million is released and Shs 200,000 is given to the beneficiaries because he demanded for Shs 200,000. We want to ask: where does the Shs 800,000 go? That is what the Government needs to investigate. We have tried to pursue this because people are taken to banks, Shs 1 million is released, the owner of the National ID is registered and given Shs 200,000, but the Shs 800,000 is taken. Who pays this money when that time comes? There are many difficulties that we need to look into in detail.There are also hard-to-reach areas, especially in terms of people accessing banks. I am glad that the Speaker suggested that we should also have mobility in terms of access so that some of these banks can reach out to people and they are able to get the resources. I thank the Government for this programme. We believe that, as Karamoja subregion, we need this money more than other parts of the country because we are still at a very low level. That is why we believe that we can always utilise these resources and demand for more. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, where the report has commented about your district or village, it is not because of being negative, but we want to support you. We want to see how we can uplift you. It is true you are poor and that is that. We would like to see how poverty can be reduced, so, do not take it negatively. MR KINOBERE: The issue in the report was about Nadunget Parish. When he was submitting, he said Nadunget Subcounty.THE SPEAKER: The two are different. The chairperson is the one clarifying, not the Member. Chairperson of the caucus, do not hijack the microphone. (Laughter)  You are our boss. Let us speak for a minute each so that many people speak.4.56MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this platform. I join the rest of the team to thank God for making you a Nnalongo . Congratulations. I also thank the committee for that elaborate and detailed report. I also thank the Government for this programme. If this programme is handled well, it will cause a positive change for the people of Uganda.I would like to make a clarification about Nadunget Parish. We have Nadunget Subcounty, but we do not have Nadunget Parish. We have Nadunget Subcounty and Nadunget Town Council, but we do not have Nadunget Parish. Moroto District has not received any funding, in relation to PDM, for Nadunget Parish. That is the clarification I wanted to make.I would like to comment on the issue of the continuous poor performance of Karamoja in almost all aspects of development. In relation to the PDM, Karamoja region was ranked the least in terms of orientation and assessment on PDM. I suggest that in future, for balanced development, Government programmes should start with the least developed subregions so that they are able to pick with the rest of the regions across the country. [Mr Lorika]11055THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023I also comment on the issue of orientation of the parish chiefs. PDM was a model that needed computer data entry, but we found that the parish chiefs were not computer literate, therefore, calling for their orientation in relation to data entry and also provision of computers because they did not have the computers to do that work; they ended up borrowing and running up and down. Let the responsible ministry purchase these parish chiefs computers, orient them and give them data because they also wanted data for transmission of information. Those are the few comments I wanted to make. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Catherine and Pastor. Let us first have those. 4.59MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my honourable colleagues in congratulating you upon the title that you have attained. Congratulations! I tried it at one point, but it came out one. I think I need to consult you. (Laughter) I thank the chairperson of the committee for the wonderful report he presented; it was a very detailed. I would like to speak on recommendation number eight the committee gave, on integrating PDM in all other Government programmes and ministries. When you look at how PDM is designed, the goal we are looking for is to have transformation in the lives of the people at the end. That is the reason they call it a vehicle for transformation. The committee is on the right track. If only all ministries can realign their programmes and interventions to play their complementary roles in supporting PDM, we will achieve this most needed goal. Members have been talking, referring to the report on banking services, issues to do with trade that the trade ministry has to take care of for the cooperatives and the formations of the enterprise groups. There are issues of mind-set, local governments regarding recruitment. Madam Speaker, I want to speak on that particular matter. We are talking about mind-set change here, but the trend has changed now. I do not think it is only about people accepting to work hard. If you look at the staffing gaps, most districts are operating at 50 per cent or less in terms of extension workers who should support the component of PDM in enterprise nurturing so that the beneficiaries are able to deliver that transformation in their life. Therefore, the Ministry of Local Governments and all the relevant ministries concerned should prioritise the issues of recruitment of extension officers. For example, in Omoro, fisheries department has one staff who runs the whole district. How do we achieve PDM objectives in that area? Ministries should play their complementary role. My priority and emphasis is extension officers in all the subcounties of a districts - if we are to achieve in nurturing the enterprises being selected by these beneficiaries at the subcounties. Finally, the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) should harmonise in terms of data. The beneficiaries are selected at the villages, entered into the system, but they are not in the NIRA data system. There is a gap as far as the information of NIRA, which is the national data system, is concerned so that we are –(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Pastor. 5.02MS MARY BEGUMISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also join my friends to congratulate you as a mother - to become a Nnalongo . May the good Lord bless our children. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the comprehensive report. I know my honourable 11056SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTcolleagues will speak about the rest. I came from my constituency yesterday night and I talked to - my issue goes to the Ministry of Local Governments. Ministry of Local Governments, as one of my honourable colleagues said, please, facilitate our civil servants, the CDOs and the parish chiefs to avoid them to compromise their standards through corruption. Minister of Local Governments, Hon. Raphael Magyezi, I talked to you personally while we were in Kyankwanzi. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Raphael Magyezi? MS BEGUMISA: He is here. Kindly, Hon. Raphael Magyezi, the civil servants are getting directly into PDM through politics, to antagonise our people. A case in point is in my district, Ssembabule. Please, handle your civil servants. I know it is affecting you somewhere else in the country. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Musa? 5.03DR MUSA NOAH (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Koboko, I would like to join the rest to congratulate you and your family for the blessing of the Lord. I thank the chairperson for this comprehensive report on PDM. I would like to make comments on two areas. Then the third one, with the permission of the Chair, I will seek clarification on the parish issue where PWDs are refusing to apply for the funds. This is happening in my constituency. I agree with the chairperson on the recommendation of reconsidering the location of the funds for the parishes. I think that is a constitutional matter. It is stated in Objective XII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy that the Government will consider balance. If you look at the parishes, especially in my constituency, the parishes are very big. I have parishes with over 7,000 people and over 700 households and so, allocating this money, getting the beneficiaries is a big challenge for the parish development and the vetting committees, and it is actually a source of conflict. I agree with the committee that the criteria for allocating the funds should be considered. I also thank the ministry and the Government at large for the development of the Parish Development Information Management System. I have interacted with that system at the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance and at the district level. The system has in-built control mechanisms and very effective. Once adopted fully, it can control corruption. Thank you, Honourable minister. However, the system is being failed for three reasons. One, the infrastructure to support it. In some of the parishes, you do not have power completely -(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Hon. Florence – I am not the one timing. We said each Member, a minute. 5.06MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you as well for the bundle of joy. Blessings upon you and the family.I join my honourable colleagues in thanking the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments for a very good and comprehensive report. During my oversight visit in my constituency, Butaleja, we observed challenges of accessibility to the funds. Butaleja as district alone does not have any bank. All our voters travel to Mbale to access the money. I appreciate your recommendation about mobile money banking, but even those who can go to the banks – [Ms Begumisa]11057THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER: I am not saying mobile money banking. It is mobile banks and this is different from what you are saying. MS NEBANDA: Thank you very much for that correction. For those who can access - at the bank, there is red tape involved. Some of them are frustrated because they spend a lot of money for the long journeys and sleeping on the roads because of the long queues. Therefore, there is a need to engage the banks more to provide a fast-tracking service to avoid the red tape. The other issue we found is on the database; ICT. ICT needs to come in handy so that information is shared effectively and there is flow of data. Thank you. 5.07MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the Members in congratulating you for having double children. I bless you with the family. I also thank the members of the committee for their report, but I wanted to point out some challenges that my district, Nabilatuk, is facing. By the time the PDM came, the first guideline was for the people to follow the plans, of which most of the people of Nabilatuk did; they got Shs 250,000 to Shs 800,000. Now that the IT people are trying to upgrade it to Shs 1 million, it poses a big challenge. I do not know how the finance ministry can help my people to get the other money that is left behind. Nabilatuk District has 26 parishes and only 24 are being coded and they are the ones getting the money. Two traditional parishes, Natopojo and Moruangibuin, have not got their money. Every time I cross those parishes, they tell me that I will never be voted again because I have not given them the money for PDM. I do not know how the ministry can help us to capture this. I also wrote a letter in that regard. (Interjection) I will take that information. (Member timed out.)5.09MR BERNARD ODOI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank our chairperson for the good job in the report. I want to pick from the objectives of the PDM; one of them is inclusivity. The guideline clearly provides for a 30 per cent segment for the youth. If I make a quick reference to one of the best-performing districts like Tororo, it is not even 20 per cent; it is not even 15 per cent that the youth from these places have benefited. I remember when the President was launching PDM in Kibuku, he used words like “ aimar , chura , calculations, mathematics and kwan .” The youth are asking, “Where is the mathematics?” Can we have 30 per cent segmented for the youth within the parishes and then we manage it at that level? I believe the youth are there and they can manage this. Thank you. 5.11MS MIRIAM MUKHAYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest in congratulating you upon the bundle of joy that God blessed you with. Congratulations. I also appreciate the committee for the report, but I want to make this recommendation in addition to what my colleagues have said. The PDM is a very good programme and its aim is to help the 39 per cent to also join the money economy. Many people have already got the money, but I think the ministry should re-focus more on the key players, on the implementation of this programme and monitoring it for it to be successful. Besides the government officials, we have the chairpersons of the committees. Many of them are not beneficiaries of the PDM fund. During my interaction –(Member timed out).5.13MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru):  Madam Speaker, being the chairperson of the subregion, I request for more time, please.11058SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER:  Members, go straight to the point; do not go into meandering.MR AKOL:  First and foremost, I thank you for emphasising the issue of mind-set change because the problem we faced, as the chairperson of the subregion, is that some Members of Parliament were telling us that they are not even interested in the Parish Development Model. Therefore, if we do not start with the members of Parliament, the LCV , LCIII chairpersons and the councillors, the religious leaders and the cultural leaders speaking the same, we are not going to succeed. Enterprise selection is failing because the minds of the people are not changed from up to down; the people cannot utilise the money because their mind is not changed. They cannot request for Shs 1 million when their mind is still set at Shs 20,000 in poverty. Therefore, there is no way you are going to succeed in this particular programme if we do not start with the leaders. The leaders cannot give what they do not have. If you do not have a shirt, you cannot give a shirt to somebody else. We have to start from the mind-set change and that is the key pillar. I wish the honourable minister, Raphael Magyezi, was listening to this, other than being on WhatsApp . The other key issue that I think Government should take seriously is sensitisation. I am a Member of the Committee on Budget. Almost all the ministries will talk about sensitising people on the PDM, but when you go to my village, there is no local language that speaks about the PDM. Therefore, there is no way you are going to help people to understand the programme. (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you cannot give what you do not have. Now, I do not have the time. 5.15MR KISOS CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to deviate a bit from the discussion of the Members, but of course, augment it this way; is it about the PDM or the Constituent Development Fund (CDF)? THE SPEAKER:  Or What? MR CHEMASWET:  Is it about PDM or CDF? Is it about the law or regulations? We need the law on PDM. Who should be the patron of the same PDM? Yes, Members have gone to the ground. They are observers and not participants. Therefore, we do not need the regulations; we need the law. We need the patronage of members of Parliament in this PDM. We need 2.5 per cent of the total revenue collected to be allocated towards PDM. The law must provide the stakeholders who must participate in PDM. The critical person in the participation of PDM must be the Member of Parliament, including the community development officer, the chiefs and the rest of the government officials in the district. Madam Speaker, I say this, looking at the countries that have participated in the CDF, like Kenya of course - look at India; Constituent Development Grant -THE SPEAKER:  You have now moved away from the PDM to a CDF. First sit. I understand when I hear my Member speaking like that because it is the season. (Laughter)  Honourable members, we are talking about the Parish Development Model, a revolving fund given to different parishes in the country as Government initiative to eradicate poverty. Why it is at 39 per cent is because of the money that we have. As members of Parliament, we have said that you are directly involved because you are the voice of the voiceless. Even when you are discussing PDM here, you are involved. When we talk about mind-set change, you are involved. You are the one supposed to do this. Therefore, the issue of CDF is different from PDM. We shall discuss CDF somewhere not here. For now, let us discuss PDM. 11059THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023MR CHEMASWET:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the advice that you have given me the question on PDM. I was only trying to look at it this way; that it is only a replica of CDF in other countries. Looking at the amount –THE SPEAKER:  It is not. Hon. Opolot-Isiagi, you went for benchmarking on CDF, can you give us information? Just give him information.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleagues that the word is clear. Parish and constituency are two different things. This is from the Government direct to the parish. However, with the CDF, it would be at the leadership of the constituency Member of Parliament and a development fund committee, that is how it runs.It is an amount directly pegged from the local revenue; it is a percentage of the tax. Therefore, let us discuss what we are in before we look for another.MR CHEMASWET:  Madam Speaker, I request you give me time to come up with a paper on the question of PDM with comparison to CDF, how it is managed and on the issue of the law so that I can circulate it to Members to understand and appreciate.THE SPEAKER:  We will appreciate your paper. I would like you to understand that by the time we made a decision to go for PDM and not CDF, there was a thorough study. We were going to have a CDF, but because of the study that was carried out, we decided to go for PDM. 5.20MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you upon your new bundle of joy, and I wish you good luck. I thank the chairperson together with the committee members for the report. I agree with the observation they made about the leadership challenge and I will mainly stick to the parishes. When I went for oversight role, especially in my parish in Rubanga, Buyanja Subcounty, Rukungiri District, I realised that the leadership has got a challenge of changing the parish chiefs and the community development officers. This is a very big problem in Rukungiri. In my parish, a parish chief does not last more than three weeks; after every three weeks, we have a new parish chief. The community development officer changes them every month. When you ask them why this is so, they say that they are incompetent. If it is incompetence, why don’t they remove them? Why change them to different parishes and subcounties? This hinders PDM. When the new parish chiefs come, they say that they have not received the reports of the Members and it delays disbursement of these funds. I kindly ask the minister to look into this and liaise with the chief administrative officers so that they stop this challenge. Thank you.5.22MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in congratulating you for getting twins. These are my comments on the report that has been tabled. One, on overcrowding of banks, my suggestion is that if the banks can communicate to the beneficiaries on the number they can handle that particular day, it would prevent beneficiaries from leaving at dawn to go to the banks and spend the entire day there and leave very late. That money should also be protected as it can be easily grabbed in the night. Many of our beneficiaries do not know English. I do not know what progress the Government has made in translation. Lastly, there are parishes that got less money. What is the Government doing? I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, what Hon. Betty Engola is saying, is about the scheduling of banks. Those good days when I used to work at the bank, you would say salary 11060SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTearners are going to be paid on Saturday and you work extra hours to serve them. Therefore, if they can make a timetable for these people to be served, it would be better. Calling them may not be easy because if you get somebody from Nadunget, he may not even be having a phone. If you get somebody from Karenga, the network may be poor. Therefore, it may not be easy for you to get that person. 5.24MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): I thank the committee for doing an excellent job. I only have three additional recommendations that I wish to add.One, that the PDM Secretariat spearheads the harmonisation of guidelines and the numbers, so that before they are issued to the public, there is one source of information to the public so that we do not have different numbers and guidelines.Two, on the issue of non-existent parishes, I propose that the Ministry of Local Governments carries out a physical verification of all the parishes in the country because the number of nine might not be exact, other Government programmes could also be affected besides the PDM. Physical verification will do this country justice. Three, that the Government chooses the other alternative of paying those districts that cannot have a bank. That the Government considers an alternative method of paying those districts that cannot attract commercial banks. Commercial banks might not see economic sense, putting money to a distant subcounty or parish, but we have local government structures. It is okay to also risk and pay through those ones, where there is no commercial bank. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The other one would be that the Ministry of Local Governments together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should harmonise the inconsistency on the difference of Shs 886 million that is missing.5.26MS EMMA CHERUKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my honourable colleagues to congratulate you upon becoming a Nnalongo. As a mother, having twins is not cheap. May God bless you. It is serious work.THE SPEAKER:  That is why you should release me early.  (Laughter)MS CHERUKUT:  I thank the chairperson of the committee for the detailed report. To go straight to the point, I would like to put it that when you look at most of the regions like the mountainous areas, for example; Sebei, Kabale and Hoima, I guess the greatest challenge is to do with money.I would like to support the idea of the introduction of mobile banking that the Rt Hon. Speaker has put forward. I know that it will help the old, the people who cannot speak English. If services are brought closer, the queues at the bank will be reduced.For the district that I come from, that is Kween, we do not have a bank. I would be the number one person to request that mobile banking systems are put in place so that the PDM can be an effective project tomorrow. Asante sana.5.28MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakasongola):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I also join my colleagues to congratulate you upon becoming a  Nnalongo.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the well-detailed report presented to the august House. I address myself to the over-increasing arrears of the parish development funds.It is true, even in my district, I have a parish, that is, Kamirampango Parish, in Kalongo Subcounty, Nakasongola Constituency. It only received one quarter, totalling to Shs 25 million. It is now missing three quarters, totalling to Shs 75 million.I, therefore, request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to, [The Speaker]11061THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023please, consider these arrears so that our people can enjoy the benefits of the parish development funds. I beg to submit.5.29MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to flow in the same vain in congratulating you for the double blessing.I just want to allude to the fact that we have parishes that have up to 25 villages and with huge populations, and if the PDM is to remove poverty in our constituencies, I beg the Ministry of Finance together with Ministry of Local Governments to come together to see how we can get the population, especially, the bigger parishes, to have equal and good funds so that we are able to serve them equally. Thank you.5.29MS JENNIFER DRIWARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. We welcome you to the world of twin Mothers. I am one of them. On behalf of Maracha District, congratulations.The 15 Parishes of Maracha District in greater Oluvu never received the first quarter, that is Shs 7 million.Three parishes in Yivu Subcounty never received the Shs 100 million. I would like to know what the Government is doing as far as these parishes that never benefited are concerned.Secondly, I agree with you on the issue of mobile banking because Maracha is one of those districts without a bank. Many of our beneficiaries spend nights in either Arua or Koboko in to access… (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Aciro, I am looking at people who rarely speak. There is Asaba there.5.31MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon your double blessing. May God protect you and the children.I would like to seek clarification from the minister concerning Okang and Omeda. We have written letters concerning these two parishes in Pader District, which are in Acholi Bur Subcounty. They have never received the fund and when I was following the report from the committee chairperson, I did not hear those two parishes being mentioned. I would love to get that clarification because my people are “on my neck” and feel that they are not Ugandans now because they have missed out and people are already using the fund.The way forward to mitigate the challenges people are meeting is maybe opening bank accounts.  It is good to follow the idea of mobile banking, but we would rather request the Government to make arrangement with banks so that they have rotational movement in subcounties so that services can be extended to the people in walkable distances.THE SPEAKER: That is why we said that we need to have mobile banking. I am speaking from the knowledge of - I used to be a banker for 12 years. Honourable members, the report says that 133 parishes and 18 districts have not received money. You need to check your record. 5.33MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. Allow me also to thank and congratulate you and also Hon. Magogo, whom Members are not congratulating . (Applause)First, in my constituency, there were some irregularities in the parish development model, whereby these people who were working on the PDM would sneak in other people on their own so that if that person is paid, then he gets a share. However, the Resident District Commissioners and other leaders in the district are trying to handle that matter and it is being minimised. 11062SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTThis PDM is really a very good project that Government has thought of. But in all the parishes, for example, in my constituency, there are no computers so the Government should buy computers and also think -THE SPEAKER:  Do you have power in your parishes? I am just asking.MR ASABA:  Actually, most subcounties do not have electricity. (Laughter) We should also think of electricity and computers in most subcounties because all this information is done at parish level. These parish chiefs collect money from beneficiaries because they want to hire computers. So, if we put computers and power, that work would be done. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, as we talk about computers, we need to have power in those villages and yet, most of the parishes in the country do not have power. So, that should be taken into consideration.5.35MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also congratulate you for having brought for us twins who may be members of this House in the future, given your traits. In my constituency, one of the biggest challenges, which has been faced by the residents and which has made the RDC to arrest many people is on the issue of computers, which he has talked about.I think the guidelines concerning the provision of those gadgets was not very clear, and as a result, many people started soliciting for money, especially chairpersons of parishes and of the SACCOs in the villages to go and hire or buy those gadgets.I would urge the Government that instead of leaving that issue to banks, they should buy computers and give them to subcounties so that they can easily work and that is one of the reasons why money delayed to be disbursed in most parts of the country. Another thing is that most of the money was given to a few banks. For example, in Bulambuli and some parts of Mbale, money was given to DFCU Bank leaving out other banks and yet DFCU Bank did not have enough manpower to disburse the money in time.However, Post Bank did a very good job. Districts should be in position to distribute money equally to all the banks instead of keeping money in one bank and suffocating the system.THE SPEAKER:  Centenary Bank in Mbale did not get the money?MR KATENYA:  They got, but Dfcu Bank delayed because they had very many bank accounts from all the districts in the region, including Teso, Bugisu and some parts of – THE SPEAKER: Do not put Teso because it is doing well. (Laughter)5.37MR SULAIMAN HASHIM (NRM, Nebbi Municipality, Nebbi) : Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. After that, we will have Hon. Goli.MR HASHIM : I congratulate my namesake as well. I stand to support the report and appreciate the committee for the good work. I have some comments to make. The first is about the balance on the initial Shs 17 million that was supposed to be sent to these SACCOs. The report clearly mentioned it and I wonder why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not sent that money, in full, to the SACCOs. Parliament should urge the Ministry of Finance to send it.Secondly, the chairperson mentioned different figures from the Ministry of Local Governments and the Ministry of Finance. I wonder why that was the case. If the ministries are working on the same figures, why should there be a discrepancy? That means they are not coordinating or harmonising their figures. [Mr Asaba]11063THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023That should be corrected. The issue of mind-set change should also be taken seriously to avoid wastage.Lastly, facilitation to the parish chiefs should be taken seriously to avoid temptation and corruption. Otherwise, these people work directly with the SACCO groups and that is why we hear that they are getting some little money from the SACCOs. If they are well facilitated, we shall avoid that. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, you need to handle the issue of the balance on the Shs 17 million that was supposed to be the initial amount paid. We do not know why it is outstanding. Hon. Patrick, Please, sit. Let us have Hon. Goli. (Laughter)5.39MR OGWAL GOLI (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker, I take the opportunity to congratulate you on joining the family of twins – because I am one of them. You are welcome. As members of Parliament from Dokolo – you had guided that we should get involved – we sat down and analysed the PDM and its operations in Dokolo in a detailed way and we identified six gaps. Given the time challenge, I will mention the major one: the PDM is designed in such a way that only the Government provides the resources. It should be designed in such a way that attracts many other people to invest in the process.If the Government invests Sh 1, and it is designed well, you will attract Shs 9. For example, we have not involved the private sector so that we can consolidate the products. We are doing it in small bits and there will be a challenge where we shall have no marketing process. We need to connect the major private sector players and the policy of value addition so that they support these processes – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Switch it on. MR OGWAL:  They would also help to relieve some of the challenges we are now facing. For example, the pillar of training is not there yet the private sector would support in that. There is a challenge of who can help them to produce. If the Government has given money, then, we can build on that.The other issue is about groups. In Dokolo, we found out that if you look at a SACCO that you are giving Shs 100 million and the individuals receive Shs 1,000,000 each, it cannot be used properly. You need to choose a few enterprises such that the power of group management will not allow them to misuse that money while they are connected to a market. Karamoja would actually be the easiest to support because they live in manyatas . When you live in a manyata , there is a clear product that you know: cows. (Applause)  What should be done is to connect them with a good buyer of beef and then they work on the issues collectively to – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Apea, this is not the National Theatre. (Laughter)MR OGWAL:  Connect them so that they are able to, say, get a solar-powered water pump, good feeds and get better breeds of cattle so that they are able to produce quality beef. You would go step by step. You need to work on the pasture. In Karamoja, they stay in manyatas,  but the whole of that land can be used to develop pasture. We have written a paper on this.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Apea, Hon. Avur and Hon. Mujungu. 5.43 MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologise that I will talk while seated because I am indisposed. In a special way, I thank - THE SPEAKER:  You are now struggling for a chair with the Member with disability. You had better recover.11064SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTMS AGNES ATIM:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for saving my life. Maybe, I would not be sitting here but somewhere else. (Applause)  I would like to add my voice on the effectiveness of the PDM. I have heard colleagues talk about the money and we thank the Government for the money. However, how shall we help our people to use this money to achieve its ultimate goal?Hon. Ogwal has said it all. My contribution is one: I would like to hear what the Ministry of Local Governments, in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – money has gone into the communities and they have made the best use of it, but after next year, what next? Where is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in mobilising the communities to select the right enterprises? Where is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to link up these enterprises in our different parishes to the market so that next time, we come back here to give how much revenue our different parishes, subcounties and districts have contributed? That is the discussion we need to have – after money has already reached a few hands – before we even think about who has not got and who has got. The impression we have left in the community is that this money is actually meant to be – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Avur, Hon. Mujungu and the minister.5.45MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to address my mind to the effectiveness of the PDM and particularly single out the area of sustainability of the programme. Many have spoken about the operational challenges where money has already gone into our communities and the beneficiaries are already using the money. However, we must be asking ourselves: how sustainable will this programme be? Since the money, in some circumstances, has been delayed, most likely, there is going to be diversion and, therefore, a challenge in repayment. The ministers concerned – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Please, conclude. MS PACUTO:  must now begin to address their mind to the sustainability of this programme. How best we can recover and how we should be mobilising the beneficiaries who have now received the money and utilised it? Soon, they are going to recount the gains from this disbursement that they have received by encouraging them and promoting the saving component. This is so that as other people are waiting, within the SACCOs, they can mobilise savings and address the poverty challenges of the people in our community, while Government pools resources to serve the other people remaining. Without addressing our mind to the issue of repayment and saving, we may not recount or get the gains or the effectiveness of PDM as intended. I thought that is something that we must now begin thinking of since the money has gone into the community. 5.47MR THEMBO MUJUNGU (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my honourable colleagues, I would like to congratulate you upon God’s blessing that has made you Nyabahasa . This means Nnalongo in my region.Secondly, I would like to appreciate the comprehensive report by the chairperson. I would like to report that much as the report has indicated many challenges - and one would say that there is lack of facilitation for this or the other, I would like to propose to the minister that they should prioritise the provision of data for the processes to be facilitated at the parish level. That is a major impediment for the beneficiary to access the money. 11065THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023We are now one year in the PDM and but I do not see hear the Ministry of Local Governments saying that we are going in to monitor and evaluate and bring a report. Isn’t it the right time to tell them that we also need an evaluation report from them their stand point as the implementers? Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. We need a status report after every six months, for us to be able to know and understand what is happening in PDM. Are people still standing? Dr Chris said I should go. (Laughter)5.49MR ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulation on your twins and welcome to our club of the Ssalongos  and Nnalongos . I would like to reflect on the performance of Emyooga,  Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) WEP and Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP). That should be able to inform what PDM is doing. We do not seem to have had a proper reflection. In Kotido, we have had a situation where the RDC kept on running around, but everybody left Kotido to either go to the kraals where there were guns – the RDC could not go there - or run to Kampala. What is going to happen to the question of sustainability in terms of PDM? Which structure is in place to do recovery? You have seen how the bank struggles. How prepared are we? If the recoveries are not there, then there will be no revolving fund. (Applause)The other issue is what my brother from Dokolo has brought. Some of us have been thinking that Karamoja is being crowded to a Uganda, which has already understood money. Imagine that you are getting some woman in the village who has never handled Shs 1 million? How do you expect her to behave in the village? Priorities will automatically change. Above all, the timing of the money. The money for farming cannot be brought after the harvests. By the time we are beginning to do cultivation, people will not have money to buy seeds, to buy implements, or to clear gardens. My view is as good as the one of Dokolo, that; the Minister of Local Governments and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should think of how to remodel PDM for Karamoja.  In the absence of that, we should not expect Karamoja to change until Jesus comes. I am not a prophet of doom.  (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  That is the mind-set we have been talking about. –MR ABRAHAMS LOKII:  I am coming to why I am saying that. Finally – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Abrahams, you need to change your mind first before – MR ABRAHAMS LOKII:  That is why we are saying that this needs to be remodelled. What can work? THE SPEAKER:  I know you have the size but first sit down. (Laughter)MR LOKII:  Let me first finish my point. THE SPEAKER:  First sit. The minister has understood and known that you should differentiate how to handle these areas. The way you handle Karamoja – you must have different enterprises for the different regions like from what you have in Teso, Kigezi and other areas. It should not be you to give the people; it should be the needs of the people. Like what Hon. Abrahams is saying, if you give a woman in Karamoja Shs 1 million, that day, she will drink until – (Laughter)-  “Personal Drinking Money”. 5.53MR MUHAMAD NSEGUMIRE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana):   Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue here is about mind-set change. 11066SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER:  Please, start with your neighbour. (Laughter)MR NSEGUMIRE:  Another issue is that we are giving people three years to repay. I think that is too much. It would be better, if we could revise that period. Another issue is about the PDM secretariat. It should do much. They should move around sensitising people who have benefitted such that they are able to repay that money. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  I also have issues in my constituency but in circumstances where I cannot talk, I give my Member of Parliament to speak.5.54MR PATRICK OPOLOT-ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for allowing me to say a word on this – THE SPEAKER:  On my behalf -MR OPOLOT:  Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and his committee for seriously digging into this matter. I am not going to discuss these issues because I am aware that we shall discuss them every year the same way for about 10 years because there are people like the minister, Hon. Raphael Magyezi and Minister of Finance whom we strongly advised on what things to do first before we move into this. Now, we are going to remain in this quagmire forever. Madam Speaker, allow me move a motion that we adopt the report of the committee. THE SPEAKER:  With amendments. Do you have something to say honourable minister?5.55THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Colleagues  – THE SPEAKER:  Before you speak, honourable minister, all this that has been said is to help us grow. We are not blaming you. We are not blaming finance. We are looking at how best we can work. How can this project work better?MR MAGYEZI:  Madam Speaker, first, let me start by thanking the committee. My Chairman, Hon. Mapenduzi and the Members, thank you for the good job done. Secondly, allow me to thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable members, for the most valuable comments you have made on the reports. They are adding value to PDM. You are helping us to improve this programme. I would like to take all the comments made in good faith because they are adding value to this programme. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, I cannot go without thanking the members of Parliament for a good job done in their constituencies. Remember where we came from; at some point, it was like an impossibility. The comments were totally difficult to bear but you can see that things are moving. The PDM is gaining ground here and there. When I heard my brother, Hon. Akol say, “But Magyezi, you are on your phone,” I was actually getting you the right figures on PDM disbursement, as of now. Let me give you an example. Under Kampala Capital City Authority, the report says that we have done nothing. As of now - maybe a few minutes ago – Shs 7.8 billion has already been disbursed to beneficiaries; 7,385 households bearing about 71 per cent performance in Kampala – that is a big improvement. I listened to comments on Karamoja and quickly saw - because we have a tracker system at the Secretariat - and the question of why these figures are different from local governments to finance - even what I am saying will be different after two hours. However, I was looking at Karamoja. Things have changed between the time the report was compiled and now. Let me give you a [The Speaker]11067THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 22 NOVEMBER 2023few examples. When you look at the districts, which have already scored 100 per cent, they include Napak. I am talking of 107 districts that are already at 100 per cent disbursement. Moroto Municipality is also above 98 per cent. Amudat - 100 per cent, Abim - 89 per cent, Nabilatuk, which the Member was pointing out, is at 45 per cent. When I look at the poor performing districts as of now, Karamoja is not among - THE SPEAKER: When you are giving us those figures, give us the figures of disbursement versus recoveries; the percentages. Do not just be happy that you have given out the money but also be happy that we are recovering to be given out again. MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, of course, after two years - because the beneficiaries do not pay back until after 24 months. After that, they are given another 12 months. That is why we are saying you have 36 months to pay back. However, looking at the four lowest performing districts - we are talking of Namisindwa - 27 per cent, Sironko with 26 per cent and Moyo with 21 per cent. In Karamoja, we are talking of Kaabong, which we need to put some bit of emphasis on. That was because of the distance to the bank and so on. I think we are gaining ground. On the issue of the guidelines, we have taken note of your comments. We are going to make sure that when I come back, we have fresh guidelines printed and distributed to the population. I have taken your advice on the banking and on the parishes, some are big and some are missing. I give you the assurance that by the time I come back, you will have a full report on these parishes. We talk of parishes, which are coded, meaning those which are gazetted by the Ministry of Local Governments. They are 10,594. In some districts, the district council passes the proposal to create new parishes. That process is not ending. They do not think that has ended. What happens to those other parishes, which must come on board? We will have time, somewhere in 2024, to go back to the Cabinet so that they lift the ban on creation of new administrative units, especially the parishes, which were already created by the subcounties – THE SPEAKER: What do you want to do? MR MAGYEZI: I am hearing voices saying that we should merge them. We will come back to this. THE SPEAKER: You first operationalise the ones you created. MR MAGYEZI: That is what I am talking about. We have those, which were created but were not yet operationalised because they were not gazetted. I am not talking about splitting subcounties again. Finally, on the gadgets, the Government is procuring tablets to be used in the citizen registration by National Identification Registration Agency, in Uganda Bureau of Statistics (census) and we shall use the same in PDM. Therefore, the parish chiefs will have the tablets indeed. (Applause)  I give the commitment, as we have always done, every six months, to come back with the facilitation. We are giving Shs 250,000 per quarter per parish development committee. The request I have heard from the committee, which is correct, is to look at facilitation of the SACCO executive so that they do not get money from the beneficiaries. I will submit that to the Cabinet so that we can see. We shall give a comprehensive report as we have always done every six months. We are coming back mid-December so that that report answers all the questions you have raised in this report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you have heard the amendments. I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments 11068SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTon the status of implementation of the Parish Development Model in the various subregions of Uganda be adopted by this House with amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  The Clerk will get the resolutions and forward them for implementation. Before we proceed, Hon. Magyezi, we extended the term of office for LCs I. Can you come back to this House with a report on the way forward? - because we are aware their term expires in January? 6.03THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that we extended the term of office of the LCs I, LCs II and the Women’s Councils to 10 January 2024. I have already crafted a paper to take to the Cabinet. I am waiting to be put on the Cabinet Order Paper so that we can come back to the House and the nation on the way forward after 10 January. THE SPEAKER: Can you make it a priority? MR MAGYEZI:  Madam Speaker, it is a priority. THE SPEAKER:  We need to inform the country whether they are going to have elections or not. MR MAGYEZI: I commit to do that in the next two weeks. THE SPEAKER: In the next two weeks when we are in recess? MR MAGYEZI: We will be guided by you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I adjourn the House to 2 o’clock tomorrow.(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 November 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)  [The Speaker]