PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6389Thursday, 24 November, 2022a boda boda accident, they immediately rush and judge: “We must get a solution for these boda boda riders. For these boda boda riders, we must do this and that.” However, on this occasion, where even people rushed to judge the boda boda rider, it was a reckless driver who caused the accident – who knocked the boda boda from behind. He has even admitted to reckless driving, causing death. I am told he will be sentenced tomorrow. Of course, as a family, we know this was an accident; there was nothing intentional. An accident can happen to anyone. However, I would like to urge Government that whereas we are pushing to handle boda boda cyclists, we should look at the transport sector extensively, to include reckless driving. You meet these people who have Subarus or Golf - when you see someone driving a Subaru or Golf, you must give way. Those guys drive as if they are possessed. (Laughter)We thank you, as a family. They requested me to register their appreciation to the Speaker of Parliament, the honourable ministers, the Clerk and staff, and you, honourable colleagues, for standing with us. (Applause) Secondly, the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games are opening today. In golf, we did our part yesterday. Uganda was the overall winner. (Applause) Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, the Woman MP for Rukiga, was the overall best player. On the side of the males, in the absence of the Attorney-General, IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 12TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, KampalaPRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, it has been long. (Applause) I was on other assignments; I was working. It is not that I was denied any space. (Laughter) We have a lot of duties in and outside the Chambers. So, we usually share all these duties. I am glad the House has been going on well; I have been following. I thank you for the good work you have been doing. I would also like to thank you, colleagues, for joining to condole with my family. I thank those who managed to make it - I know that that day, we had many functions - and those who sent us messages when we lost our brother in an accident. It was very painful, but it is God who gives and it is He, who takes away. We still believe in the Almighty, that our brother is in a better place. Of course, many people were debating on social media. I have seen that there has been a rush to judge boda boda riders. When people hear of PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6390TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERE [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRKiryowa Kiwanuka, the Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa became the best male from Uganda. (Laughter)  I took advantage of the Attorney-General’s absence and Gen. Jim Muhwezi not being there was also a blessing. We conquered Kenya. (Applause)We played yesterday and, so, we shall be going to Juba to get our medals. I do not want any of you to accompany me. (Laughter) I know you are going say that I need company. (Laughter)  The Speaker has gone to Juba for the games’ opening ceremony. We are sure Uganda will emerge the overall winner. Let us pray hard for our comrades who are representing us there. We have matters of national importance. We received condolences and many more and, so, on that topic, I request that no one makes any comment. 2.15MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): I will not do the same, but I also represented you in your constituency and, indeed, I thank you very much. I also seriously marketed NUP there.Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that there is something happening these days: the attack on police posts, which is happening regularly. Today, they attacked Nakulabye. Bungokho was attacked yesterday. These people who are attacking the police posts take guns. However, from the information we have heard from the Deputy Inspector General of Police, he knows these people, but he is not arresting them and the vice is continuing. Therefore, the procedural matter I am seeking is whether it would not be procedurally right for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come to this House and give us an update on the situation. Many police posts have been closed, which is another problem affecting the rural areas. This business of attacking police posts by unknown people - even Jinja barracks was attacked, a soldier was killed and guns were taken. Wherever they attack, guns are taken. It is as if Government is silent on this matter. It can bring a lot of disharmony in the country. As Parliament, we cannot keep quiet on such a matter, which affects our security and the country at large –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, please.MR SSEWUNGU: I know I am hearing “orders” - Maybe they are looking at my face – and being handsome –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I had guided earlier on that. Stop formalising informalities by bringing them on the Hansard. Do not respond to people who are not on record.MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. So, that is the procedural matter I am seeking. We had the security minister here, but he was not serious on this matter. We cannot keep quiet because this matter is becoming rampant, day-by-day.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have seen statements from the police, public statements about this matter, meaning that it is a matter of public interest. I do not think it causes any harm for the minister to update the House about what is going on. Indeed, many police stations have been attacked and the spokesperson of the police has been giving press releases. So, there is nothing classified to that effect. Government Chief Whip, would you like to say something on this?2.18THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, it is public knowledge that there are some sporadic attacks on police posts. As peace-loving Ugandans, it is important that we condemn the attacks because today, it can be on a police post and tomorrow, it may be your residence or my residence. So, we need to condemn it because we believe in peaceful means. 6391THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022I undertake to inform the Minister of Internal Affairs to brief the House. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not yet guided on that. I wanted to see whether you were comfortable with that before I make my ruling.MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I know, at the moment, is that the police are conducting investigations. If it pleases you, you may guide the minister to brief the House without getting into the details of the investigations. He can only inform the House of where the attacks are happening. I leave that to your prerogative, Mr Speaker. However, as you have stated, it is public knowledge. We are all reading on social media what is happening - not on a daily basis - but the sporadic attacks on police stations. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Internal Affairs should bring a statement to the House next Wednesday on the sporadic attacks on police stations across the country. – Honourable member, a point of information is to a Member on the Floor; we do not have anyone on the Floor.Let us go to matters of national importance.2.21MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, I registered my matter of national importance two weeks back, but the presiding officer, then, guided that it would be forwarded to today. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have two minutes. MR KOMAKECH: I thank you for giving me the way. I come from Puranga Subcounty in Aruu County, Pader District, where I have lived for a while and that is where I have my ancestors. Three weeks back, a gentleman named Ali Dusman came with a court order, claiming 1,000 acres of land in Puranga Subcounty, which is now a town council. He even took people to Court and claimed that the entire land belongs to him. He asked the locals to compensate him with Shs 1.2 billion, yet these locals do not have the funds to get a lawyer to represent them in court. Currently, they spend nights outdoors in fear of being evicted from their land. I request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, with utmost respect, to pay a visit to Puranga Subcounty and save the locals, who were once living in IDP camps. They are scared that they might be sent back to the IDP camps by the same people who sent their ancestors there. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, we have handled most of such cases together. I do not see the lands minister here, before I burden the Government Chief Whip. We handled many cases of that nature.2.23MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that the honourable member has just raised is alarming. It now causes serious problems because when somebody says a person came in with a court order, the tragedy with such is a presumption that they went to Court, litigated and won the court case.I am meant to understand that there has been a directive issued - that currently, the police should not witness an execution, unless and until they have verified that Court order. Secondly, it must take three months.Apparently, without going into legality issues, the intention is to have people that wish to exercise some rights within the law to have time and exercise those rights. It has two implications: The first is - maybe the Attorney-General will address this august House on the legal undertakings that he can execute, especially where there is a court order. Nonetheless, a matter that goes back to the Ministry of Lands, which supervises district land boards - my attention is drawn to the fact that in these areas of northern Uganda, 6392TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERE [Mr Sseggona]there is no mailo land because they have only customary land. These titles are issued by district land boards. The duty of the parent ministry is to go back to their policy, as the supervising ministry. How does somebody get to access land, claiming 1,000 acres, which is inhabited by other people? Yet in the regulations, among the things somebody must satisfy before he is given a lease, which subsequently metamorphoses into a freehold, that applicant must be in occupation of the land in question.The investigation that must be conducted must stretch to the land boards and the area land committees. In Wakiso, an area and committee of a particular town Council issued a recommendation in respect of land in a different subcounty - I do not want to speak much about this matter because it has since gone to Court - but it goes back to the management of the land boards and the land management system with respect to public land; it has now stretched to customary land.A few weeks from today, I will bring information –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, please, conclude. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Yes. I will bring information of another minister, who I understand has acquired 2,000 acres of land occupied by people in northern Uganda. This is a minister who was appointed only two years ago –(Interjection)- No, I am not in a hurry. I just want to draw the attention of Parliament to the problem in the land management system, especially with respect to Government land and customary land, where titles are issued by the district land boards. Of course, the blame has always been put on what they call, “mailo land”, but now, colleagues can see that the problem has stretched beyond where we have the mailo land regime in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sseggona, your submission is in line with why I call the Attorney-General. On several occasions, I feel the ministry of lands needs legal guidance on the dos and don’ts.In some of these issues, people can claim ignorance. By the way, let us not think that they know everything; they do not know everything. Therefore, Attorney-General, please, advise the House. 2.28THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Komakech, your issue is noted and after here, we are going to sit down and get more details.The Attorney-General’s Chambers takes interest in any matter where more than 30 people are going to be affected by a court order. Therefore, if we find a case, which has more than 30 people, my office gets interested. Many times, we have applied to become parties in that case, even if the court rightfully found that the land belonged to that person.As Government, we have to find out what we are going to do with the people who are on that land. That is how we have been handling those matters. The practice directives that were issued by the President were for purposes of making sure that the administrative processes are properly done. The practice directive does not interfere with the processes of Court. Court may make an order, but we have to ensure that whatever is being done is done in an orderly manner, if it is to be done at all. If Government has an interest in it, it will take it up. District land boards have challenges; I have attended several meetings under the superintendence of the Prime Minister, where we were trying to find a solution on how public land in the different areas is handled by the district land board. Obviously, there is a law, which grants the district land boards these powers, but we are working administratively to see how to manage that issue. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6393THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, what I request is for the Member to share with me the details of this case; Government will take interest in it. (Members rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now, colleagues, you are going to share my time; I have a schedule.MR SSEGGONA: I apologise, but it is a matter of interest across two governments, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to seek clarification when he says, and rightly so, that there are practice directions on these execution matters. Usually, when Court is giving an eviction warrant, they give a warrant, which expires in one month yet I understand the practice directives, which the Police relies on, is actually issued by the minister and it talks about three months. I would like to know from the Attorney-General - if there have been efforts to harmonise these two because by the time the three months run out, the warrant has already expired. In addition, we do not want a system that interferes with the operations of the court as well. So, I wanted to find out if there have been efforts to harmonise this in terms of those timelines.MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of the Republic of Uganda is one. It comprises the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary, and we have to work together to ensure that the people of Uganda are protected in every instance. Therefore, whether in two or three months, they are all arms of Government and we will deal with it. What I can assure you, Mr Speaker, is that the Government of Uganda, which includes the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary, shall not sit back while any person is evicted from his land. I beg to submit.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. These are matters that are very important, but we do not need to come back on the Floor on every matter because we end up clogging our Order Paper with very many issues. What we need is serious action taken. Once it is not taken, then the Member can come back to the Presiding Officer and we call the minister back here. Clerk, please, relay this to ensure that the Attorney-General and the minister of lands meet the Member so that this issue is handled urgently. Hon. Christine Ndiwalana, Hon. Kahunde. 2.32MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning nomadic pastoralists who have invaded my district of Kiryandongo. Nomadic pastoralists, some of whom were chased away from northern Uganda and others from unknown areas have invaded Kiryandongo District in Masindi Port subcounty. Their animals frequently stray in people’s gardens. These pastoralists are very arrogant. On several occasions, they have beaten my voters when they try to arrest their animals. They are posing a very big security threat in the area. We have recorded increasing cases of cattle theft in Kiryandongo. Our local justice systems have failed to handle these cases whenever they are reported. Mr Speaker, I pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs intervenes in this matter as soon as possible. I also pray that the minister of agriculture considers vaccinating cattle in the neighbouring areas because our farmers are in fear that these animals could spread contagious diseases like Foot and Mouth Disease. I beg to report, Rt Hon. SpeakerTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -2.34THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, the issue the Member is raising has a committee already 6394TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREin place. I will only reactivate that committee, which consists of myself, Hon. Mac Odwongo, Gen. David Muhoozi, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and Hon. Bright Rwamirama; we shall handle. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are usually specific: you do not usually say, “We will handle”; you usually say, “Next week, I will go to Kiryandongo -” because handling can last for a month. MS NABBANJA: Okay, you want me to give you a timeline?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The colleague is desperate in the way she came to my office.MS NABBANJA: This committee will go to Kiryandongo next week and report back accordingly.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you do not need to report here. What we need is action on the ground with the MPs because I know you handled this matter seriously when we had it in northern Uganda.2.35MR MOSES WALYOMU (Independent, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. This is a matter of life and death. On the 13th of this month, we lost one of the chairpersons, LCI of Kabembe West, Budima Parish, Butagaya Subcounty, Kagama County, Jinja District. This chairperson was in critical condition that needed ICU services and so, he was referred to Jinja Referral Hospital. However, on reaching the referral hospital, the ICU was not functional. When we consulted the nearby hospital in Mbale, it was the same problem. Mr Speaker, adding to that, these people were told to buy drugs in the nearby pharmacies. At the end of the day, we lost the chairperson. Jinja is one of those districts with Ebola cases, and having no functional ICU is very dangerous. Not only that -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers -  MR WALYOMU: My prayers are that Government and particularly, the Ministry of Health, should equip referral hospitals with ICU services and make them functional.Two, drug supply to referral hospitals and health centres IV or III or II should be adequate. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is not in the interest of your area to say Jinja has many cases of Ebola when we are going for Christmas. You also told me that they failed to get an ambulance to bring the patient. You said that the hospital did not have an ambulance; that is what the honourable colleague told me when he came to my office. Therefore, I am presenting the case. Rt Hon. Prime Minister and former Minister of Health - MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concern and I want to thank him.Colleagues, all referral hospitals have more than two ambulances; we shall find out what truly happened. Secondly, yesterday, but one, I had a report that in the last 10 days, we had not registered any Ebola cases. So, now, this takes us back –(Interjections)-  is it Ebola? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Member linked Ebola to ICU, a link, which I disagreed with quietly. Those may be COVID-19 or –MR WALYOMU: Mr Speaker, it was not Ebola, but I said since Jinja is one of those districts with Ebola cases and since we do not have ICU facilities, it is dangerous.MS NABBANJA: First of all, Jinja Hospital, like any other regional referral hospital, has an ICU facility. This Parliament appropriated money during the COVID-19 period and we established one.[Ms Nabbanja] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6395THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022Honourable colleagues, we shall find out what truly happened and report back to you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Walyomu takes his time before he brings such issues; he rarely comes up just like that. Please, pick interest. He said it was the same in Mbale. You need to pick interest in this.2.40MS MARGARET ACHILLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raise a matter of national importance on the phasing out of Kotido Primary Teachers’ College. Following the on-going restructuring of teacher training institutions across the country by the Ministry of Education and Sports, Kotido Primary Teachers’ College in Karamoja Subregion has been phased out. This college was opened in 1985 as a Grade III Teacher Training College on serious demand of north Karamoja after realising that Moroto Core PTC could not meet the high training needs of teachers in Karamoja subregion. It is unfortunate that even with the long struggle to attain this college, its noticeable benefits and development to the community, it has been phased out. The phasing out of this college has left the community that gave its land pondering whether to take it back because they had offered it for education of their children to be teachers.A number of stakeholders’ consultative meetings have been held in the district with the Ministry of Education and all have resolved that Kotido PTC be retained and be upgraded to a core PTC, on grounds that it has a larger catchment area coupled with long distances, which cover districts of north Karamoja, Kitgum, Agago, Pader, Otuke, Amuria, Soroti and Kapelebyong. Kotido PTC is the nearest PTC for access of students from the above catchment areas. For instance, the distance from Karenga to Moroto Core PTC, the only college in Karamoja, is 280 kilometres. One can be able to see that the available institution that trains teachers is far apart and connecting them is very difficult, coupled with insecurity. Kotido PTC has a land area of 48 acres with many structures and facilities to support teaching and learning, hence it has room for expansion. There is evidence that there is increased access, retention and completion rates of learners from primary one to -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your prayers -MS ACHILLA: Mr Speaker, my prayers are that Government accords this part of the country affirmative action in order to promote education for the Karimojong children who will become teachers. Secondly, that the Ministry of Education reviews its decision on the phasing out of Kotido PTC and reconsiders its retention and upgrade to a core PTC. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemonges had come with a close issue in Sebei. Can you use one minute?2.43MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add to what the honourable member has just said; that the same issue happened in Sebei region. We heard in the news last year around October, that Government had come up with a policy to phase out PTCs. Sebei had only one PTC and that is Kapchorwa Primary Teachers College. It is a shock to the entire region that even after phasing out, the five core PTCs, which remain in the eastern region include one in Mbale, Tororo, Bukedi Subregion and two in Teso; there is only one in Moroto. From Kapchorwa, Kween, Bukwo to reach a nearest core PTC is about 250 kilometres. Mr Speaker, my prayers are that Government upgrades Kapchorwa PTC into a core PTC. Thank you.6396TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember Hon. Ssewungu had raised this issue sometime back and you were supposed to respond.2.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that Kotido PTC is one of those to be phased out. It is also true that Kapchorwa PTC is another one among those to be phased out. As for the request by my colleague to upgrade both to core PTCs, that is not possible at the moment. We have had discussions with the local government to see what they think are the best services that such institutions will be able to deliver to the community. There are quite a number of ideas that have come up. (Interjections)  Maybe, when we - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I know this is a very serious issue. If we open it up, I know the time we shall spend here. Committee on Education and Sports, please, handle this matter and any colleague who has a complaint or who is affected can appear before the committee. You will then report back to the House. Please, I am speaking, Hon. Amos - No, you do not come to enrich my ruling; you do not have that power. Honourable Chairperson, Committee on Education and Sports, three weeks are fair enough so that the Minister for Education can appear before the committee and meet the affected colleagues. What usually brings a problem is for you to raise such an important move without consulting your fellow leaders here. Consultation is always very important.2.47MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to report to the country and also to the House, a security-related matter. Last evening at 7.48 p.m., some unknown gunmen attacked the people of Kalongo Town Council and killed two people. One of them was a 52 year-old called Joseph Komakech and another one called Joel. They sprayed bullets in the town council and managed to escape. This kind of shooting and killing is becoming rampant in Agago District. Before this, they killed one businessman because their intention was to get money. The moment they see you with enough groceries in your shop, they attack you. The first thing they did was to put a boy next to that place under gunpoint and they robbed him of all the money he had. The next shop they entered was Joseph Komakech’s.Our prayer is that security should go a little bit deeper so that we check this kind of unnecessary riding of motorcycles by unknown people. Secondly, we used to have a very robust and effective LC system on security matters. Why don’t we revive it so that the neighborhood gets concerned to know which unknown people are moving around? This would help to safeguard people, especially during this coming festive season. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs -2.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Okot raised a matter yesterday related to incursions by warriors from Karamoja. I would like to report back to the House the broad spectrum of measures we want to take, in particular, regarding the rustlers and also these internal security issues that arise.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were ready to report. Honourable minister, a Member cannot raise a matter where people died last night and you respond that way. That is unfair to the Member. His constituency is not receiving any message.GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, can we investigate and report back?COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6397THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that is better. You should assure him that you are going to handle it.THE PRIME MINISTER (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, we were in Agago in September. Remember those issues were very much on the Floor of Parliament. I led a team of the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Minister of Internal Affairs and our army commanders. We put in place a number of measures. Therefore, I promise, on behalf of Government, that we shall use the same approach. We will go there, either tomorrow or the other day, and reactivate our security personnel on ground to move and make sure that these culprits are brought to book.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister.2.52MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Entebbe Expressway is one of the few roads this Government has made, somehow beautifully. (Laughter) This road is a dual carriage and, indeed, it has areas of exit. However, from Kajjansi to Munyonyo, there is an emerging trend. We raised issues on why they have not put lights on this road; many accidents are happening. Many companies are establishing factories along this road. They are removing barricades to create entrances and exits where their factories are and many accidents are happening. I am talking about a lot of vandalism. My interest is to find out from the Ministry of Works and Transport whether they are allowing these companies to create exits and entrances to and from their factories. For example, around Kigo Prison, a company parking fresh water has created an entrance, which does not go back to the right side where it must pass to join the other side of the road. Who is allowing these people? This is an expressway, which has a dual carriage, but they are creating entrances and exits at leisure, for their factories. Lastly, we would like to know - because we know the contract: why doesn’t this road have lights at night? People are dying and lots of accidents are taking place. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport -2.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the honourable colleague, but it is not that those companies have created entries and exits. They are taking advantage of those people who are vandalising the guardrails. The ministry is already aware and we have constituted a team to come up with a comprehensive report so that we see how to combat that. On the issue of the lights, we are still mobilising funds. Once we get enough funds, we shall provide enough lights, but the major cause of accidents on that road is speeding.We have already told the people there to at least put signages, which show the maximum speed one can drive at on a given stretch. However, next week, we shall have a comprehensive report, which we will give to the House on all the challenges we have on that road. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do not need a report on the challenges. You are burdening yourself. Let me give you a tactic; the less you come here to present, the better for you. If you start inviting yourself here, you are going to be in trouble. (Laughter)Honourable minister, what I would guide is that, for example, you lose nothing calling the Chairperson, Committee on Physical Infrastructure to visit that road. It is around 20 minutes and they would even show you 6398TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREwhat they mean. You might be reading from different scripts. I stay on that same road. When I was going through the access road to my area, I wrote to the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). They gave conditions – the design and everything – but some people come and dig; eventually affecting the base of the main road. Hon. Ssewungu has said that people are creating access roads without the approval of UNRA. You need go and do a spot check with UNRA. They will tell you: “We approved this one. We did not approve the other one.” For the ones that were not approved, they would close. (Applause) It is very simple, honourable minister –  Prime Minister, your friend here –(Laughter)MS NABBANJA: He will speak after me. There is only one Prime Minister in this country. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please, we do not have much time. These two are very good friends. MS NABBANJA: I thought I should take this opportunity to direct my young brother to go to the area that my other colleague has talked about. Please, go there yourself because if you say you will use your technical people, it will take ages. Go there tomorrow. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good - On the issue of lights?MR SSEGGONA: Yes. Mr Speaker, now, people can see why the Prime Minister and I are close: we are both practical. I rose on the issue of lights because lights are not about beauty. It has a lot to do with security on the road and we have seen and heard very many stories of scares of insecurity on the road. World over, expressways are monitored 24 hours a day. You will notice that in many cases, even if your car developed a mechanical problem, within 10 minutes, there would be a patrol car to come and flush you out, including breakdown services. However, there cannot be security monitoring when there are no lights. Usually, Government comes to Parliament and asks for money. My brother, the minister, was very casual in saying, “We are still looking for money to put up the lights.” This road had a budget. It also has a maintenance budget and people are paying to use this road.I had expected - and that is why I wanted to speak before the Prime Minister, so that we could hear the commitment of Government on lighting this road. Those monitoring security on this road should have their work made easy. Otherwise, we are going to keep quarrelling with Gen. Muhoozi here, but he will ask you, “How do you want me to monitor?” It has cameras, but they cannot be effective without light. (Interruption) MR SSEWUNGU: I thank the LOP for giving way. Mr Speaker, the fact is that when this road was being constructed, that money was within the contract and in the last Parliament, Hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga raised the same matter, but money could have been taken somewhere else. Currently, we know that this road - just to clean and wash it, costs Shs 1 billion every month; this is on record. However, we need to know who took that money and why they didn’t put up the lights. If they failed, let us look for more money and put lights on that road. We have travelled in a number of countries; we know what happens on such roads. Honourable LOP, that is what I was saying.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What Hon. Sseggona talked about; usually for such roads with toll ways, where you have people running concessions, one of the things they start with is lighting. Even when they do not find it, they do lighting because it is all incorporated in the costs of maintaining the road. Therefore, Committee on Physical Infrastructure, please link up with the minister [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6399THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022to look at the terms of the concession, which should have those details. Hon. Byanyima, do you have some information on that?MR BYANYIMA:  Mr Speaker, the minister is aware that the company that is collecting money now has been given an ultimatum up to the end of December to put up lights. I do not know why he cannot say it. They delayed because the money they were collecting was going directly to the Consolidated Fund and so, there must be means again to pay them. Therefore, soon, the company is doing that job.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please take up the matter and ensure that we have lights on the road.MS NABBANJA: I did not want to - because I expected my brother to talk about it. There is already work going on to provide lights on that road. You have seen them dig some holes on that road; that is the sign that they are going to provide lighting there.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 3.03MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of public importance. In reference to the 1948 United Nations Organisation’s Universal Human Rights Declaration Charter and Article 29(1)(c) of the Constitution, freedom of worship is a fundamental right. It is a culture in human perspective and practised differently, person to person and society to society.Mr Speaker, on 8 July 2022, Pastor Peter Kizito of Eternity Christian Embassy Church of Kyengera was arrested by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) enforcement team under the guise of noise pollution. Pastor Edison Muhanizimana of Kansanga was equally arrested and both were tried in courts and charged with offences of noise pollution. Mr Speaker, the world is about to celebrate the holy month of Christmas, which is a festival for all Christians; we normally enjoy and celebrate it in any manner according to our preferences. It is my greatest prayer that the NEMA enforcement team, under the directive of the minister in charge, balances the standard control of noise pollution, together with freedom of worship enriched in Article 29. It is my prayer too, that the minister in charge meets with the pastors’ fellowship leaders of Kampala to harmonise the mode of worship in order not to contaminate with any other freedoms of the other side. Lastly, we pray that an amicable approach is found and also to review the NEMA Act in reference to noise pollution because the digital sound metre used to detect the sound, if at all it was brought here, and we were all ordered to keep quiet, it would rule us out of order. Mr Speaker, the Born Again community has supported this Government for a long time and it is our prayer that -  (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a pastor?MR TEBANDEKE: Mr Speaker, I am a Christian, not a pastor. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Attorney-General, help us on this matter.MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, order. MR KIRYOWA: I thank the Member for the matter he has raised. I would also like to thank NEMA for the job it is doing. (Laughter) Article 43 of the Constitution provides that “In enjoyment of Rights and Freedoms prescribed under this Constitution, no person shall prejudice the fundamental and other human rights or freedoms of others or the public interest.” 6400TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREMr Speaker, there are some rights, which cannot be curtailed in any way. Shouting while praying, speaking at a volume higher than what is prescribed by the law set by this Parliament is not one of them. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a point of procedure –MS BEGUMISA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure of - Thank you very much, Attorney-General. Thank you, my colleague. Is the Attorney-General procedurally right to put it that he thanks NEMA which - protect me, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected.MS BEGUMISA: I am finishing. (Laughter) I am a pastor myself. Protect me, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues. Hon. Mary - Now, most of you I know work day and night to go to Heaven. God’s representative is speaking and you are making noise. So, you are failing yourselves.MS BEGUMISA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the Attorney-General procedurally right when he thanks NEMA, which has failed all the time to at least arrest discotheque owners who make a lot of noise at our doorsteps including my own home? Discotheques make noise; no report of such has been given. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, two wrongs do not make a right. – Honourable member, you cannot access a microphone when the Speaker is speaking. What I picked from the honourable colleague – maybe, Attorney-General, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and colleagues, it is a matter of engagement.Probably, some of these pastors do not know their limitations. I do not want to call it noise – of expressing their message. However, they have requested for a meeting with the minister in charge of environment for guidance. Maybe, they can be guided much better. They can be told their limits. On the issue of noise, in some areas, you do not sleep. You find a disco hall and a church in the same area. 3.09MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): I would like to thank my colleague, the Attorney-General, for being very loud and clear. Honourable Members, not all rights are absolute. Each right, whether absolute or not, has a corresponding responsibility.Therefore, the freedom of worship, which we all respect, has corresponding responsibilities. Those responsibilities include not violating the NEMA Act, which law we passed ourselves. Of course, we – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is why I said we should amend it. MR NIWAGABA: Honourable members, it is also important to note that our Rules of Procedure prohibit us from discussing matters where we have a conflict of interest. I would not have expected my colleague from this side to raise a matter that actually touches the issues of the environmental health of everybody and discredit what NEMA is doing. We would be applauding NEMA for fighting noise pollution; either by us worshiping or those encroaching on the environment. (Applause) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next time, Hon. Tebandeke, consult your Attorney-General. (Applause) I had guided that the ministers for environment should meet - because they have an organised platform of pastors. They should engage on these matters. It is very important. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, ensure that indeed, this is done quickly. Colleagues, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Members of Parliament and staff of the Select Committee on Budget [Mr Kiryowa COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6401THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022from the National Assembly of Namibia. They are here to benchmark and share experiences with their counterparts in Uganda. They include: 1. Hon. Mike Kamboto – Head of the delegation 2. Hon. Josef Kauandenge – Member of Parliament 3. Ms Katherine Joyce Nakutta – Director, Clerks 4. Ms Josephina Shatumbu – Director, Finance 5. Mr Herman Angala – Finance Consultant 6. Ms Esabel Idda Namasiku – Committee Clerk You are always welcome, colleagues, to visit us. Thank you. (Applause) 3.12MR MUHAMMAD NSEGUMIRE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the sustainable logging of trees for plywood and timber production products, especially in Mityana, Mubende and other surrounding areas. The National Policy, 2001 and the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 provides Uganda’s principal framework for forest protection. I, therefore, report to this House that with the increasing number of plywood companies in the country, many communities from Mityana, Mubende and other nearby areas are cutting down trees to provide raw materials for these companies. The continued and uncertain logging in Mubende, Mityana and other surrounding areas, this could affect food production in these areas by triggering changes to local climate and land degradation, still deforestation, areas are infertile to hold up crops and grassy areas are also not productive and suitable for long term cattle grazing – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what are your prayers? MR NSEGUMIRE: My prayer is that the Minister of Water and Environment should provide this House with comprehensive management –(Interruption)MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter being raised by my brother, Hon. Kibedi, was raised here by Hon. Nakazibwe. Maybe, the Prime Minister delayed giving them the action taken, but it was raised here. Is the honourable member in order to bring back an issue that was raised here a few weeks back? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Member, a point of order is a very strong point, which shows that something has really gone wrong. At least, if you had gone for a point of procedure, I would have picked it, but with the point of order, you even scared me. Let the honourable colleague conclude.  (Laughter)MR NSEGUMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this matter because it has delayed and I do not see any answer – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I have ruled. Please, state your prayers. MR NSEGUMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My prayer is that the Minister of Water and Environment should provide this House with a comprehensive management plan against illegal logging and tell us whether Government has plans for any tree-planting campaign for this country. I beg to submit THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have been told that this matter had already been raised by Hon. Grania from Mubende. If it was raised, then it should have been responded to.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, indeed, Government is in high gear; we set up a committee in the Cabinet. The Member is suffering –(Mr Abdallah Kiwanuka rose_) – you are breaking the microphone. He needs help.6402TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, the submission on the Hansard is really not good. Let us remain focused on the matter.  MS NABBANJA:  Okay. Members, Government has come up with a committee chaired by the Rt Hon. Kadaga, to see how best we can regulate the harvesting of our timber. However, colleagues, I would like you to take note of the fact that timber is becoming lucrative. We would see a way of encouraging our public to plant as many more trees as possible because it is now a business.Therefore, I would like to allay the fears of my brother. The Cabinet came up with a committee headed by the Rt Hon. Kadaga, and they are doing a good job. At an appropriate time, we shall report on the matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you make my work difficult because I am responsible for my Members here when they raise issues. Now, I do not know when the Cabinet committee will finish its work. It can be a year – oh, they have already reported back and so, can we say in two weeks’ time? Can you give us an update then? Thank you.I have been requested by Dr Nsaba Buturo to inform you, in peace, to turn up at Kololo Independence Grounds for a Conference on Ethics and Morality on 29 November 2022. The event will start at 8.00 a.m. Members are requested to take COVID-19 tests from the Parliament Conference Room on Sunday and Monday morning. The conference is organised by the Parliamentary Forum on Ethics and Integrity. Now, I have done my work. If you want to take a COVID test, please, do and if you do not want to, do not go.Secondly, colleagues, when you write to me a note here, you should tell me who you are. Colleagues who I called to present their matters and you were not here, please, note that the Parliament always starts at 2.00 p.m. and not 3.00 p.m. Next item. Procedure -MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising relates to the applicability of our rules, specifically rule 41, which provides that every Thursday, we shall have the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I have looked at the Order Paper and this item is not there. I would like to inquire, Mr Speaker, whether this is by design or omission. Members who are here and available to ask the Prime Minister could be given the opportunity to ask questions. I have questions for the Prime Minister and I would like to know what time I will be able to raise them. Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just to inform you, I have seen some people complain that I am going to destroy your microphone. It is going to be safe; I do not have that intention. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. When the presiding officer is making an Order Paper, they put into consideration very many issues. We have always had Prime Minister’s Time. Today, our focus was on the action reports. We have passed very many resolutions as Parliament, which have not been acted upon. We felt that the Prime Minister should use this time to look into this, but next week, you will have Prime Minister’s Time. The Prime Minister is whispering to me, but I will be sharing with her. Next item -LAYING OF PAPERS79 RETIRED DIPLOMATS AND AMBASSADORS WHO HA VE NOT RECEIVED THEIR RETIREMENT BENEFITSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Public Service -3.21THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, at the Eighth Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of this Parliament on 16 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6403THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022November 2022, Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija Namubiru, MP Workers Representative -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are only laying a paper.MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay details regarding the 79 retired diplomats and ambassadors who have not received their retirement benefits. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the job well done. This one is referred to the Committee on Public Service because I know there are many colleagues who have related issues to be dealt with conclusively without even reporting back here. If there is any Member who has an issue, they should go there and the chairperson of the committee will liaise with the Office of the Speaker. If there are other pending issues, we will be guiding on the way forward. Honourable minister, in regard to issues of Public Service and discrepancies in salaries, you have taken legal officers in police back to ordinary salaries; they were supposed to be paid as judicial officers. You started it and all of a sudden, you took them back from I think from Shs 5.4 million to Shs 1 million and something. They are complaining. Honourable minister, police pilots are not being paid as scientists. I hope that you have sorted it out - Yes, but regarding legal officers in the police, please, take it up. I have received very many messages from them. I kindly request you to follow up on that issue and reconcile. Next item. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMOGERERE FOR HIS EMINENT AND DEDICATED SERVICE TO THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is a colleague, a senior leader and senior elder in our country who served us diligently and whose debate should add to the national ethos, a debate that can enrich our nation and not a debate that should divide us; a debate, which should bring us together. I hope we shall take that route.3.24THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure to pay tribute to the late Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere for his eminent and dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda.“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with deep sorrow, the sad news of the demise of Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere, which occurred on Friday, 18 November 2022;AWARE that Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere had a distinguished career serving in various capacities on the African continent, in the Government of Uganda, and as a political leader of the Democratic Party;RECOGNISING that Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere has served the Government of Uganda in several key responsibilities;RECOGNISING that Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere was a firm advocate and a promoter of democracy in the Democratic Party;COGNISANT that Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere successfully led the Democratic Party as President for 25 years and was one of those who contributed to constitutionalism in Uganda;APPRECIATING that Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere was a particularly dedicated and dignified leader who immeasurably participated and contributed in shaping the pre and post-independence democratic governance and political leadership of Uganda;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:1.  Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, 6404TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERErelatives, friends, the Democratic Party, and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished and noble citizen.2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the service that Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere has rendered to the Democratic Party and the people of Uganda.”Mr Speaker, I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Huda, the Government Chief Whip, the Attorney-General and the whole House. Thank you. Would you like to speak to your motion?MS NABBANJA:  On Friday, 18 November 2022, we received sad news of the death of Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, an accomplished politician and leader.Mr Speaker, Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere was born on 11 February 1932 at the Bumangi Catholic Mission in Ssese Islands, present day Kalangala District, to the late Joseph Bagenda Kapere, a fisherman, and the late Maria Lwiza Namwendero, a homemaker.He completed his primary education at Kisubi Primary School, and his O’ level at St Henry’s College Kitovu, and he joined St Mary’s College Kisubi for high school in 1946. He was a cadet, head prefect and president of the debating society.In 1952, he completed the Cambridge Intermediate Examinations and was admitted to Makerere University, where he joined the local students’ union.In 1954, he was elected Vice-President of the Students’ Guild. In 1955, he was selected as an exchange student, to attend Allegheny College in USA, before returning to Uganda to graduate as a biology and chemistry teacher in 1957.In his brief teaching service, he carried out teaching practice at Namilyango College, where two of his best students were Mr Aloysius Njala, later a Director of Bank of Uganda, and Justice Francis Ssekandi. He later moved to St Leo’s Kyegobe in Fort Portal.In 1990, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Humanities and Letters by his Alma Mater, Allegheny College, Meadville, USA.In 1961, Paul Ssemogerere contested as the DP candidate in Mengo North (part of Bulemeezi County), where he was elected. He travelled with the late Ben Kiwanuka across the country and internationally.Dr Paul Ssemogerere became DP Publicity Secretary from 1962 until 1969 when political parties were banned, and, together with Ben Kiwanuka, he was arrested and detained without trial under the Public Order and Security Act of 1967.In 1972, he replaced Ben Kiwanuka as the leader of the Democratic Party, having served him as the Parliamentary Secretary.After a reported staged car accident in 1972, Paul Ssemogerere escaped the servicemen aboard a railway freight car disguised by a friend and later Editor of the Citizen , Mr Kyeyune. He crossed into Kenya and was admitted as a refugee in Baltimore in 1972.Mr Speaker, this reminds us of the political journey Uganda has gone through since independence up to when the NRM Government took over power.In 1973, he joined Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, Syracuse.In May 1974, he married Ms Germina Namatovu and, together, they have children.In 1980, he assumed leadership of the Democratic Party and contested for president and became Leader of the Opposition in Parliament from 1981 to 1985.From 1986 to 1995, Dr Ssemogerere was appointed and served as Minister for Internal [Ms Amongi]6405THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022Affairs, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Affairs, and; later, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Service under the NRM Government. During all this time, he remained the President-General of the Democratic Party – mark that one – the way Mao is.In June 1995, he officially resigned his Cabinet position to contest in the 1996 presidential elections, which he lost to the NRM candidate, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.In 2005, he retired as Democratic Party President, a position he had held for 25 years, to private business.Mr Speaker, on 26 September 2016, Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere was awarded a Golden Jubilee Medal No. 1,037 by President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni at Kampala Serena Conference Centre.Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President granted the late Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere an official burial.We wish to extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the Democratic Party that he led for 25 years and the people of North Mengo, whom he represented in the Legislative Assembly.May the Almighty God grant his soul eternal rest. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Leader of the Opposition - I am told he is the former Secretary-General of the Democratic Party. They elected him, but I do not know whether he assumed office at any time. (Laughter)It is free seating, honourable colleagues.3.37MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, it is very delighting to hear Hon. Gen. Muhoozi saying I should be here to supervise him. (Laughter) I know those days are coming and, by the grace of God, I promise him that I will be his very good supervisor. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I would like to very warmly thank -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have five minutes.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: No, that cannot be true.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a total of 30 minutes. So, I am the one who allots time.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, the most bereaved now should be heard. Unlike other times, my prayer for time is stronger this time. I pray that God will grant you the patience to accord me, as you have always done. (Laughter) Permit me to thank the Prime Minister - my very own, the Rt Hon.  Robinah Nabbanja – for moving this motion that I rise to support it with my heart and soul. Before I commence, let me also say “Thank you” to the Government here on your right for granting Dr Ssemogerere the kind of burial that he so deserved. I rise to second the motion although with an amendment at the end, among the prayers. It has become common – and I pray it continues – that when we lose such a dignified person who has served not only with commitment, but distinction, we name something in memory of such people. I pray that the powers that be find pleasure in naming a prime road after Dr Ssemogerere for the diligent service. A number of things have been said about Dr Ssemogerere that I do not want to repeat – and are factual - but I will make some few factual corrections. It is true that Dr Ssemogerere departed on 18 November 2022 and the nation has since been united in profound grief for a singular life, which more than sums up the mind of many for the kind of Uganda they aspire for. Any attempt 6406TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREto appraise the life of Dr Ssemogerere is odious an exercise and a tall order at the same time. I will only attempt, all the same, in the hope that I will do justice to his larger-than-life profile. I knew Dr Ssemogerere from childhood as a close friend to my late father and as our representative both in Parliament and the Constituent Assembly, representing the people of Busiro South constituency where I was born. From humble beginnings, he was the last of the eight children born to Joseph Bagenda Kapere, a fisherman – as mentioned by the Prime Minister – and Maria Louisa Namwendero on 11 February 1932 at Rumangi Catholic Mission in Ssese Islands, in the present-day Kalangala District.He came early to grief when he lost his father in 1933, only one year after his birth; he grew up under the Church of the Catholic White Sisters in Kisubi, where his mother worked as a domestic cook to support the young family. He would later attend St Mary’s College Kisubi, Makerere University, Allegheny College in Meadville, Pennsylvania and obtained a Doctorate in Public Administration, in addition to the Honorary Doctorate mentioned earlier by the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, Mahatma Gandhi remarkably stated that the best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in the service of others. I could not agree more, that the life and career of Dr Ssemogerere resonates accurately with Gandhi’s timeless discourse. In 1958, at the age of 27, he resigned from his comfortable teaching job to join and work with the late Rt Hon. Ben Kiwanuka here at Parliament.From 1961 to 1962, he was a member of the LEGCO where he represented the country with diligence and later, represented North Mengo in Parliament.It is also true that in 1969, together with the late Ben Kiwanuka, he was detained under the Public Order and Safety Act, passed by the regime in power in 1967.He has witnessed and personally taken the brunt of the state’s repression of political opposition and its reliance on security responses to political matters. I personally witnessed how he was brutalised with tear gas and bullets, while attending graduation parties of two Young Democrats he had helped to educate at Nkozi and Kamuli. I was in attendance, in addition to the brutality he suffered at the Constitutional Square during the quest for the restoration of multiparty democracy in Uganda. Dr Ssemogerere was again thrust into the deep affairs after the National Consultative Council (NCC) voted Prof. Lule out of office on 20 June 1979. All of you still have memories - if you were born then – of the famous “No Lule, no work,” and what followed at the current Constitutional Square. He continued to be a member of the Democratic Party for as long as political parties were allowed to operate, and I wish to make a correction; it is not true that while he served under the NRM Government, he was President of the Democratic Party, because political parties had been suspended until the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution under Article 269, that he fought with vigour until it was amended or repealed. The late Dr Ssemogerere would go on to lead the Opposition in Parliament under those very difficult circumstances where he served both as Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister of Defence. When the Government in power in the 1980s was being fought on several fronts by among others; the Rwenzururu Movement, the Uganda Freedom Movement (UFM), Uganda National Rescue Front, the Former Uganda National Army (FUNA) and then the National Resistance Army (NRA), Dr Ssemogerere resorted to serving as Leader of the Opposition and used that office to rescue countless lives from the infamous “panda gari”. [Mr Sseggona]6407THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022It will also be recalled that at some point in 1982, Dr Ssemogerere announced that he had opened up a black book in which he was compiling and cataloguing the excesses of the regime in power then. The innovation was a deterrent and helped to keep the regime in check even when some people ridiculed that endeavour. To him, it was an approach that would guarantee peace and stability.In 1994 to 1995 - and this has been omitted - he represented the people of Busiro in the Constitution-making process and greatly contributed to the making and development of constitutionalism, although he refused to sign the Constitution on account of the ban on political parties under the then Article 269 that he vigorously fought. Dr Ssemogerere who had served as Cabinet Minister under the Presidency of Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa and Gen. Yoweri Museveni resigned on 13 June 1995 and emerged as the joint Opposition candidate under the Inter-Political Forces Cooperation (IPFC), deputised by our very own Mama Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal Barbara. (Applause)He pushed for the agenda of returning to multiparty democracy – and I wish to emphasise - he was uniting with the people he had accused of rigging his election, and therefore, working to bring Uganda together again. The democrat in him pushed for the agenda of returning multiparty democracy in the country. He sought an amendment of the Constitution to repeal Article 269 and to demilitarise politics by scrapping army representation in Parliament and emphasised the implementation of the minimum economic recovery programme. He pursued litigation and numerous constitutional petitions as an alternative to violence. Mr Speaker, the late was a vanguard of democracy and rule of law, even in circumstances of extreme disagreement and adversity. When President Yusuf Lule was removed from office, by a vote of the National Consultative Council, Dr Ssemogerere brought the first of what would be the landmark constitutional petition, challenging the removal from office. Justices of the Constitutional Court agreed with him, although holding that the matter had been overtaken by events. Little wonder, Mr Speaker, that in the run up to the 2000 Referendum of political systems, when the Parliament passed the Referendum and Other Provisions Act without quorum, in contravention of the Constitution, Dr Ssemogerere, together with his two deputies, the Hon. Zachary Olum and Hon. Rainer Kafire, brought a constitutional petition seeking to nullify the Act and succeeded. In all, he would later bring five landmark constitutional cases, which set the stage for the return to multi-party politics and enhancement of our jurisprudence. Rightly, his death culminates into 90 years of a solid character of steadfast loyalty to the country, high level of integrity, a stellar record of service to the public and deep sense of nationalism, an unshakeable faith in God and the Church, as well as unquestionable commitment to the motherland.Dr Ssemogerere’s commitment to his country was critically underpinned by the understanding that beyond all manner of thought and idea, Uganda is bigger than any one individual or any one institution. To this, he tirelessly applied all his endeavours. I recall, with fondness, that in 1993, he chaired the committee for the coronation of His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, for which he was awarded a medal by His Majesty the Kabaka. To this end, I express my deepest condolences to his Majesty the King, on behalf of my family, the people of Busiro that he diligently represented in Parliament, and on behalf of the entire Opposition in Parliament, and on behalf of NUP. To the Sabasajja Kabaka , Gutusinze ayi Beene . Mr Speaker, I had occasion - as did some of the colleagues - to share in the disappointment of the man in the evening of his life. As such, I can attest to his sadness at the time of his 6408TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREdeath, in the state of affairs, in his country. He was particularly saddened at the increasing number of abductions and political intolerance in the country, by State operatives, the growing authoritarianism and the country’s weak institutions, the assault on constitutionalism and rule of law, the uncertainty arising out of the debate and political succession, economic stagnation and the youth bulge yet, without assurance of a stable future so immensely troubled him as did as many issues. This is a far cry from the Uganda he tirelessly worked for and applied himself to all his adult life. Mr Speaker, if any, in his memory and honour, this is a renewed call for deliberate sacrifice, on our part to deliver reforms to the electoral landscape and validate the legitimacy of the aspirations of our people to decide how they are led, to deliver equitable opportunity and services across the nation.Mr Speaker, it is well within my belief as it should be for all and sundry that we should extend condolences to the widow, my sister Prof. Dr Germina Namatovu Ssemogerere, Paul Ssemakula, Karoli Ssemogerere, Anna Namakula, Immaculate Kibuuka, and all other children, the many that he has mentored through various forms of mentorship and education, including those that have abandoned him for greener pastures in their political diaspora in the current Government. I, therefore, without reservation, second this motion, with amendments that the powers find it within their minds to name a befitting prime road in his memory and appreciation. I beg to submit. For God and my country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I thought you would thank me for giving you the time as requested.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: It so deserves and I do without reservation. Thank you, sir.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dean of Independents - if the Dean of Independents is not here, I do not have any prior information referred to my office appointing any of the Independents to replace Hon. Zijjan. Let me start with Mama Cecilia Ogwal. Because we have other business to do, we are displaying pictures of the late Hon. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere for our visitors and other people to see. I will give Mama Cecilia Ogwal three minutes; and for the rest, we shall use two minutes. I will pick about six Members.3.55MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I welcome you back from a long absence. I also want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to my fallen brother and friend. It is true that talking about Paul Ssemogerere in three minutes is very difficult, but I would like to summarise the life of Paul Ssemogerere in just three words. I would say: First, I got to know Paul Ssemogerere through Hon. Sam Kutesa and Hon. Kafumbe Mukasa. I knew him as a Democratic Party member, a Catholic, a Democrat and an activist in the restoration of the country at any stage in our political journey. Mr Speaker, Paul Ssemogerere started his journey from the deep end of the pool of politics. He started in the 1960s when Buganda was divided as far as the political opinion was concerned. The Baganda thought that the only way that we would drive Uganda to be a united country was by having an indirect election in 1960, 1961 and 1962 elections.However, Paul Ssemogerere who was known to be part of the nationalist forces resisted and as a result, those of us who wanted to know more about our history were excited to keep close to Paul Ssemogerere to learn more. He decided to mobilise the Democratic Party to defy the mood in Buganda. And in 1960, although the Baganda as such were not properly represented because they did not register, the Democratic party swept Buganda and indeed, for those of us who want to learn, and I always prefer to learn from [Mr Sseggona]6409THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022my past mistakes or strength, the Democratic Party gave away free the platform they had had shaped. Later on, the Uganda People’s Congress, being united with KY swept the entire ground politically. Mr Speaker, the same thing happened when NUP swept Buganda in last year’s election. I made a statement and said, “That spirit of KY has re-emerged in Buganda.” I do not think I was wrong. Buganda has always wanted something that it can identify itself with regarding the traditional values of Baganda. They saw it in the 1960s through KY and they have seen it again through NUP. Therefore, like it or love it, that is the way I have known it. I led a walk out of 47 Members in the Constituent Assembly to re-affirm the statement that, “Do not joke with Buganda when it comes to Federo.” I am a Langi from the village of Dokolo. I led that walk out of 47 Members; there were 66 Members of Buganda in the Constituent Assembly, but we only got 28 Baganda to join us in the walkout. If there is any complaint, let the Baganda complain about themselves first before they blame the others. How do I remember Paul Ssemogerere? There are two things: having been in power for 15 years when we went for the 1996 election, we were given 39 days to campaign and usher in a Government. In 39 days, we were able to get 27 per cent of the popular vote. Therefore, if we were to go by Paul Ssemogerere’s dream of proportional representation, the Opposition would have been 27 per cent represented in the Sixth Parliament. However, we were not represented and so, we lost out. Mr Speaker, let nobody underrate the value that Paul Ssemogerere had in the politics of Uganda. I am surprised that this Government woke up at the last minute and gave Paul Ssemogerere that glorious send out. Instead of giving him a glorious life before his departure, they gave him a glorious send off and this hurts me. There are very many Ssemogereres still with us. Please, look for them now. Do not wait to give them glorious send offs. That is my prayer. Remember Paul Ssemogerere as a reconciler and a man who always emerged whenever there was a problem. The mover and seconder have said that Paul Ssemogerere was arrested in September 1969 - for those of you who read history - and he was rescued by Idi Amin. However, Paul Ssemogerere was willing to work with us. He did not remember the arrest of the past and that is very important. Members, let us not shape our history by what happened yesterday. Let us look at today and let us walk forward depending on what we want Uganda to be. May God rest his soul in peace. (Applause)4.01MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dr Ssemogerere was the Minister of Foreign Affairs for over a decade and I was also an officer in the ministry. In paying tribute to him, I would like to thank him for the work he did as the Foreign Minister of Uganda. I would like to pay tribute to him for the protection he gave to Foreign Service Officers in the ministry. The Foreign Service Officer job is very competitive and it is one of the top civil service jobs in this country. When you join it, you hope to rise up to the ambassadorial level; from Grade VI to Grade I ambassadorial level. That is the wish, hope and aspiration of every Foreign Service Officer who joins Foreign Service. Dr Ssemogerere, as the Foreign Minister, protected this. Therefore, officers like me rose to become ambassadors and head Missions; we flew the Uganda flag to represent the country. These aspirations of Foreign Service Officers are almost dashed. Mr Speaker, I would like to plead to my Government and my President that when these young men join the Foreign Service Office, they aspire to be ambassadors; to reach at the top of their levels like the army do. You join the army and you rise to become a General. Like the doctors do, you rise to become a senior consultant. Like the police, you become an Inspector General of Police. However, these 6410TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREforeign officers are now reduced to working in headquarters or working as second –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable member. MR BABA: Lastly, the late Ssemogerere did not believe in “the winner takes it all.” He was a consensus builder. He was very consultative and this is the spirit we need in this country; consultative, consensus building and working together. I think this is one of the biggest legacies he left for us in this country. I thank you for giving me this opportunity, but please, let Government listen and give these young men an opportunity to rise to their positions and head Missions. At the moment, there is only one Ambassador; a career diplomat in Saudi Arabia. The rest are all political appointees. The President has the prerogative to appoint, but I appeal to my President to give these young men at least a quota or even a minimum representation in some of these Missions so that they can be satisfied in their career. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, there is a balance I am trying to get here. We have around three DP Members, we have some elders who worked with the late as well as the young. I am trying to balance the debate and so, you should be patient. For those who abandoned DP, please, be seated for now. (Laughter) 4.05MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very proud that today, I am talking about Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, who mentored most of the leaders you are seeing here. When we joined the Democratic Party, we actually joined the UYD, which was the youth wing of DP. He always trained us. What I remember about Dr Ssemogerere is that he was devoid of corruption. He was a very incorruptible person. Secondly, he was a down-to-earth man; a very humble man. You would not even think that he was once a Prime Minister of this country. Mr Speaker, one time he said, “If there is anything to die for, you should die fighting for your country.” I think whatever he did, in his capacity, he died fighting for the rights of the people of this country and for that, we shall remember him. I was reminding Mama Cecilia here that in the 1996 elections, I was with her and Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere in Otuke, but she could not remember and so, I reminded her. I was the one pushing the car of Dr Ssemogerere to mobilise the people to support him. I moved with him and I learned from him that if you want to do something, you should get determined to do it and you will always achieve it. Having pushed the car, I am rightly in this House as a Member of Parliament because of his training. (Applause) Lastly, Mr Speaker, he died thinking of Federalism. I heard Mama Cecilia talking about it; he was one of the 47 people who actually walked out from the Constituent Assembly. One of the things he died thinking about is how this country, one day, will attain a Federal status. He even gave an example of the German model. He loved it and thought that this is the only way this country can get balanced development. Mr Speaker, if it could be necessary, one day that topic could be brought to this Parliament for us to discuss and probably, give Ssemogerere the best he could achieve for this country; a Federal system of governance. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kinyamatama – the young people also know Mzee Kawanga. (Laughter)4.08MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving the young people an opportunity. [Mr Baba]6411THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022First, I rise to second the motion. As a young person, I have learnt a lot from his life of service to this country. The biggest attribute is the unifying factor that he was at the time Uganda was being torn apart by the politics at the time. Uganda came first in all his thoughts. He was very objective. He never considered religions, tribes or political parties. Therefore, Uganda is united because of his great effort during the Constituent Assembly. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jimmy Akena -4.10MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira East Division, Lira City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Uganda People’s Congress - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, order. Let us listen to one another. MR AKENA: We, in the Uganda People’s Congress, share in the grief, which has befallen DP and the family of the late Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere. The last conversation I had with him was on the 1996 elections. He was questioning how or whether my father totally supported his bid for the presidency. I assured him that the struggle for multiparty politics was forefront. It was clear that we do not have to agree on everything, but that so long as the common idea for a better Uganda is before us, we can work with anyone and in whatever circumstance. I am a little disappointed with the researchers in the Office of the Prime Minister on some of the elements in the tribute. One thing, which was not captured – there were many events, which happened towards the end of 1969. Firstly, the first President of Uganda and the King of Buganda passed away in November 1969. About a month later, at the delegates’ conference of UPC, where the matter of whether to go one party State or multiparty was prominent – the late President of Zambia and the late President of Tanzania attended that delegates’ conference. At the end of that conference, Milton Obote was shot at in Lugogo Stadium. After being shot at, a grenade was thrown, which did not explode. This is the context under which the then Minister of Internal Affairs issued Statutory Instrument No. 233 of 1969. I am sure the Attorney-General can guide us that a Statutory Instrument cannot ban political parties. The proof of this is that the 1980 elections were held under the 1967 Constitution, which was enacted by UPC. When UPC had the opportunity to write its own constitution, it did not put in any article like Article 269 and removed the political parties –(Inaudible)– hold the view surely -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, get another microphone, Honourable Colleague. You see, we have a few presidents in this House. (Laughter) MR AKENA: We in the UPC are confident and assured that we won the 1980 elections fair and square. The fact – and it is good that I have the Opposition here. I think it is very important: if we are to resolve questions of history – because we are all creatures of history – let us conclusively determine what happened in 1980. As far as I can follow, it is hearsay.  I have read the Hansards of the 1980s when Paul Ssemogerere was in this very Chamber. These issues did not go to the extent where people today say that the 1980 elections were rigged. What I can say, frankly and clearly, is that that gave opportunity to others who were ready and prepared to struggle for the instruments of power and to control the Government. It gave them the green light. As we stand today, we must lay a foundation, which will prevail whereby anyone who wants to lead this country should go with 6412TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREtheir manifesto, speak to the people, get their mandate and then, come and govern. This other route, I do not think is tenable. On that basis, we in UPC and the democrats hold that that is the route we must follow: the route of democracy. I am a staunch democrat. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, Honourable Colleagues – Please, I would want us to refocus the debate to what is happening today. When issues of 1980 elections came in, I saw some faces, which were smiling, getting wrinkles. (Laughter) Some of us were not born when you were in those elections. I was not yet born. Therefore, I do not want to preside over a debate over issues, which happened before I was born. - No, I have other things to read. I am looking at the future; if you did not sort your issues - Please, allow me to pick Hon. Mugole.4.15MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to a fallen hero, Dr Paul Ssemogerere. I remember that in 1995, around November – when I was a young man in the company of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the late Adonia Tiberondwa, the late Yona Kanyomozi and the late Patrick Mwondha, who used to call himself “a political bullet of Busoga” – I was presented to Dr Ssemogerere by Hon. Rainer Kafire, who was a former Member of Parliament. Dr Ssemogerere had said during the Inter-Political Forces Cooperation that if he became President, he would still be a minister for truth and reconciliation. Therefore, he was a conciliator. He wanted to form a ministry for truth and reconciliation. Because of the speech I made as a youth, the group headed by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who was the deputy by then,  appointed me as District Reconciliation Officer of Pallisa, if we won -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you among people who abandoned DP? MR MUGOLE: No. (Laughter) I came as a youth; that was Inter-Political Forces Cooperation. I was a youth who was brought by Hon. Rainer Kafire and Dr Ssemogerere appointed me - I can tell you that in Pallisa District, we got 55 per cent for Dr Ssemogerere. What made me leave – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on and conclude. What made you leave?MR MUGOLE: What made me leave is because Dr Ssemogerere was betrayed by his own people – even in Busiro, he was defeated. All of us that side turned and became NRM because his own people had betrayed him. He was a very good reconciliator, who wanted this country to be peaceful at all times. That is why I remember him. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nantongo - I think she is the only DP lady in the House. Let us listen to her.4.18MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Dr Ssemogerere, on behalf of all the young generation to which I belong. We were privileged to tap into the wisdom of the late, despite having come to leadership at a young age. The late was a mentor and a leader. He derived his joy in mentoring the young generation. We can all testify that many of us leaders in this Parliament, passed through the hands of the late Dr Ssemogerere.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please, let us have order. MS NANTONGO: Mr Speaker, sharing wisdom with the young generation was such a great deed.[Mr Akena]6413THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022My plea to leaders of this generation - our elders – please, take time to mentor the youth, take time to train the leaders of tomorrow. Many of us here are leaders because of the late. I implore the elders to create leaders of tomorrow; the leaders whom you would want to leave in charge of your children, who you are giving birth to right now. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you among the people who abandoned him? (Laughter)4.16MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to pay tribute to a great man, Dr Paul Ssemogerere. I will make comments about the time I knew him. Firstly, come 1980 during the general elections, that is when I first met him, when we were campaigning for Dr Joseph Opio Oloya, as our Guild President. Dr Ssemogerere was very calm. Even when we met in the Faculty of Agriculture, when Dr Adoko Nekyon was then prevented to speak on radio and we were accusing Dr Ssemogerere of not helping out, he remained calm. He said, because Dr Nekyon was a cousin to Dr Apollo Milton Obote, he chose to keep calm. That is when I saw what he stood for: truth and justice. He came to this House, even after we felt that the elections had been grabbed from under his feet - (Interjection)  - Yes, because -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, remain focused; you are protected.  (Laughter) People want to grab your microphone, the way they grabbed -MR BATARINGAYA: So, we remained focused and he also remained focused and came here to defend the right -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude honourable member. MR BATARINGAYA: The right that had voted him as a Member of Parliament. I just pray to this House that what Dr Ssemogerere stood for - truth and justice and peace in this country – that this Government, which I serve, and the rest of us live to make sure that there is always peaceful change of Government and we live in harmony. May his soul rest in eternal peace.4.22MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If PK Ssemogerere was an academy, many of us would have been part of that Academy.I studied with the late Ssemogerere’s son, Paul Ssemakula, in the same class at Namilyango College. The late, because we were from the same clan - Lugave clan - and from the islands, he called me his son. When we joined university, during our days, where I was a UYD and you, Mr Speaker, belonged somewhere else –(Laughter)Mr Speaker, we were part of this academy. When it came to 2011, I remember having a private conversation with the late Ssemogerere because I had developed political interest at a higher level. The issue was, “In which party are you going to contest?” Buvuma was an NRM stronghold. The late PK, after that conversation said, “If you are sure that you will win on an NRM ticket, you have my blessing.” Indeed, I won. Since that day, we have re – (Laughter)  Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please - We are listening to what transpired in a private conversation. You were not there to doubt anything.MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, since that day, I have been very comfortable where the late PK sent me, - that is in the NRM, because he gave me his blessing. What do we learn from this? Today, people can even change political parties 10 times for purposes of either going to Parliament or winning a local government election. Most of us even on this side are now in different political parties. 6414TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREThe late PK was a very good leader at a wrong time. Probably, people at that time never understood him and it is fortunate that for us who are around today, can understand and appreciate his contributions to this country. What message do we take? Today, politics is a matter of life and death; PK lost, but he never went to Court. In 2021, we had 106 Court petitions, specifically for Members of Parliament. Even the 4th person -(Member timed out.)4.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Ms Huda Oleru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I support the motion. Aware that the late Ssemogerere had aged, he was weak, but he had an immense ocean of experience and wisdom that was enough to be given to the young people. Therefore, his passing on means that the young people in this country have lost the massive experience that he was supposed to give. The late Dr Ssemogerere contested in 1996 in the West Nile Subregion, specifically in Arua, and got 93 per cent. Almost the whole of the North voted for Dr Ssemogerere. That night our young energetic men got all their bows and arrows fighting against the army who were in uniform and had guns, safeguarding the votes of Dr Ssemogerere. Whether you were young or old, whether you were 18 years - all of us were lined up to vote. Even if you were not 18; that was how we got 93 per cent in West Nile.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, are you saying that you got it by rigging? You said even those who were not of voting age voted.  (Laughter)MS OLERU: I am just trying to emphasise to you how the north supported the late Ssemogerere. To our dismay, we were betrayed here. At that time, the people of the West Nile wanted to walk up to Kampala to defend their votes. However, the person they were dying for was not supported where he came from. As if that was not enough, again, in 2001 when Dr Besigye contested, we all voted for him, but the people of the north were betrayed here. Therefore, the people of the north learnt a lesson and they have since changed. This time, we voted for the current Government and they pointed fingers and blamed us. For how long will the people of the north be betrayed?  You tell us to move to the left; when we move to the left, at night, you turn to the right. (Laughter) These are very painful experiences, but such incidents make us share what we went through. But what do we learn from the late Ssemogerere –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, switch on and conclude.MS OLERU: First of all, Ssemogerere said, “If I was betrayed this time, even if I had won in the whole of northern Uganda and other parts of eastern Uganda, I knew my votes were not enough to take me to State House. Therefore, I am not going to Court.” He never mobilised people to go against the Government that had won by that time, creating peace, which is very key and very important. May he continue to rest in peace. Thank you.4.31MR FELIX OKOT OGONG  (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the gallant son of Uganda and to pass my sympathies and condolences to his family, to Parliament, to the President and to Uganda at large. Mr Speaker, I first met the late in 1996, through Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. At that time, we were campaigning for him. I was an agent and the immediate agent for Hon. Cecilia Ogwal because we were all mobilised to support him. We were promised by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that Dr Ssemogerere was going to win. I met [Mr Migadde]6415THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022him in closed doors in Lira and I was really convinced that this time, we were going to take over power. The second point that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal made to us was that this was the opportunity for us from Lango to reconcile with Buganda; and we all supported Dr Ssemogerere, Lango voted for Dr ogerere at 97.6 per cent.That was the point of reconciliation and that is what Uganda needs right now. I would like to inform this Parliament that if we want peace in this country, we must agree to leave the past, live in the present and reconcile with everyone. The second point that we should note from Dr Ssemogerere is that he was a very humble man. I met him in a house, very simple, very humble and very sober.That time we were running up and down, but he was calm. Actually, one time, they lied to me - my sister Hon. Cecilia Ogwal told me that money is coming through Kenya. (Laughter)I was informed by my elder that you Lira boys, in the morning, money is coming in through Kenya. (Laughter) We all went everywhere and campaigned, but I did not see that money. Then, I went to my sister and asked, “When is the money coming?” She said it was a trick so that we all mobilise. (Laughter) But in the real sense, Uganda needs peace. The whole of the north voted for Ssemogerere even though he was not from the north. That means we are not sectarian. We gave Dr Besigye 97 per cent votes and he was not from the north. This time, we gave Museveni about 70 per cent votes - maybe next time, we can give him 97 per cent. Therefore, I would like to appeal to everyone in this country that the only message we should give our people is, let us do what our people want: Give them roads, give them peace, give them health services, give them schools, power - and you will get the votes; but do not stay here in Kampala, without giving them those services and you want to go back to them. That will be a catastrophe. Thank you, very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, let us use only two minutes so that I can give more of you a chance.4.36MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I hear such statements being spoken about Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, I feel proud to be a DP member; I feel special that I belong to the Democratic Party. I got little time to interact with the late, but he taught me two or three things. He told me, “Fred, disagreement does not mean hatred. It does not mean that you should hate the people you disagree with. You can disagree, but do not hate each other.” Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere handed over the leadership of DP when he was still alive. It is a challenge to some political party leaders here whom I will not mention. I think it should be a lesson that you can live to see your successors. Mr Speaker, I am talking about a gentleman who did not hold any grudge over the people he disagreed with. It is rumoured that Hon. Kawanga Ssemogerere won the 1980 election. I was not born by then; I was born on 25 November 1984, but that is what I have heard rumoured. However, Hon. Kawanga Ssemogerere did not choose the route other people choose. Others claimed that simply because the election was rigged, they went to the bush to defend the votes which were rigged. Even when they won the war, the victory was not given back to Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere. (Laughter) He humbled him – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A minute to conclude, honourable.MR KAYONDO: Mr Speaker, the people who took Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere’s guitar are here making praises over him whose victory they took and never returned to him. 6416TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREWhen I asked him, why did people choose another route, which you did not take, he told me, “Fred, however bad the economy of the jungle might be, the lion will not eat grass, not because it is proud, but that is its nature. My nature is peace and I will always remain peaceful.” Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere remained peaceful, even up to his death. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kayondo, you have to be very cautious. You want a man who was very peaceful to benefit from the proceeds of a war. He said he cannot go to shed blood; now you want those who went and fought to hand over? Abim and then I pick Youth Representative, Northern.4.39MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion to pay tribute to an admirable son of Uganda, the late Paul Ssemogerere, a political stalwart and a principled man who was admired by many. The late Ssemogerere was a very objective person and he provided objective checks and balances that contributed to the good governance of our country. He was an Opposition leader who was admired by many. I also admired him because I worked with him at a tender age when the people of Kotido voted me for being a very good person who completed education without getting derailed. I am speaking about a person who was my father and whom I admired very much. Mr Speaker, the late Ssemogerere was a very calm person and very cool headed. I think that is the reason he is said to be the longest serving DP President; he served from 1980 to 2005. He was also a man who was down-to-earth and he mentored very many, including some of us who are seated here. Therefore, we have lost a great man, we have lost a “Bible” and a dictionary for the country – (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Okot.4.42MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion on two accounts: one, that Hon. Dr Ssemogerere, even in his demise, will continue to be an inspiration to many young people who are interested in elective politics. Going by his biography, he was very consistent in participating in politics throughout his life and this speaks to his belief that through politics, we can develop our communities and we can unite our people, unlike now where many people look at politics as a means to divide and also cause hatred, which is very unfortunate. Secondly, Dr Ssemogerere also spoke about the need for deliberate mentorship programmes for young people – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Okupa.4.43MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and seconded by my brother who is the acting LOP today. I met Dr Ssemogerere in 1991 in St Leo’s College, Kyegobe, where I was a student in my A’ Level. He came there to address the students and I picked from him one thing that he told us, “Young people, while you are in school as  you  grow, make not just friends, but useful friends.” That has stuck with me; the friends I have are useful friends. Therefore, if you are my friend, you are a useful person and I picked this from Dr Ssemogerere.Come 1996 at Makerere University, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as mentioned earlier, mobilised us together with Dr Ssemogerere and I was one of the key campaigners at University Hall. After the campaign at Makerere University on that day, we went back to our halls jubilating. At around 11.30 p.m., I was in my room with my roommate Herbert Ouma. A fellow student came with a pistol threatening and asking us [Mr Kayondo]6417THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022why we supported Dr Ssemogerere, which was very unfortunate. We supported him because of his character, which has been described here. His wife, Professor Germina  was my lecturer at undergraduate and also my supervisor at post graduate – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Shartsi -4.45MS SHARTSI MUSHERURE (Independent, Mawogola North County Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mawogola North, Ssembabule District, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere. I grew up in a DP household and at a young age, I remembered talking to - When people would come home, I would ask them at the gate, “Which party do you belong to?” If they did not say DP, they did not enter. (Laughter) I was quite aware of the politics at that time even as a young person. The late Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere was a man who did not believe in violence, even when it was the only choice left to him. He was a democrat in an era that was not ripe for his methods. He was a patient man of God. We owe him a debt of gratitude. We are grateful to the NRM Government that gave him a befitting funeral and I hope that we will continue to espouse the ideas of truth and justice. May his soul rest in peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we have gone beyond the time I had allocated. I know each one of us wanted to talk about the late because he has made a very big contribution. Hon. Okupa is independent, Hon. Shartsi is independent so honourable colleagues, this is when my job becomes difficult here. You look at colleagues and see that each one was going to submit very important points. Unfortunately, we are limited by time. I wish I could get more time, I would allow all of you to submit. Honourable Colleagues, like you have all said, we have a lot of lessons to learn from the late. Personally, I never interacted with him physically, but I interacted with him emotionally and intellectually from the contributions he made to the country from his works. Of course, his name is well written into the annals of our history. As the generation that never lived through that time, I had wanted colleagues who were in the Constituent Assembly - and I think Hon. Anifa has moved out. Hon. Anifa was in the Constituent Assembly with the late, so, I had wanted to give her an opportunity before I could conclude. I do not see any other person who was in the Constituent Assembly. They were just a few. Let the one who was in the CA with the late - It is an opportunity – even you, Hon. Silas, 30 years from now, we shall say, “Those who were in the 11th Parliament.” (Laughter)4.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the first time, I would like to declare my interests here that, yes, I was in the CA, but I am also the mother-in-law to the Speaker. Therefore, when he gives me this opportunity, again, it makes some of you - and you know most of you refer to me as Ssenga. The spirit I have today – like my sister, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal with whom we were in the Constituent Assembly - The peaceful political tolerance that we have, we emulated from the late Dr Paul Ssemogerere.When you look at yourselves, as of today – politically – are you tolerant of your colleagues? Even when you look from the Opposition side to our side, we have heard that he was a peaceful man and a unifier. He wanted to see a peaceful and stable Uganda. Is it what we are seeing today? You keep saying: “We, the new generation, are tired of these old people.” What has the new generation emulated from us, who have been there? 6418TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERECan we take this opportunity, politically, to tolerate each other, though we come from different political ideologies? As of now, I do not see anybody, other than I, who is still where they started from.I see my brother-in-law, Hon. Akena. Where are you? What is happening this side? (Laughter) On that note, as a leader, Ssenga and somebody that has been there – the little changes you are seeing in me is what I am emulating: we must tolerate each other politically so that we live together. This country is for all of us. We can shape it together so that we survive together. Those who are advancing intolerance and violence, please, take it from me that it is high time we came together politically. We are here today, but other people will be here tomorrow. Some of us are lucky that we have been here for 30 years, but let us tolerate each other for the good of our country. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Colleagues, like I was saying, we have to learn from such great men and women; that is the reason we emulate the late Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere, who worked closely with the Government. Even other people working with the Government - as long as the purpose is serving our country - should live in harmony with each other.In my opinion, as long as the end result is Uganda becoming better, not being looked at as if you have betrayed someone because you have greeted the people they do not like. We sit in the canteen and laugh. Even in the bus, we laugh. However, when we get on the microphones, we start chopping each other.Hon. Ssemogerere never feared competition. Some of you, colleagues, are already crying that you have competitors. In politics, you have to have competition. If you utilise competition very well, it makes you better because it keeps you on your toes. Competition does not allow you to sleep. In the end, the public benefits. On both sides of the Government and Opposition, we have competition. The issue is which kind of competition do we have? Let us have constructive competition – a constructive exchange of ideas – the likes of the late Dr Ssemogerere. Another thing is that the size of the late Ssemogerere was evidence of healthy living. To live up to age of 90 requires a size like his. We have to work on our bodies. We have to work hard. You can see my Prime Minister here. The moment she gets on the treadmill, you cannot dare her; I have seen her. Therefore, let us try to live healthily. Let us look after our bodies so that we live longer; it is the only way our people will benefit from us. Otherwise, if you were to walk around for just 10 metres and you are already panting, especially the young people –(Laughter)- Please, stop mentioning names here. (Laughter)I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – the Government – and the Opposition for working together to pay tribute to this great statesman. You are setting a very good example to the nation – that on matters of national priority, you can work together and this is very important especially for the young generation. Honourable Members, I now put the question to the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to Pay Tribute to the late Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere for His Eminent and Dedicated Service to the Republic of Uganda. (Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, extract the resolutions and pass them on to the family. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your indulgence, I would like to point out that the motion did not stop at that. I moved an amendment on naming a prime road after the late Dr Ssemogerere. The question has not been put on that. I request that you be pleased to put that question for completeness. Thank you very much. [Ms Kawooya]6419THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I have seen many roads named after very many people. I do not think it is usually through such motions. By the time Government brings such a motion - if you work very closely with your sister, this can be done without even putting the question. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can comment on that and we move forward. We do not need Parliamentary resolutions to name roads after great people. Let us go to the next item. - I have already put the question.  Honourable colleague, please.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, motions are not dealt with that way; a motion is resolved here. I appreciate your guidance and it is good guidance from you as a leader. However, the way we deal with motions here is that a question is put on the motion and it is decided. I would implore you- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that is what I have done. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: No. You have not put the question on the second leg of the motion for it to be handled by Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, call the next item.PRESENTATION OF ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT, MAY 2021 TO MAY 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -4.58THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure to submit before this House, an Action Taken Report –(Interruption)MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising – and I beg for your indulgence – is on the issue that Hon. Sseggona had raised and you had asked the Prime Minister to respond. Dr Ssemogerere was a peaceful man; I do not want us to leave here divided. This is a very simple thing, which can be done; it is not some difficult thing. So, procedurally, wouldn’t it be right for the Prime Minister to just give a nod and we move peacefully?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, I have spoken to the LOP - if you were watching - and we have reconciled positions. We will handle it in our own cubicles. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please proceed. However, she can still comment on it because I have not stopped her.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, as a national leader, let me guide that there are procedures of having roads named after people and we shall use those same procedures. I move under Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure to submit before this House an Action Taken Report on Resolutions of the First Session of the 11th Parliament – that is from May 2021 to May 2022. The other day, I spoke about the foreword. So, I will now definitely go to the objectives. The objective of this report is to provide information to Parliament on action taken by Ministries, Departments and Agencies in fulfilment of Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure. Scope Mr Speaker, we considered the resolutions of the 11th Parliament from May 2021 to May 2022 and engaged the responsible Ministries, Departments and Agencies on the actions taken. These ministries include:    i. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;ii. The Ministry of Works and Transport; 6420TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREiii. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;iv. The Ministry of Health;v. The Ministry of Education and Sports; vi. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;vii. The Ministry of Internal Affairs; viii. The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs;ix. The Ministry for the Presidency; x. The Ministry of Justice and Constitution Affairs; xi. The Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance;xii. The Office of the Prime Minister; andxiii. The Ministry of Water and – I think they have forgotten the Ministry of Lands.Methodology In considering the resolutions, we interacted with the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. We considered the same through Cabinet – as I had told you last Thursday – and held meetings with different Ministries, Departments and Agencies. We also reviewed a number of documents; we used the Hansard, correspondences from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament to my Office, the Government Chief Whip and resolutions of Parliament. We also used the correspondences from relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies. Chapter Two The chapter clearly outlines the date, title, resolution and action taken by the relevant ministries. However, some of the pending resolutions require legislation and policy formulation. Government is in the process of initiating the necessary legislation and policies. Mr Speaker, it is at this time that I request you to allow the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to present – and I request that Members be patient because it is a big volume. Therefore, I request you to allow the minister to start; then the Minister of Health, in that order. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I really want to first thank you for the detailed work – I have seen and read the whole document. I have seen some of the resolutions were just captured without looking at the recommendations. While on some, you captured both the resolution and recommendations to some ministries. In my mind, I had wanted to propose to the House that we should first go back and each minister submits independently so that we are able – because, you see these resolutions – No, the Prime Minister has done good work; no one can doubt that because the duty of the Prime Minister is to coordinate; you have coordinated the Government and the reports are ready. However, how do we present them? - Because on the Hansard, it was recorded as a substantive item. It must have a substantive action taken report as per the rules; otherwise, they will all be lost in there and you will never track these reports on any single day. For the ones, which are ready, I would propose that we amend item No.5 so that we have 5(i) Justice, 5(ii) Health…. so that in future, we are able to track these presentations. We will be able say this action report for Justice was under item 5(i); otherwise, you will never get it. We need the Hansard, which will be used 100 years from now. Then, after each minister has presented, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we shall give an opportunity to the shadow minister because we are now on serious action - we had a lot of debate; these are resolutions of Parliament. [Ms Nabbanja]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6421THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022These are real checks and balances we want to focus on. Otherwise, even if you do not, during the debate, Members are going to raise it. The Leader of the Opposition gave me notice that he already prepared. When you submitted, the shadow ministers also prepared. Colleagues, I do not know whether this can work well.5.07MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you for this very important report. I see it as one of the tools for accountability, for us to account for what we have done and said here. I have read through the report and it is only focusing on the resolutions, which is okay. However, rule 220, requires that you also pay attention to the recommendations. There are very critical recommendations, that this House has often passed through the committee reports. In my view, this report does not capture everything that we would have hoped to see as Members of Parliament. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To some extent, that was on our side - how we extracted the resolutions that we told them to implement. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, ministers are members of Parliament; they are here with us. They participate in approving and adopting the reports. Let us work as a team, to avoid saying that you did not send me the report, when the report is on the Hansard. I think one should always access the report on the Hansard and look at the recommendations.I saw the response from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; it is very detailed and even that for the Ministry of Health, by the way. They went, recommendation by recommendation, but some stopped at a resolution, which is just a heading; and they focused only on that. That way, we fail to get a good report. Hon. Oboth Oboth, what do you say about this, as a senior? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you speak now, your people keep quiet. You always want to speak their views.5.09THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, I think, I am tempted to agree with your guidance. Can you protect me from -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected, honourable. MR OBOTH: I do not want to mention the name of his constituency, because it sounds strange. Mr Speaker, you have guided us, especially on our part we were purely responding to issues raised by Parliament. But as you have said, we could have gone beyond just the resolution. I think even my ministry‘- I do not know whether we have any recommendations, but I think it is additional guidance that would enrich the debate and then we have a fully-fledged report. I would go with your guidance. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 5.10MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, thank you. I have always agreed with my younger brother, Hon. Jacob Oboth, for over 20 years. That is why even in law school, I would give him my books to read. (Laughter) My point of departure this afternoon is, whereas the minister seeks to hide under your concession that probably the extraction might not have captured everything, the rules are instructional and the rules are saying both resolutions and recommendations. I think it is also compelling on the part of humility for us to say, “Yes, we all missed out on something when the matter came up and when the instruction went out”. Now that the presiding officer has noticed, it is upon us to look at the specific action points taken by the ministries and we point out where a particular ministry has complied with the rules - we dispose of that. Where a ministry has not complied with the rules, we give them time to go and make good whatever has not been sorted. 6422TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERE That way we will not lose time, but at the same time, will comply with our rules by looking at both recommendations and resolutions. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The problem is that the recommendations were part of the resolutions. I want us to agree on a clear way that will benefit all of us.5.13MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister’s task, which was given, is on our iPads. The other time, the presiding officer directed that we should read and internalise, and we read.I would like to implore the Prime Minister and the various ministries, when coming back with a report; let them indicate the date Parliament passed the resolutions. Upon indicating the date, let them tell us the actions that were taken. Let them be specific on the timeframe of that particular action. For example, if they are saying the Minister of works and Transport has been directed to work on a particular road, let them tell us the timeframe that the Government thinks the work should have started. What we are seeing here is quite open. They are not specific. They should be specific, so that it guides the honourable members.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, rule 220 says, “…following the resolutions or recommendations”. However, we want a rich response. If one says, “I chose the resolutions”, the resolutions are where we usually have very many issues covered. To me, as a team which works together - because Parliament and the Executive work together - if you look at the resolution, particularly the one for Ministry of Works, what they did on the resolution of Parliament urging the Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. Resolution one: the action taken - that is recommendation one. They extracted recommendation two - action taken, recommendation three - action taken. It is very detailed and very rich; it helps you. For example, if they had said a resolution of Parliament, urging the Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. If they say, “We are amending the Act”, they would have answered you; that is an action, but does it help? It does not. We want to go deeper and interact; see what is implementable and be honest with each other. Parliament will also see - maybe there are resolutions we passed and they are very difficult to implement. We should be honest with each other. It helps us; even next time when passing resolutions, we will know how to pass only what can be implemented; what cannot be passed will be left out. Hon. Abdu, you had wanted to guide? Let Hon. Ssewungu finish and then you give final guidance.5.16MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for giving us what she has laid today. As the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation, under rule 179, most of the business and actions given here almost relate to the committee I am chairing currently, when my boss is not around. I would like to thank you very much that you have facilitated this committee very well because we cannot make any report without making on-spot assessment. Under UNRA, let me just quote from the Prime Minister’s Statement: “UNRA is working with the Ministry of Works and Transport to provide alternative material for traffic signs such as fiber glass, for sign plates.”However, the moment you do not provide a specific time when this objective or action will be achieved, then as a Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, [Mr Sseggona]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6423THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022under rule 179, we get a problem because we have to go, assess and report back to Parliament. Unfortunately, the framers of these rules, which is us, were right. Where Government fails, it is right for them to come back and say, give us more time or we have failed to do this and they withdraw the promise. I support you, as you have stated, that we need that specific assurance from the Prime Minister because after adopting this action plan, the next step, under your leadership and the guidance, is that you are going to give us support to go and prove whether what these people were asking for actually took place.When you talk about cattle rustling and giving people back their cattle, we have to assess who got theirs, those that were stolen and those that were given to some other people. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.18MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think these are two issues which are different.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me reassure the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that, you are suffering for nothing. It is the minister who is supposed to bring the action report. Stop burdening yourself. We are not frustrating you; we are working with you and I appreciate the fact that you have coordinated. The rule is very clear because this resolution was falling under a certain docket. You have done your work and brought them together and they have given a good report, but we need it well structured so that it can be well tracked and well followed.Otherwise, when we open a debate here - there are things I have seen among the actions taken. When you say you will inform the President, it has been five months and you have not informed him. It means you have not taken any action. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am trying to ensure that we have a debate, which will help us. Otherwise, we shall have a quarrel when we go into some of these issues. MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the problem originates within our rules when we use resolutions and/or recommendations. Parliaments act through resolutions. Once a recommendation has been adopted by the House, it is no longer a recommendation. It is a resolution. That is where the Clerk’s office should be faulted. When you are extracting a Parliamentary decision, just know that once the House has resolved, it is no longer a recommendation of a committee. It is a Parliamentary resolution. You cannot say, “These were the recommendations of Parliament and these were the resolutions of Parliament”. Do not divorce the two. If there is a report - And I know where the problem comes from; in standalone motions, sometimes they say, “Parliament hereby resolves” and that is the only resolution they extract. However, if there is a parliamentary report, which has made recommendations and those recommendations are from the committee to the House - I would like to emphasise that parliamentary committee recommendations are recommendations to the House. Once the House acts on them by adoption, they are no longer recommendations. They are now resolutions and the Clerk’s office should be clear on that. When communicating, you need to see the report, which was adopted, what were the recommendations, transmit or record them as resolutions of Parliament then we will not have this confusion. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This speaks to what I said at the beginning; that on our side, we should have communicated. Also, on the side of Cabinet, it is taking a convenient route; you are behaving as if you are not Members of Parliament. 6424TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREHere, ministers are in Parliament. Whether you attended or not, you are supposed to access the Hansard and access the report. We are not like countries where ministers do not sit in Parliament. So, when you are a Member of Parliament and you say a report was not communicated to me, I did not access the Hansard - But again, it can be a good defence on your side. We should have extracted more details and shared them. If it is a report, we pick out the report and the Hansard so that you see how the debate was moving.We will conclude with Hon. Cecilia and then I guide on the next step. 5.23MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is a convergent point; where we have always operated on different lanes. The Government has always taken it that Parliament is not appreciative of its position. Now with this initiative, Mr Speaker, you are actually moving closer to the Executive and saying, “We are ready to support you in ensuring that whatever you say in Parliament is implemented.” This is where the Government should have appreciated. In addition, the Prime Minister and the Executive should know that the Commission has put in place the operational office of the Leader of Government Business, which operates purely on what is discussed in Parliament, its recommendations or resolutions, as we have been told, and passes them on to different ministries. Therefore, whether the minister is here or not, the Office of the Leader of Government Business and the Chief Whip are supposed to capture all those details and pass them on to the different ministries. I would like to say that this is a very good initiative you have brought and I hope that the Prime Minister will operate at a better level from now on. I thank you.MS NABBANJA: I take this opportunity to thank you and my grandson, Hon. Abdu Katuntu. That is why you have seen me stand up because I know that the recommendations of Parliament are made into resolutions of Parliament. I know that the Clerk is a seasoned lawyer who knows all the operations of this House because he has been here longer than all of us. He is the one who gave us those resolutions, which we acted on. However, I take your concerns that we needed to have details. There are those ministries that did exactly what you are talking about. Why don’t we handle those? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are still waiting for my guidance; I have not concluded and now you are concluding on my behalf. I am the presiding officer.5.26MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. Given the explanation from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I posed this question before, but I would like you to clarify today. If we borrow practice from other areas where Government - for example, in the Judiciary, when a presiding Judge or Magistrate decides on a case, the Registrars or whoever can extract, but before that, it is brought back to that judicial officer to sign it off. This has been the missing link here in Parliament; that these resolutions are extracted from somewhere. I believe they bypass the Office of the Speaker - the presiding officer who sat here, who formulated and knows the kind of resolution that has been made. So, I am kindly requesting, if it pleases you, that going forward, no resolution should actually leave this Parliament, if it is not certified under the hand of the Speaker, who will preside over that session. That way, we are not going to miss anything. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues. The clerk and team really have done a wonderful job. You see, sometimes these details go into so much detail, the [The Deputy Speaker]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6425THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022clerk has been a Member of Parliament who knows that indeed, whether you are a minister, whether you attended or not, you go with the whole resolution and the whole report. It is not that this was failure to do work, but it was a summary, yet we are demanding for a detail. I talked to him earlier on and we agreed that we are going to work on a detail and we will submit it. However, luckily enough, like I said earlier on and the Prime Minister has repeated, there are those ministries, which gave a detailed response on the issues. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you want us to follow what is in your book. I can see - Yes, I had mentioned it. I said the LOP and the shadow ministers. Yes, I thought the first represent and then the shadow minister comes and -MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, there is no controversy in this. And like I mentioned earlier, we are not into this for politics, but for quality of governance in this country. When I - (Interjection) - yes and service delivery. When the matter was raised and the Prime Minister uploaded her statement, we moved and responded and I even served her with a copies of our responses because to me, it is a better style; it is neat. Like I mentioned, the Prime Minister and her ministers are going to give us the details. What I had done was to prepare an executive summary before I go into the details of each. But if it is the guidance of the Speaker and concurrence of the House, I am equally at peace with presenting after they have presented. I have no problem. Mine was only an executive summary before my ministers go into the details of the respective ministries. I am okay with either approach.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. So, we are starting with the Ministry of Justice. And LOP, I hope your response is also uploaded on the system for colleagues to access. So, can the Clerk help us and give them a copy? Please technical people of the LOP, ensure that it is uploaded for colleagues to follow up. Oh, is it there?5.30THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, this is the Action Taken Report from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I said item 2.1. We start with a title. This was-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record, this is item 5(i), for record purposes.MR KIRYOWA: Yes, item 5(i).THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The response of the LOP is also uploaded. What is the title, LOP? If we could get the title - Sorry, Attorney-General, give us the title so that Members can easily track it on Alfresco.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We did file a response; it is named, “Response from the Opposition on the Action Taken Report from the Prime Minister, May 2021 to May 2022.”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, colleagues, you should be able now to access it. It is uploaded; Attorney-General, continue.MR KIRYOWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue to address here is that Parliament made a resolution urging the Government to address the challenges facing the girl child and children in general in the digital era. The first item that Parliament resolved was the Government to implement the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2019 and the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014. The action taken, Mr Speaker, was that the Trafficking in Persons Act is being implemented in accordance with the law that is by prosecution of persons who are found guilty of such offences. However, the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014 was subject of a constitutional petition, where the Court found that section 1(2) on the definition of pornography was unconstitutional. An appeal against this decision has been filed by the Attorney-General’s Chambers. 6426TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREThe implementation of the Anti-Pornography Act has, therefore, been made difficult by the deletion of the definition of pornography.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Attorney-General, you see for such reports, you have to read verbatim. Yes.MR KIRYOWA: Much obliged. Thank you. Then resolution two is the Attorney-General to present to Parliament the status of implementation of the Penal Code Act, intended to protect both the girls and the boy child against female genital mutilation, mutilation, rape, defilement, child marriage and other forms of child abuse. Action takenThe very nature of the Penal Code Act is to provide offences and punishment for those offences. Therefore, successful implementation of the Penal Code Act requires securing convictions of offences committed. Mr Speaker, the table at the next page shows the statistics of the offences that have been reported, and how they have been handled to conviction. The first column shows the offences, which are rape, aggravated defilement and simple defilement. For example, you have newly registered cases and case files for rape. We had 1,036 new cases, and then by gender disaggregation of the case files that we have, we now have 1,130 cases of adult males and four females, 38 of juveniles who are boys and two male persons with disabilities (PWDS) and one female. The cases that are sanctioned - these are cases that have been investigated and sanctioned for trial by the DPP. We have 590 cases of rape that have been sanctioned in the period under question. The cases on mention altogether as at May 2022 were 1,761. The ones that were consented to - that is work in progress and completed - were 10 and then the ones that we requested for further inquiries were 302. The ones under hearing are 323 and the ones that are taken for committal - all these offences are capital, Mr Speaker, and these offences have to be committed to the High Court. Those ones that have been sent for committal are 432. The convicted cases in the period under issue were 49; that is May 2021 to May 2022. We had 49 convictions of males and six convictions of females. We had one acquittal from males, and none for the females. These are by gender segregation. We had 14 withdrawals; those are cases that were filed, had been sanctioned, and along the way, we find they could not get a conviction and have been withdrawn. Then we have nine cases that were dismissed. These cases are dismissed for want of prosecution, say probably you do not get the witnesses coming to court. So, those were nine that were dismissed. We have none that were revised and, therefore, the closed files for that period were 209. I don’t know whether I should read all the tables.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, capture the whole table and all details on the Hansard.MR KIRYOWA: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, the Office of the DPP continues - now this is just an addition- the office of the DPP continues to prosecute cases related to the girl child. For FGM, which was not included in the table here - it was a long table with all the offenses; so, I think in desegregating them, we missed that. We had seven cases in the period 2021 after May and 40 cases in 2022 of (FGM) female genital mutilation. These offences were mainly committed in the areas in Nakonyen village in Katikekile, Tapac Subcounty, which is a grazing area in in the Karamoja Subregion.We also had, in November 2022, which is recent, a report now, one conviction of a person; an elderly woman - a 46 year old woman who was sentenced to four years in prison for procuring four girls aged 13 to 15 years to acts of female genital mutilation.The next issue was Parliament’s resolution urging the Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace and security [Mr Kiryowa]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6427THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022in the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Bugisu and Sebei. The specific resolution in this regard to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was that the Government verifies and pays compensation to the people who have lost lives, livestock and property in cattle.This resolution was sent to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That is how it was captured, but we understood it to mean the people who lost lives, livestock and property, in as far as the wars were concerned. That is what the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was handling.We have received from Parliament Shs 50 billion towards the compensation. By the end of the Financial Year 2021/2022, we had paid out Shs 49,345,708,595 and we had Shs 654,291,405, which was bounced payments. We have set out, in the tables below, the amounts of the war debt claimants paid by each district. We regularly submit to Parliament the list of names - and we did it before the end of the financial year - of the particular names of persons who –(Interruption) MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Actually, there is no mix up, but I would like to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General. We seem to be reading from different texts. Beyond the figures they have paid for in compensation - that is Shs 49 billion and so on - there is nothing more than that. I do not know where he is reading the rest from. I seek clarification. Even the table that he is talking about - because immediately after that, he goes to resolution number four. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, did you update your report? The one uploaded has the details. It is on the screen. MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, on what the Attorney-General is reading, there are two areas; here on the Floor of Parliament, issues were raised on cattle rustling whereby the Karamojong were crossing to the Acholi, Lango and Teso regions raiding the cattle of the communities. The other issue is about the compensation of the lost animals. The resolution passed by Parliament - what the Attorney-General is supposed to answer - is about the cattle rustling, not the compensation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. That cannot be for the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General is answering compensation; cattle rustling is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.     MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, if you read the headings, he talked of cattle rustling. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he mentioned that and also clarified, when he said that he meant compensation. So, we shall make that correction on the record. That is why we shall debate the action taken. Attorney-General, what the Leader of the Opposition said is that you served him a different document yet his responses are based on the old document. However, we shall come to that later, Leader of the Opposition. We can give you time to respond later. For now, use your iPad. MR KIRYOWA: Mr Speaker, right under the action taken, we say; Government commenced compensation of cattle lost in Acholi, Lango and Teso Subregion. To date, 17,000 claimants have been paid a total of Shs 49 billion with Shs 654,000,291 unspent, because of bounced payments as shown below. Therefore, here, we have only shown the monies that have been paid. For the ones that bounced, that money was taken back to the Consolidated Fund.We have set out the payments for all the regions district by district, but we have the details of even the individuals who were paid. We laid it on the Table of Parliament before the close of the financial year.    6428TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREAccording to Article 79 of the Constitution, a law be enacted to adequately and specifically criminalise, penalise and make raiding a very expensive and consequential venture to all perpetrators and abettors. There is already an offence in the Penal Code Act that deals with cattle rustling, but Government is currently reviewing the Penal Code Act. Therefore, there is an opportunity to study the possibility of introducing other offences related to cattle rustling in the Penal Code Act. Nonetheless, it is already an offence under the law. I beg to submit.Mr Speaker, those were the only resolutions that came to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, like you guided, a resolution like this one will be handled by three or four ministries. Each one of them will be speaking to their specific aspect and I will speak to the law. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The way we usually do it is that when we are making the final pronouncement - because that is from the presiding officer - we have one ministry that coordinates. You do not work in silos. Otherwise, you are going to have four ministers presenting one resolution; you will never finish. That will mean that also the Leader of the Opposition has to respond four times and we debate four times on the same resolution. Government - since you are one - is well integrated. We have a lead ministry, lead agency, and then you bring in others to support you on the Floor, once we have a debate. Otherwise, if we do not do it that way, then it will mean you work in silos, which will make our work very difficult here. It is okay, if it has been done that way for now. MR KATUNTU: The learned Attorney-General says that a resolution could be affecting two to three ministries, and each is speaking on a particular part of that resolution. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that if there are three ministries speaking to that particular point, they present all their responses together?  Then, we can have a response. If there is some other ministry coming to present, maybe two days later, related to the same point and another one, two other days later, it does not make sense. We shall be moving back and forth. Therefore, we need to identify the point that the Attorney-General has been raising. If there are other ministries on that, they should present and then you can have one response. Wouldn’t that be a neat way of doing it, Mr Speaker? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure, I think it would be much better. It is closely related to what I said. If it had been joined, he would read it then the other ministers would support in terms of responses. However, for now, if the others are ready, they can also submit and we conclude on this matter. Government Chief Whip, do you want to say something? 4.46THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, as stated by the Attorney-General, the only aspect in terms of his responses that has gone and has been integrated between Internal Affairs and Defence is the issue of cattle rustling. The responses from Defence and Internal Affairs have been integrated and Defence will take the lead, supported by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then they had better present on this specific resolution because what Hon. Abdu Katuntu is proposing is, if the resolution of that day has been shared by around three ministers in terms of responses, let all of them present and then we finish. MR KIRYOWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We will have the Minister of Defence present, and then the Ministry of Agriculture, on what has been done on cattle rustling and then we can deal with it. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, do not mind; this is a learning curve; it is the first time we are doing this. Therefore, we are going [Mr Kiryowa]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6429THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022to come out better. But I hope, Hon. Abdu, as the chair for the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, you are identifying areas which we need to clean up in our rules; we need to come out clearly on these grey areas.5.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Your guidance is in sync with what we had prepared, regarding the issue of insecurity in Karamoja and it makes sense that we do not scatter these related aspects to speak at once. That said, my job, in this respect, was to make a preamble of the spectrum of measures that are included in our response and then allow Defence to give the detail, which I do now, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is that a preamble? Thank you, General. Now ‘General’ Oboth.5.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the resolution of Parliament urging Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace, security, and stability in the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Bugisu and Sebei. I request those who are uploading it to put- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we check from page 29?MR OBOTH: Yes, under the Ministry of Defence. The resolution is cast out there. That Government, in accordance with Articles 26, 209, 212 and 222 of the Constitution of Uganda, urgently and adequately deploys security forces in Karamoja and districts bordering it from the subregions of Teso, Lango Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei, with adequate logistical material and financial resources to stop cattle rustling that is illegally depriving people of their right to own property and subjecting people to torture, cruel and inhuman treatment, and thereby restore peace and security. Actions takena. Mr Speaker, the UPDF has made commensurately robust deployment by enhancing troop levels. These have been further boosted by local defence personnel from various training wings of the UPDF. With these enhancements, each district in Karamoja has a force for zonal security supported by the intelligence.b. In the neighbouring subregions, the UPDF has enhanced troop levels in Kitgum, Agago, Abim, Otuke, Kapelebyong, Katakwi, Kumi, Bulambuli, Kween and Bukwo, to prevent and curtail incursions by cattle rustlers in the respective districts.c. While recognising that adequate security calls for the participation of the public, as well as local leaders, we have integrated into our operations, the anti-cattle rustling mobilisation and sensitisation. Important to note is that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, has traversed the subregions, leading the mindset change effort by encouraging the population to engage in other productive activities, such as goat rearing.Resolution No.2Relatedly, that Government, in accordance with Article 17B to D of the Constitution, reinstates the local defence forces from the affected districts as a permanent auxiliary force under the command and coordination of the UPDF, with improved management and remuneration, trained, armed and deployed within their villages, communities to support and work with the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force in deterring raids, protecting lives and property, plus tracking and recovering of stolen animals from the armed raiders.6430TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREAction takenWith regard to the reinstatement of local defence forces between April and June 2022, the UPDF deliberately trained and passed out 14,440 local defence forces that are deployed in Karamoja and the neighbouring affected districts. Resolution No.3 That Government takes steps to immediately remove all armed herdsmen moving within the sub regions of Teso, Lango Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei and Karamoja including the armed Turkana, Tuposa and the Pokot. Action takenWith the re-launch of the Usalama kwa wote Operations in July 2021, 631 guns were covered by May 2022, within the reporting period. Resolution No. 4Government, with immediate effect and in accordance with Article 22 of the Constitution, re-launches and accelerates a comprehensive and sustained disarmament process in the Karamoja subregion to remove all illegal guns from civilians and raiders. Action takenUsalama kwa wote Operations were re-launched in July 2021 and is still ongoing to date. Resolution No.5Government, within six months from the date of this resolution and in accordance with Article 22 of the Constitution, implements a mechanism to prevent the re-acquisition and proliferation of illegal guns within Karamoja subregion and from the neighbouring countries. Action taken Mr Speaker, on 6 April 2022, the Governments of Uganda and Kenya signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Defence and Security, particularly on combating cross-border animal rustling, small arms proliferation, as well as other transnational crimes. The UPDF, in collaboration with the local leadership, and their counterparts, especially across in Kenya, established a joint mechanism for prevention and curtailing arms proliferation and these include the formation of joint peace committees to provide a warning and resolve any emerging and existential cross-border security issues. In addition, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Kenya Defence Forces (KDF) maintain liaison officers on both sides of the border. The UPDF has deployed three officers in the Loki Chogiyo in Turkana County, Kachelipa in West Pokot County, and the Kapsokwan in Bungoma County in Kenya, while Kenya Defense Forces officers are in Moroto, Amudat and Tororo respectively. Similar initiatives are in the offing with the Government of South Sudan.Related to this, the reporting on the security and cattle rustling, I would like, with your permission, to invite the Minister for Agriculture, because he has an item on the same. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, colleagues, we cannot come in between. Please, the minister is reading, you will get time to debate. No, you cannot, before they finish. What if it is at the end? Colleagues, when a minister is presenting, allow them to finish the presentation. You cannot say you are not getting something, when they have not concluded their presentation. Then once it is done, and you find something missing, you can come and say, but I did not hear this.MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, my understanding was that the presentation that has been done by the Attorney-General is well married to the one of the Internal Affairs and Defense. I do not know whether the one which is also coming is a part of that, because it will be good if you allow that after that team presents, we react [Mr Oboth]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6431THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022and respond to those issues. Then another set comes on. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, each group has an area of interest. I know Hon. Silas’s interest is mainly compensation –(Laughter) Then you have another one whose interest is cattle rustling, and then you have another one whose interest is restocking. All of them came out of one debate, one resolution. Let the Minister for Agriculture conclude. Honourable minister, how many pages do you have? I was meant to finish at 6.00 p.m. No, I have another official engagement. Hon. Sseggona has reminded you that he is not a casual laborer –(Laughter) 5.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino Kyakulaga): Mr Speaker, on the same resolution, there is a specific resolution relevant to my ministry and the resolution is, Government, in a measure to deter raids, and is monitoring, tracking and recovery of any raided or stolen livestock, urgently implements through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The programme to brand and tag all livestock in Teso, Lango, Sebei, Bugisu and Karamoja sub region. This is on page 21 of the booklet. Action taken: The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in collaboration with the Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity Studies, has developed a Livestock Identification and Traceability System codenamed (LITS), to address cattle rustling, theft and animal health. The system is based on radio frequency intermitted device (RFID) technology, enabled by satellite.It involves tagging the livestock with a paired ear tag. One of the ear tags is an ordinary ear tag and the other is -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone, honourable.MR BWINO: Thank you. It involves tagging the livestock with a paired ear tag - an ordinary tag and an electronic tag, in which a chip is embedded. The chip bears all the information about the animal, i.e., the bio data of the animal, ownership and location. It also has other attributes:1. The cheap enables identifying the individual animal. This information can be read by a handheld electronic reader and is also reflected at the district, as well as at the central server located at the ministry headquarters.2. It enables real-time tracking of the movement of the livestock. It also enables investigation and tracing the livestock wherever they are, in case of being rustled or stolen. The chip also provides information on livestock population and livestock off take or sale or change of hands. It, therefore, gives a trends analysis for each individual animal.3. The system enables authorities to trace origins of specific animal diseases, by the trace back of the source animals, thereby being able to control disease from source and prevent further spread. Mr Speaker, the Livestock Identification and Traceability System software and hardware requirements have been developed- to a plan and budget for piloting, and later implementing. The system is being developed for submission to Cabinet and Parliament for consideration. The system is planned to be implemented starting July 2023. In the meantime, we are formulating a law on the Livestock Identification and Traceability System that will make it mandatory for all livestock to be registered, tagged and reflected on the National Livestock database. The principles for the Bill are being developed for consideration by Cabinet. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I can see the Minister for Education is seated comfortably: you also have a response on that same issue, if you check your 6432TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREpage 95. I am reading from your document, on page 95 of the booklet.6.04THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, thank you. I beg that you allow me a few minutes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is here, titled, “Resolution of Parliament urging Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace. ” Have you seen it? DR MUYINGO: I have seen it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had something else in connection with what the Attorney-General had presented. The resolution was that Government provides free compulsory primary and secondary education to Karamoja for a period of 10 years, as a mindset change strategy, against the culture of cattle rustling and raiding. Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, the action taken is that the Ministry for Education, implements a policy of free universal primary and secondary education in all parts of the country, including Karamoja. In addition, Government has put in place the following interventions in the Karamoja subregion:1. Construction of boarding facilities, saving the children long distances of walking; 2. Schools feeding programme, where food is distributed to schools, thereby attracting learners to schools;3. Construction of water facilities (valley dams and tanks), thereby saving children from searching for water for animals and creating time for them to be in school;4. Coding of schools; the ministry has coded more schools in the Karamoja region; and5. The ministry has further constructed seed schools in this subregion.The date when the resolution was taken was 3 November 2021. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. LOP?MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like I did say yesterday, this is a very good innovation, created by our rules. You can see how you have compelled Government to get back to work. I would like to thank both the Prime Minister and her ministers for the presentations. In more particular terms, I must express my excitement to see my brother, Hon. Fred Bwino, and hear the presentation he has made this afternoon. (Laughter) I have known the name – and the name is very big – but I had not had the occasion to meet him. It is a pleasure that I have met him. (Laughter)Secondly, like you guided earlier, this being the first time, I am not in any way going to stand and blame honourable colleagues for anything that I may feel is wanting. I can only applaud the effort.I did serve a response to the Prime Minister earlier and I noticed that, subsequently, the version that we had been supplied with has been amended. I am equally excited at the amendment because it gives more details, which we were demanding for.Therefore, having uploaded the latest version at 3.35 p.m., we could not make detailed responses, now, in answer to the abridged version. We, therefore, request for time to come back with no –(Interjection) - I want to be factual. If you looked at our response, you would see that we are out for facts. I request, therefore, that you grant us time to respond to the abridged version. In particular, I would like to interest the Minister of Education and Sports - outside Parliament, he is my son - Hon. Dr Muyingo, to address his mind to the resolution calling for compulsory education. Compulsory – implying compulsion because the education they are talking about has been in place -[The Deputy Speaker]ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6433THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, you are going into a response. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: You are brilliant, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) So, kindly, grant my request. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. The kind of work we want to do - because I remember the Speaker, when presiding here, told you our target. We would want to get very clearly structured responses from the ministers and clearly structured alternatives from the Opposition and then have a meeting of minds on these issues. So, the document -  Hon. Silas, I know you have issues for your area, but it is always important that these two sides guide us in what we do because we belong to either of the two sides – please, allow the presiding officer to do his work. Am I protected? (Laughter) I am seeking protection from the honourable colleague because he is my brother. We are very good friends. I wanted him to understand the extent to which I am feeling pain and pressure from him.So, I am going to grant you up to Tuesday next week. Use this weekend to go through, work on responses and then we will come and debate this issue. I will not open debate now before we hear the alternative. Secondly, honourable colleagues, now that you have all these responses, use this weekend to read the resolutions you made here. Update yourselves. Go back to the Hansard, look at the debate and then when we come here – you just do not wait for a minister because we are not going to be reading each and everything.I will tell a minister to summarise because I assume that you read because it has been uploaded on the system. So, I will tell a minister to summarise and we will move on. So, debate on Item 5(a) is deferred to Tuesday.I have a special request – I know the assignment our Minister of Health has. She wanted to present but her statement is long. Honourable minister, I will give you a maximum of 10 minutes to do a summary of your action taken report. That will be captured as Item 5(b) – Action Taken Report from the Ministry of Health.6.13THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, thank you for the 10 minutes. I had two resolutions. One of them was on non-communicable diseases and the other was on Malaria. The first was for Government to provide free drugs to Ugandans suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure – page 33. The three resolutions were:1. Free screening and treatment for retinopathy – that is the problem with the eye – free blood lipid control and screening for early signs of diabetes-related kidney disease and treatment; 2. Free drugs to Ugandans suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure; and3. Prioritise investments in non-communicable diseases to provide free drugs to Ugandan suffering from such diseases. I will not go through the preamble, but allow me to go straight to the action on page 34. The screening for diabetes and high blood pressure-related retinopathy is a service offered free of charge by ophthalmologists and ophthalmic clinical officers in all public health facilities from health center IV and above. However, the emphasis of the ministry is primary prevention of diabetes and hypertension and early treatment to prevent complications such as retinopathy. When it has already occurred, treatment is surgical -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, save us that detail. Just focus on the action.6434TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGEREREDR ACENG: The treatment is provided currently in three facilities: Mulago, Mengo, and Ruharo in Mbarara. This is because it requires specialised equipment, which is not available in all the facilities. In private, it is provided in Agarwal and ASG hospitals. Government has a plan to provide this missing equipment, which is contained in our eye care plan 2020/2025. It will require resources. Two, was about testing for blood cholesterol. Mr Speaker, riding on the HIV funds, we have made equipment for testing blood cholesterol available from the Health Center for upwards and the testing is free of charge. However, there is a shortage of reagents, which are not always available. And we are appealing to Parliament to make this available, on page 35. The total quantified laboratory requirement is Shs 960 billion. The total provided by the Government of Uganda and partners is Shs 540 billion. And the existing gap - I beg to amend that - is Shs 420 billion. So, because of that existing gap, we usually have shortages. The third one was screening for early signs of diabetes related kidney diseases, which is also available in all regional referrals, general hospitals and health centre IVs. And again, it may not be carried out routinely, as is required because of challenges of reagents and supplies. However, equipment has been made available in the facilities. Mr Speaker, on the issue of free drugs to Ugandans suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure, a budget line was created in the National Medical Stores on page 37, and the current funding that is being provided is Shs 3 billion. And they have provided a breakdown in millions of Uganda shillings for each of the non-communicable diseases - hypertension, diabetes, mental health, sickle cell disease and oral morphine.Mr Speaker, the other was to prioritise investments in non-communicable diseases to provide free drugs. And what we have done is provide tools for advocacy so that we can mobilise funding from partners and also carry out operational research that is on page 38, resolution No. 3 three. Mr Speaker, on page 39 - that was the second issue on Malaria: Resolutions of Parliament urging Government to strengthen efforts to prevent control and eliminate transmission of malaria. And under that, Parliament gave us three resolutions to undertake. The first one was to increase the health sector budget for prevention, control and elimination of Malaria. Mr Speaker, the estimated budget for next Financial Year 2022/2023 is Shs 319 billion. We have secured $212 million from Government and partners. There is an existing gap of $107 million, meaning, we have not yet met the requirements. However, the increase has been progressive.Mr Speaker, on page 41, I have provided the Malaria funding projections for the medium-term expenditure framework from 2022 up to 2025. The second one was to track all Malaria support and presidential pledges. Mr Speaker, I have highlighted the presidential pledges and where they are on pages 41-42. And on page 43, I provided a tracking of funding for Malaria, starting with the Global Fund from 2015 to 2023 and the rest, I provide narratives because some partners are not as consistent as the Global Fund. They provide and then they phase off.On Page 44, the resolution was that through the Ministry of Health, we adapt and spearhead clear multi-sectoral and relevant stakeholder coordinated mechanisms. And I have broken down what partners starting from Government, private sector, civil society, academia, development partners are doing in the field of Malaria. And that continues up to page 45. The last one was to scale up preventive programmes and innovations. And on page 46, I have broken down what we are doing to scale up programmes and the new innovations that we have come up with. Mr Speaker, I thank you.ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT6435THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 24 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This is indeed, detailed. Honourable colleagues, I am receiving notes, very salient issues are being raised, which you would want to raise but these issues, I am saying, just give them for Tuesday. These are the issues we are going to address on Tuesday, when we have time, when more of your colleagues are here., Colleagues, what we are learning from this is - you see, these are resolutions made on different days and different times. Now, we shouldn’t allow backlog. When we say three months, let the minister come here, within three months, and explain. When we say two months, let it be two months: you come here you show us - otherwise, when we bundle up each and everything trying to clear the backlog, you even rush, and end up not doing very good work - though we are going to try and do  very good work. I want to thank you.6.22MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): I would like to thank you very much. Mr Speaker. As a Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation, I would like to inform this House - I do not know why my boss in Express never revealed this; we even met him as a committee. Some of these areas have already been handled in our committee and we are about to table the report, only that our committee cannot table a report without the on-spot assessment.For example, when we talk about compensation he met us and he gave us the list and we are going to look at those individuals in those particular districts and how they got the cattle and the beneficiaries because you find - I do not want to reveal what is in our report. Therefore, Mr Speaker, like Hon. Muyingo, my doctor, knows that when we talk about education, we have to go there. If he talks about boarding schools - and we are meeting him on Tuesday with the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation – if you say, ‘boarding sections in Karamoja’, we have to go there and see it; not mere seeing them here, and that is the role of our committee. So, Mr Speaker, we shall be beneficial at the right time. I will report to you, before Tuesday, the areas we have handled as a committee so that even when they attract debate, we will be patient a bit to Table our report as a committee by giving factual evidence of what was promised under our rule 179. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But Hon. Ssewungu, the reporting mechanism under rule 179 is different from the one of rule 220; they are totally different. So, if they report to the committee that side, they are still required to come and present here. And the beauty of here, for example, you might find that under your committee, you do not have MPs who are affected - Hon. Silas or Hon. Rose Obiga does not sit there, but these are MPs on the ground. Therefore, when you talk of what you have done in Teso or Lango, these colleagues who raised it are there; the ones who raised the issues, and they are going to insist and go there. Then also, your committee can help us and verify, and continue doing its oversight. But now this is the oversight of the whole House, where we would want Members who are not part of that committee to be able to come and say, no, they did it or they didn’t do it. Therefore, I do not want us to mix the two. Otherwise, your committee is doing a good job, and vice chairman, I know you are doing a good job with your committee. Colleagues, I, adjourn the House – Yes, point of procedure, Hon. Silas?MR AOGON: Thank you for being a very good Speaker, Mr Speaker. Tomorrow, I will be travelling to South Sudan representing this House because I am in the top six of volleyball. And I will miss the debate yet it is in my heart to participate. This is a very serious matter, Mr Speaker. I would like to be able to ask the question myself, particularly to the Attorney-General, as to what exactly happened to the issues of compensation for Kumi District. This is because I will not be here on that day. I beg that you allow me to ask the question. 6436TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR PAUL KAWANGA SSEMWOGERERETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have already asked it. MR AOGON: Attorney-General, can you respond? What happened to Kumi’s cattle compensation? The people are asking. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, are you in position to respond? He might perform badly in Juba and say it is because we refused to answer. MR KIRYOWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had two districts and as you see on the list that we presented, they had zero; those are the districts of Kumi and Omoro. We sent them the cards on which they were supposed to put the details. When the cards were returned, they were totally messed up; so, we sent them back and sent them a new bundle. Therefore, the money that had been allocated to Kumi and Omoro – unfortunately, because the financial year was ending – we sent it back to other districts, which had completed the registration. There are two districts which did not receive any and they are on the list; Omoro and Kumi.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Attorney-General. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. (The House rose_ at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT