


PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 23 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You may have read and heard on the social media that Mr Vincent Opio Lukone has died. That is the information that has been circulating on social media. 

Let me state, for the record, that I was in hospital up to about midday today with him and he is not dead. Please correct that. Inform whoever wants to know that Vincent Opio Lukone is not dead. He is sick in intensive care but he is alive. Please, let me correct that so that the misinformation does not begin to dominate the social media and cause panic in the community where he comes from. Thank you. Let us proceed with business.

There were Members who wanted to raise matters. If they are not here, let us proceed. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO HIRE POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL STUDENTS FROM MAKERERE COLLEGE OF HEALTH SCIENCES TO FILL THE STAFFING GAPS IN MULAGO HOSPITAL

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are still compiling a comprehensive statement on the proposal to hire postgraduate medical students from Makerere College of Health Sciences to fill the staffing gaps in Mulago Hospital. I request that we present this statement next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it just miswritten here? I thought you are the Minister of State for Primary Health. You are now speaking for finance. Oh, it is health and finance. Okay, thank you.

DR MORIKU: It is an issue of health and it has financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When will you be ready?

DR MORIKU: I will be ready next week on Wednesday. Give us a week from now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How urgent was the matter when it was raised?

DR MORIKU: The matter is urgent but given the preparation and consultation needed, we thought we could be given more time. If Wednesday is too far, maybe we could think of Tuesday next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since there is no objection from the Members, you have to work with what you have proposed. What day of the week did you say?

DR MORIKU: Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tuesday next week. Let us have this statement on item 3(1) on Tuesday.

DR MORIKU: Thank you. 

2.12
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is in form of seeking clarification. What is going to happen - because the urgent matter was that the students who were on internship were on strike because of their unpaid allowances? What is going to happen with the service that they have been providing? Are they still working or not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you give a short statement on that and then the written one will come on Tuesday next week? What is this all about; the allowances for these students?

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, as I mentioned before, there was a consultative meeting involving many stakeholders, namely the Makerere College of Health Sciences, Makerere University staff, the medical postgraduate students and officials from the Ministries of Health and Education. We are still making reports and holding further consultative meetings. 

Given the importance of the matter, as I said, we could still make this statement on Tuesday. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, as you are aware, postgraduate medical students are students of Makerere University. By the nature of their training, these trainings are done in the regional referral hospitals. The fact that Makerere University is closed it automatically implies that the students have to be away from the university as well.

However, the point here is that the medical profession is unique. You train and provide service to the hospitals at the same time. There was a call and a need to have the students and the College of Health Sciences operational. Those are the meetings and the consultations that we are making with the stakeholders. We will bring the statement to this Floor of Parliament as requested. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, is that satisfactory? Can we proceed? Thank you. On Tuesday, that statement should come.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON EXPLANATION ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE DREDGING LICENCE UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE RIVERS ACT (1907) WAS ISSUED TO MANGO TREE GROUP LIMITED ON 4 MAY 2016 BY THE THEN MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see the name of the former Minister of Water here. I do not know what the background is, but -  

2.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter has been presented to Cabinet, because it is a matter of principle; where a minister has served in a ministry and is required to come and give a statement, much as he is no longer in that ministry; and more so, where that minister was not given an opportunity to appear before a committee just in case he had some personal explanation to make himself.

Cabinet has considered this and we would like to request that still, the minister in charge brings the statement to explain what the Members of Parliament required, because that minister is at liberty to consult the former ministers who served in that ministry. Prof. Kamuntu served as a minister not as an individual in that ministry. It is unprecedented where a minister is requested to make a statement about his/her actions made while still serving in that ministry.

In other words, Parliament will receive the information they want from the minister. I request that we are given the opportunity, next week, for the ministry to come and explain. The former minister can give further explanation but as a matter of principle, I think it will be procedurally correct that the one holding the portfolio makes the statement. Therefore, this is the status quo, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to say something, honourable member?

2.17
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am perplexed by the Government Chief Whip’s explanation because this matter came onto the Order Paper, I believe, with the knowledge and consent of the minister who still remains a minister regardless of the portfolio he holds.

I am of the considered opinion and view that the minister, who is present in the House, can make the explanation and I am sure he has it, for the Members to debate. The business of postponing matters under the guise that hon. Kamuntu is no longer the minister of that sector should not be allowed. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that he be allowed to present the statement for Members to debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is this a matter for personal explanation of a Member of the House or it is an institutional question that requires a response from the institution that was responsible for this? If we are individualising it then that will be another matter that would be like an inquiry that now he is not there but because he did something, we are going to look for him as an individual. 

However, if it is an institutional question of the ministry, then I think it will still be the right minister in charge of that sector to give that explanation because I am sure the records are there. I think that is the way to go. Otherwise, you are now asking the person of hon. Kamuntu, not the minister. It might make more sense if the substantive minister responsible for the sector comes and explains to the House what went wrong with this particular issue. If the minister who was there then wants to add something, he can do so but not as the main vehicle for this discussion.

If hon. Kamuntu was not appointed a minister, I do not know what we were going to do. If he was not a minister in another sector, would we have looked for him in Sheema? However, the minister responsible for this sector should come with this statement and explain what is required by this House. That could be a proper way to proceed. Thank you.

Madam Chief Whip, will the statement be ready tomorrow?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I request that the minister brings the statement on Tuesday. I will give him tomorrow and Friday to consult and then come with the statement on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we take this statement from the minister responsible for the sector on Tuesday? Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPULSORY MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION

2.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Azuba Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am waiting for the papers, which are still being printed within this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been uploaded into the iPads? The procedure is that you submit the document you would like to present to the Clerk’s Office so that it is put on the iPads and Members can go through it.

MS NTEGE: It would have been on the iPads but it is not yet there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are preparing hardcopies? Honourable members, do we wait for these copies? The statement is on compulsory motor vehicle inspection. Would that require us to read something or can we listen to the minister? If you are able to proceed, do so. If you are also waiting for the papers then we all wait. (Laughter)

MS NTEGE: Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN AGAINST GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will come back to this statement from the minister as soon as the document is available to the Members.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: She has called item 3(iv). Mr Speaker, I talked to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and she told me that she is ready. I am surprised that she is not yet here and I am sorry for that. 

I would like to propose that you allow us to handle item 4; laying of papers, as I look for the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come and give her statement. For sure, I consulted her and she told me she is ready. Therefore, she must be within the precincts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, we expected four statements from you and none is forthcoming.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am sorry, Sir. I will handle my people from -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know today that we have Prime Minister’s Question Time as well. Therefore, let us move quickly. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

A) THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Bill? Can somebody lay that Bill? Does anyone have a copy of this Bill? Let us finish with this, please.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendments Bill, 2015 as it was saved in the Ninth Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this Bill was already property of this House except it was in the Ninth Parliament and this business was saved for this Parliament. We ordered for a reprint of the Bill so that Members of the Tenth Parliament can have access to it and it has been done.

The procedure we have adopted is to receive them as statements for laying on the Table and it is hereby forwarded to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It is so committed for them to handle within the timeframe of the rules and report appropriately.

B) SUB-COUNTY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any commissioner here to lay these reports?

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following districts:

    1. Arivu Sub-County, Arua district
    2. Abim Sub-County, Abim District
    3. Apeduru Sub-County, Amuria District
    4. Kapelebyong Sub-County, Amuria District
    5. Engari Sub-County
    6. Mutunda Sub-County 
    7. Kiryadongo Sub-County
    8. Mazimasa Sub-County
    9. Kigulya Division in Masindi Municipal Council
    10. Buliisa Sub-county -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen Buliisa. Are you following from the -

MR BAHATI: I am following the -
    11. Busiriba Sub-County 
    12. Petta Sub-County
    13. Nabuyoga Sub-County in Tororo District
    14. Sop Sop Sub-County 
    15. Magola Sub-County in Tororo District
    16. Rukoki Sub-County 
    17. Ogom Sub-County 
    18. Lokopo Sub-County 
    19. Katerera Sub-County 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you just reading those that are easy to read? You have skipped one.

MR BAHATI: Which one?

    20. Kobulubulu Sub-County 
    21. Kakure Sub-County 
    22. Bukedea Sub-County 
    23. Lwampanga Sub-County 
    24. Nakitoma Sub-County 
    25. Palaro Sub-County 
    26. Katerera sub-County
    27. Kichwamba Sub-County and;
    28. Butunduzi Sub-County in Kyenjojo District 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those sub-county financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. All the 25 reports stand committed to the appropriate Committee on Local Government Accounts to handle expeditiously and report back.

2.30
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand up as a former Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. In my tenure and indeed that of those before me, because I did look at the record, there was no opportunity for the committee to look at the sub-county accounts throughout the country. 

I have also had an opportunity to interact with those who came after me but the situation still remains the same. Every year, the minister responsible actually lays those papers on the Table. The Local Government Accounts Committee can consider the district accounts, municipal accounts and town council accounts and that alone is too much for this committee.

Therefore, I had suggested and I would request the minister responsible - not this one responsible for laying papers but the Ministers responsible for Finance and maybe Local Government to re-examine the law to see if we can get the district public accounts committees to look into the affairs of sub-counties or the gombololas because it is not possible here.

We just accumulate that stationery every year and we never have time to go through them, let alone debate. The framers of the law intended that Parliament should be able to look into these reports but practically it is not possible, Mr Speaker. It is certainly not possible.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister responsible is if we can look at the law that constitutes the district public accounts committees, facilitate them so that they have the capacity to go throughout the sub-counties and examine those books rather than them coming to Parliament and Parliament does not have time to look through them.

2.33
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would be of a different view. Yes, it is a challenge if we looked at the local government because we have the ministry, the districts, municipal councils, town councils and sub-counties. Given the challenge we have, if we looked at our district public accounts committees, I think there is a problem with capacity and professionalism. There are challenges.

I was of the view that, like we have always done, we can split the committees. We can have a committee in charge of local government town councils and sub-counties. We are even many Members now. Having a committee of 30 people in a committee of Parliament is quite a big number.

We can split the Public Accounts Committee into two or three with one handling the districts, the other handling municipalities and town councils and the third handling sub-counties. That way we would be able to make some progress. 

I think there are also other committees that may be having challenges like the one my colleague, hon. Katuntu, is chairing. We have COSASE with over 100 entities. These are so many. We can also split that to have COSASE handling commissions and another group handling state enterprises. 

However, to take it down to the district level, we still have challenges given the fact that we do not have the qualifications for the councillors and most of the district councils with the exception of Kampala, which can have professional people.

However, if you looked at Serere, we even had a challenge of having the vice chairperson of the council due to lack of qualifications. I would think that we would be able to handle it at the parliamentary level by splitting the committees since there are more Members of Parliament. Thank you.

2.35
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Considering how many sub-counties we have at the moment and how many sub-counties, town councils, and municipalities there were at the time the Constitution was framed, I think it is impractical now that sub-county reports can be considered by Parliament.

Therefore, what is important at this point in time is going back to the spirit of the law. How can these sub-counties and town councils be brought back to what had been intended at that point in time?

I do not think that it is a question of splitting up committees. On average, each committee takes over UShs 800 million a year. That will be another burden to the taxpayer. Therefore, I suggest that what is important is reviewing the law and seeing how best these reports can be considered at this point in time. 

2.36
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I would like to support hon. Katuntu by giving my experience because I worked with local government for over 18 years. This business of coming with post-mortem accounts, say of 2012/2013 or 2013/2014 does not help local governments. By the time you come to find out the loss, money is already spent and there is no work done. 

We should come up with better methods of helping local governments if we are really serious. Bringing them here in the thousands – some district accounts committees do not have the capacity. The concerned committee of Parliament should come up with a new proposal on how best those sub-counties and town councils can be considered. 

Mr Speaker, we have over 238 town councils and 248 town boards. As I speak, over 40 are becoming town councils soon. These are the sources of expenditure for service delivery that we are talking about. If we are to be serious, something must be done about how those accounts should be taken seriously. 

As I said, we are talking of 2012/2013 and 2013/2014. When shall we talk about 2014/2015 and 2015/2016? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are a series of things that we need to consider when we are looking at this. The first issue is, why is this report being laid today? Was it ready before or has it just been prepared? This is the first time that it is coming to Parliament and this is an audit done by the Auditor-General. Nobody else does it. 

Therefore, by saying the year 2012 - has the Auditor-General just completed and submitted this audit report? That is one thing to consider because if it was done earlier, it would have been brought to this Parliament earlier. It is also possible that it could have also just come out of the Office of the Auditor-General. 

That aside, the process is that the Auditor-General finishes his work under the law, for the institutions that the Public Accounts Committee oversees. The interrogations begin immediately we receive the report. That is the procedure in the law. For example, if there is a query in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs from the Auditor-General, that will go straight to PAC and the matter will be examined immediately. 

However, that is not the same with the local governments because local government accounts committees will first go to the District Public Accounts Committee who will first, compile their own report, submit a copy to council and another to the minister. In other words, the District Public Accounts Committee would have already examined the books and they are the basis for the query by the Auditor-General. 

What is supposed to happen under the law is that, a compilation of all these reports from the district public accounts committees – when they come to the minister, and this is section 88 of the Local Government Act, the minister makes a compilation of all those findings from the district public accounts committees, which are then brought to Parliament in volumes but not these ones that we are listing here. These are not for Parliament.

The ones we are receiving here are for information and they go to the committee. When these queries come from the minister stating how they have been handled, that is when the appropriate committee of Parliament picks them up. That is how the law was structured to work.

If you may recall the last time we engaged with the Minister for Local Government, we said that something should be done to review the status of the law. Either we are not applying it properly or there are gaps in the law that need to be filled. That is where we are. For now, we will receive the reports and send them to the committee but the committee has nothing to do because the same audit report should have been sent to the district public accounts committee.

The district public accounts committee cannot be examining the same accounts that Parliament is also examining. It does not make sense.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think we need to be speaking from the same wavelength.

One, the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament and is answerable to Parliament. All the reports of the Auditor-General must come here. Once these reports come here, we have to act on them and that is constitutional.

However, under the Local Government Act, there is also another parallel process that the Speaker is trying to explain. I will give the House an example of the time I was chairperson of that committee. We had innovated a system where instead of us meeting in Kampala, we examined all the local government accounts at the local level. We would go to Kigezi, sit in Kabale and call all the district municipalities, town councils and sub-county chiefs and we would go through all the challenges that had been raised in the Auditor-General’s report.

However, we found that due to the time we had, there was no way we would come from the district up to the sub-county. It was literally not possible. As such, we would look at districts and sometimes municipalities and left the town councils unattended to.

The biggest challenge we have is service delivery at local level, which is not monitored properly and that is the crux of the matter. We must, therefore, harmonise the law so that we have in clear terms and say well, Parliament has nothing to do with this and therefore, the Auditor-General will be responsible maybe to a minister or to a district public accounts committee –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. When you look at the opinion of the Auditor-General about these sub-counties, it is a question of the Public Finance Management Act.

The responsibility of appropriating money, what it does, when it is checked and opinions made is with Members of Parliament. We must check whether the money has done the right thing.

What the Auditor-General does is to form an opinion and it is only the institution of Parliament that can drop that query and nobody else. The Auditor-General audits the money that Parliament has appropriated to see whether it has done a good job or not. 

The best way to go about this is to revise our Rules of Procedure, to maybe expand the Local Government Accounts Committee because it is constitutional. Only Parliament can drop a query from the Auditor-General. As such, when we amend the rules, we must expand the number of the members on the Committee on Local Government Accounts so that we can deal with the work otherwise, it will be a problem when we delegate our duty to another entity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think that we are speaking about the same thing. The point is simple, what does Parliament examine? In the case of central government agencies, Parliament examines the direct reports from the Auditor-General. However, in the case of local governments, it examines that report that has been brought by the minister. 

The report by the minister implies that there are investigations already done by the district public accounts committees. Therefore, you do not expect sub-county reports to be examined by Parliament, no. If this was the case, it would impose an absurdity because how many sub-counties do you have? When will Parliament have the time to examine accounts of central government agencies and then come and examine the accounts of sub-counties and secondary schools? Where will that time be? 

The law anticipated this and that is why they split the roles. It states that Parliament will examine the queries after the minister has compiled them from the districts and brought to the queries to Parliament, not the raw things that we have been listing here. You will not have the time. The law could not have stated that. That would be absurd. 

Let us proceed. I think we should have another debate on this matter when the time is there. Right now, we have just laid the papers and hon. Katuntu commented and we are generating a debate. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I was a district councillor for five years and we looked at how the accounts of the district would be managed. Monies were coming from the central Government to the district account and we were doing the allocations at the district level. 

However, the conflict that comes in is that there is a change in policy by Government that development budget monies are now being sent directly to the sub-county accounts. That is where our concern is. 

If it was the way we used to allocate resources at the district level to the sub-counties and so on – the law envisaged that district public accounts committees would do a good job and submit the report that would form part of the report of the Auditor-General and then we debate it in Parliament. That would be sufficient. 

However, in this case, sub-counties are now managing very big votes. My sub-county received over Shs 400 million and that is so big compared to what we used to receive previously – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of procedure but isn’t that part of the debate?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am bringing forward to correct the anomalies as soon as possible is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to pronounce ourselves on how to proceed as we leave the law to take its course? We should take precaution to ensure that those monies are not abused. 

I would like to state that the proposal of hon. Kakooza is the best immediate remedy; to expand the Local Government Accounts Committee so that we have a team of people that pays attention to that money before the money is abused. Isn’t that procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it can only be something that is capable of being implemented if a debate is carried out and resolutions are passed. As of now, what can I say? There is no decision by this House and I am saying that the only way we can arrive at a proper decision is when we hold a debate on this subject either by a proposal to amend the Local Government Act or not. 

If we are talking about how these things work, the Local Government Act itself contains delegations commanded by this Parliament. The responsibility was given to Parliament but Parliament, through the Local Government Act, has delegated some of its work to the district public accounts committees. As such, there is no conflict here. The issue is how Parliament should do what it should do. That is where we are, otherwise we will not move. 

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, this afternoon we have Ms Akuma Suzan, Clerk to Council, Oyam District Local Government. She is here to observe our proceedings. Please join me in welcoming her. (Applause) 

We also have a delegation of Tororo District youth leaders from various parts of Tororo District. They are here to observe the proceedings. They are represented by the following: hon. Oboth Oboth, hon. Yeri Apollo Ofwono, hon. Angura Fred, hon. Okoth Otieno, hon. Nyakecho Annet, hon. Sarah Achieng and hon. Asamo Helen. They are here to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) 

2.52
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Regarding your proposal that there is need to hold debate on this subject, I agree with you. In the last Parliament, I was on the Committee of Rules, Discipline and Privileges and this House was concerned about the backlog in the Local Government Accounts Committee. We were given a task to find out why there was backlog. We moved to a number of districts. Unfortunately, we were not able to present our report. Our report was on the Order Paper up to 9 May and I believe that they should have saved that report. 

Mr Speaker, I have learnt from my former chairperson that the report was saved. There were so many issues that were raised in that report, including the fact that there is duplication of work; the same witnesses called by the district public account committees are again called to Parliament. In the process, we waste a lot of tax payers’ money. 

Mr Speaker, that report was well prepared and we were on the Order Paper several times. I pray that the Committee on Rules comes up with that report and I do not think they will take much time since –(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, you were in the Chair when this matter came up. The background given to my former vice-chairperson was to the effect that we had to conduct this within the regions. We benchmarked within Uganda, we looked at the contradictions and controversies within the law and that position has been harmonised. 

The only things lying between the harmonisation of that position and answering the questions here is for the current chairperson to bring the report here so that it is debated. It will afford Members the opportunity to appreciate the guidance you are giving. 

I do not want to pre-empt the recommendations but it is not far away from your guidance. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, my former chairperson for that information. Mr Speaker, that report is available and there is need for it to come to the House for debate, so that we see how to forge a way forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will have that report retrieved and we will have this discussion. In addition, the Minister of Local Government had agreed to look at this again and see whether there are new proposals that can be brought to the House. He is here and I think we agreed on this the last time we had this discussion. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Chair ruled that we get a statement from the Minister of Education on the issues pertaining to Makerere University. 

Mr Speaker, we cannot sit here and pretend that things are okay in Makerere. Students have lost time, exams and are incurring costs which are not necessary. We are being confronted by both the parents of these students and the students themselves. 

Mr Speaker, the situation is not okay in Makerere, including the issue of Mulago Hospital because of the intern students who are in that hospital. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to proceed in a manner that the minister presents the statement so that we can see whether the Makerere University issue can be addressed. 

We are the representatives of the people and the people are asking, “Why are they punishing our children in a manner that is not fair?” Mr Speaker, that is the matter for which I would like your indulgence to look into and see how we can proceed. Otherwise, it is not okay, not only for Makerere but also for the entire country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the statements that were ready were communicated to the Clerk and they are the ones that were put on the Order Paper. For those that are pending and are not on the Order Paper, I am sure they are going to be preparing them and we will have a look at them tomorrow. Can we wait for this statement tomorrow because it should come by tomorrow because that is what was requested?

C) REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the districts of Namutumba, Maracha, Iganga, Yumbe and Jinja Regional Referral Hospital.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those reports and the opinion of the Auditor-General. They stand committed to the appropriate committee for handling.

D) REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL AND TOWN COUNCILS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following municipal and town councils:

    1. Arua Municipal Council
    2. Fort Portal Municipal Council
    3. Jinja Municipal Council
    4. Busembatia Town Council
    5. Katwe Kabatoro Town Council
    6. Kaliro Town Council
    7. Koboko Town Council
    8. Kibiito Town Council
    9. Kigorobya Town Council
    10. Hima Town Council
    11. Kiryandongo Town Council
    12. Maracha Town Council
    13. Nebbi Town Council
    14. Iganga Municipal Council
    15. Kalungu Town Council
    16. Kyarusozi Town Council
    17. Pakwach Town Council
    18. Paidha Town Council
    19. Yumbe Town Council
    20. Adjumani Town Council

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those 20 reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for municipal and town councils for the year ended 30 June 2014. They stand referred to the appropriate Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: As the honourable minister was laying the reports, he came to the end of 20; but after laying them, he added another four. Which ones are those that he picked from the side and added? Can we know which ones are on top? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Clerk will extract those ones that are on the record and submit. If there was any other thing, it will not be part of the record. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I am being informed that the issue of Makerere University that was raised by the Member for Busongora North was ruled on yesterday; that the issue of Makerere will be dealt with after the Committee on Education presents its report on the status of the universities. 

I am also informed that the Speaker also directed that the Office of the Clerk should come up with a resolution of Parliament on issues pertaining to Makerere. That is where we are. Let us wait for these reports and then see how to proceed with them.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, we can wait for the committee for even two months. However, there is a lot of pressure on Members of Parliament. Don’t you think it is procedurally right for us to have this matter discussed, whether the committee – actually, to be debated today and not tomorrow. It should have been even yesterday.

Mr Speaker, the pressure is on us, by parents and students themselves – and even in hospitals where we have medical students helping a lot like the cases in Mulago and other regional referral hospitals, it is too much. It is like we are doing nothing. We have closed our ears and eyes to the plight of the people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure?

MS BETTY AOL: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to handle this today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has rules and we proceed, as much as possible, within those rules. If we step outside the rules, we will be inviting conflict. The rules are structured to guide on what we do and when we do it.

Now you want to call for a debate on what? There is no motion. What are you going to debate? Nothing has been presented before the House. 

We should wait for an appropriate housing of this debate and then we will debate. I have said that if the statement from the Ministry of Education was asked for yesterday and a promise was given, it should come tomorrow so that some debate can be done.

However, I have no background on what transpired. I have just been updated on what the Speaker ruled; that issues to do with Makerere would wait for the report of the committee responsible for this sector.

Honourable members, it is now 3 o’clock and this is usually the Prime Minister’s Question Time and the Prime Minister is in the House. Please call that item.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the time we raise policy issues with the Rt hon. Prime Minister who will give us direct answers on some of them and we will see how to proceed.

3.05
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWDs Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

MR KATURAMU: Yes, please. I am raising it to the Rt hon. Prime Minister.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, the process of signing the Economic Partnership Agreements between the East African Community and the European Union is on-going. For the information of colleagues in Parliament, these agreements are meant to promote trade in a reciprocal manner. Today, the East African Community member countries are not moving at the same pace. Some countries have already signed the agreement and others are yet to sign. 

The question, Rt hon. Prime Minister is, wouldn’t these disagreements be a recipe to what happened in the 1970s and led to the break-up of the East African Community? Can you allay the fears of Ugandans that this will not be a recipe for the breaking up of the East African Community?

3.07
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the East African Community is strong and is getting stronger. (Laughter) There is no way this small irritation can break up such a vibrant and people supported institution. That is point number one. 

It is true that two member states of the East African Community have signed the partnership agreement while others have not. Uganda, true to her tradition, is talking to her East African colleagues and member states with a view of harmonising the position of East African countries. Therefore, if we want, we are on course to harmonising a common agreeable position to all the East African member countries. There is no cause for alarm at all. 

3.08
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda continues to receive a number of opportunities for our students to study abroad. In the past, we had a scholarship board that would sit and ensure that the opportunities are available to every Ugandan from every part of the country. 

In the absence of the scholarship board, what mechanism is Government using to select and ensure Ugandans from the Lango region have the same chance to access that scholarship, like other parts of the country? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that the scholarship board has in the past served the country quite well. I do not have the latest information on the matter but if the scholarship board is not in place, I do expect that it will be put in place or a better mechanism will be set up.

3.09
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From Millennium Development Goals, we have gone to Sustainable Development Goals. What sustainable practical solution is the Government putting in place to contain the food security challenge that is looming in the country? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: This is a very important matter and there has been a challenge of food security in our country. A number of areas are really stressed and Government, working with communities and other interested parties, has been mobilising the population, sensitising them and alerting them on the need to frugally look after the food reserves they have.

It has also advised the people to plant crops as quickly as possible, when the rains come. In fact, seven teams led by ministers with support from technical leaders are now going around the country with district leaders and civic leaders to alert and mobilise the population to deal with this situation. In some very desperate cases, Government has mobilised some food and made it available to those who are in great need. 

3.12
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware - I hope you do not tell me you are not aware - that the health sector in Uganda is doing very badly and Government suspended health centres II, which were really helping us. My question is, what workable solution has Government come up with to provide health care services at parish level?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Government policy is very well known. We have health centres IV in district hospitals below constituency level.  We also have health centres III for the sub county levels. In some areas where health centres II were already operational, they continue to function. However, it is true that Government discouraged the construction of more health centres II because of the running costs in terms of staff and other requirements.

Government, therefore, is doing whatever it can in terms of giving more support, training, health systems strengthening and ensuring the availability of resources so that the health sector can, indeed, effectively recover to serve the health needs of the people of Uganda. 

3.14
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, our current education curriculum is not very relevant to the needs of the Ugandan people today. What is Government doing to ensure that we have the curriculum tailored to our local needs, especially at secondary level? 

DR RUGUNDA: The question of curriculum is central to the country’s educational system and development in a final analysis. It is true Government has regularly been reviewing both the curriculum for the primary and secondary schools. This review still continues and our aim is to ensure that it is as relevant as possible to meet the development challenges of the country.

3.15
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government created municipalities and they have started operating but are only being run by the technical team. 

May I know whether it is not illegal for municipalities to run without the political wing? We are getting into the budget cycle but who is going to handle their budget? When does the Government intend to hold elections for the mayors, the Members of Parliament and division leaders of these newly created municipalities? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we said, Local Council I elections are going to be held in January and the Electoral Commission will soon issue an election programme for the new local government institutions, municipalities and town councils that my brother is talking about. 

3.16
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is a follow up on the statement I made in this House on the 21st September highlighting the plight of the people who border national parks and have lost properties and loved ones to wild animals, especially Queen Elizabeth National Park in Bwambara sub-county in Rujumbura, Rukungiri District. 

While responding to this statement, there is need to not only compensate the affected families but also to put up a fence around the parks for permanent protection of Ugandans, the Government Chief Whip –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you need to ask a question.

MR TUMUHEIRWE: I am asking a question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not. Ask the question.

MR TUMUHEIRWE: It is now over two months with no answer coming from the Government Chief Whip, which was promised to us. The question is, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government’s message to the affected families for restoring their hope that their Government cares for them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government sympathises with those compatriots who may have lost their lives or who may have suffered as a result of the animals from the parks. The minister responsible for wildlife has already been asked to take up this matter, to deal with it and then report to this august House.

3.18
MR ELIJAH OKUPA(FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, first, I would like to thank you. The Hepatitis B vaccines have been delivered to Serere District and Teso in general. (Applause) However, there is a gap. After people have been tested, those found healthy are vaccinated but those infected, there is no hope for them. What could be the remedy? What will be provided for those infected? That is the challenge because there is no remedy up to now.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this problem the hon. Okupa is raising has been discussed here many times. Government is doubling its efforts to ensure that vaccines are available to all those Ugandans that need them. As I said earlier, the issue of cost has been a hindrance but Government is gradually overcoming that problem.

3.19
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am very sure that as the Leader of Government Business, you also have the pressure of Makerere University. You are in a better position to update us. We are being asked, “Can you tell us exactly the position of that committee? Will our children be able to go back before Christmas?” You could tell us exactly what is happening; because I know that you could have put pressure on them, so that you are well equipped with answers to respond if you were asked. 

I am, therefore, asking on behalf of the many students out there. What should I tell them because I am going back over the weekend? What should I tell them? Where has the committee reached? Do we have any hope? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, you had already made a clear statement on this matter. In addition, the visitation committee has just started its work and finally, Government will at an appropriate time, make a statement on the matter.

3.21
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Bunyoro is comprised of seven districts and with a population of around three million. You are also aware that you have plans to elevate Hoima Municipality into a city status – Oil city. My question is, when are you establishing a public university in the region? I am asking because I have never seen a city without a university. (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the matter would be more effectively and factually handled by the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. Let us wait for the plans the minister has. I am sure the city status will be taken into account. (Laughter)

3.21
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a challenge in my constituency. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the Minister in charge of Youth, Ms Florence Kiyingi, is carrying out an operation to retrieve our money. But the challenge I have in my constituency is that the CDOs that were given responsibility to give out this money did not give out the full amount. 

You can find a group that signed for seven million and they were given only Shs 2,000,000. To make matters worse, these people were charged and they want 100 per cent of what they signed for. So, you as Government, what are going to do for these people?

Secondly, instead of arresting these group members, why don’t we start with the CDOs that give the full amount to these people? It is a serious issue, much as it is in Busujju, I understand it is countrywide. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for revealing vital information that will help the police to ensure that the culprits concerned are brought to book. And really, we are waiting for details and the police will follow them up to ensure that that habit can come to the end.

3.22
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBE (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to also thank you for the response to the earthquake victims in Kakuuto. You and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness reached at the scene of disaster. My question is, when the President visited the earthquake victims, they were promised items like iron sheets, cement, among other things.

However, up to now, nothing has been done and our neighbours in Tanzania have been given these items and now we have pressure from the constituency because they have seen the response that our neighbours have received from Government. You know, when your neighbour is supported and you still have problems – the rain season has started, people are still sleeping in the open. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as President Museveni told the people concerned and indeed, the country, Government is putting in place machinery to implement the presidential directive.

3.26
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know whether Government has a master plan for Operation Wealth Creation for municipalities and urban areas. Many times, when the leaders are talking about it, they talk about planting maize, tea, among others, which is right but in urban areas, we do not have enough land to do that. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised an important point. It is true that Operation Wealth Creation actually started in the rural areas, initially as a pilot programme to support the veterans, it became successful and it has been expanded to the country. It is true that as the whole programme is being developed, it will take into account the urban areas because the classical Operation Wealth Creation did not give adequate attention to the urban areas but the programme that is being worked on will take into account the needs of the urban areas. 

3.38
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank Government for supporting 14 municipalities in Uganda with Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (USMID). It serviced infrastructure development, it is working very well and I want to thank Government for that.

However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you realise that not all those municipalities that are being supported by USMID are getting funds for development in the areas of education and health. May I know from you since you coordinate the ministries why the municipalities are not getting capital development funds for education and health? The USMID funds are strictly for USMID activities but not education or health. They are for retooling, training and other things. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The USMID programme was for old municipalities and has been concentrating on infrastructural development. However, this does not stop in anyway other well-known programmes of Government reaching the municipalities and serving the population. If I may make another comment with regard to Operation Wealth Creation, it is true that urban authorities have started with a number of projects, metal works, carpentry and other programmes that do not require expansive pieces of land. Therefore, they are already on board. Nevertheless, there are plans to even expand those programmes.

3.30
MS ANNITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We must thank Government for providing us the vaccines for Hepatitis B in Teso especially in Bukedea. However, upon testing of these people, those found sick have to go for a viral test and each costs Shs 70,000. Remember, we are dealing with poor people in villages that are not able to afford that kind of money. How is Government going to help us in helping these people have a viral test and get treatment for them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a legitimate point. The cost has been one of the bottlenecks but Government is doing whatever it can especially with manufacturers to get drugs, vaccines that are affordable so that more people who are in need can get other vaccines or the treatment.

3.32
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, yesterday I met the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, inquiring how possible it is for the ministry to consider some sub counties in my constituency without any secondary school in the coming budget and he said there was no money.

My people want to study. When shall that money be availed to establish secondary schools in my sub counties; Katikara and Mpasana where we do not have any single secondary school and even any health centre III? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my friend knows very well that resources are a limiting factor and as a result, Government is going in phases in order to be able to bring more and more secondary schools. 

At the end of this Kisanja, we want to make sure that every sub county has a secondary school that is aided by Government as we indeed promised. Therefore, you will not be left out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what was that word, for the record?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, language is an ever expanding and ever developing area. For the interest of my colleagues, Kisanja is in reference to this very period of five years where the people of Uganda gave mandate to the National Resistance Movement and President Yoweri Museveni to take charge of affairs of transforming Uganda to a middle-income country.

3.34
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru South County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government of Uganda is spending a lot of money in procuring agricultural inputs for distribution to farmers under the Operation Wealth Creation.  However, it has been observed that most of these inputs are given to farmers without prior training and this has resulted in massive loss of taxpayers’ money. For example, in 2015/ 2016, out of the 122 million seedlings of coffee that were distributed in Uganda, only 40 per cent survived and the reason to that was due to inadequate farmer training.

If we continue with this trend of events, the agricultural targets of 2020 may not be achieved. What strategies does Government have to address the issue of farmer training in this country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised a factual point. It is true the losses were substantial. The numbers you have are similar to what Government has. The measures being taken include organising a lab, stakeholders in the coffee sector to sit and look at the implementation modalities, problems and get solutions for them.

Secondly, we will recruit extension workers so that they can advise the farmers. We, therefore, expect that when those two are in place, better planning on implementation and extension workers, this mortality of seedlings in coffee and other crops will end.

3.36
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during elections, the President suspended fisheries enforcement. In this era, as we strive to become middle income in this kisanja hakuna mchezo, the police have abdicated their responsibilities because of this.

The Beach Management Units (BMUs) which we put in place by an Act of Parliament are not functioning, the Fisheries Department is completely in abeyance, the lakes for us who neighbour DRC have been left to piracy, our people are being killed and all sorts of indiscriminate fishing are taking place. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is your plan to bring sanity on the lakes and make sure that this important resource is not completely wiped out? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ndugu Biraahwa has raised a valid point. The minister responsible for fisheries through the Ministry of Agriculture is already in contact and in consultation with the top leadership of Government, to come up with the new modalities of protecting that natural resource of fisheries on our lakes. 

3.38
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in March this year immediately after the general elections, we had post-election violence where we lost over 30 people and over 600 households were displaced because their houses were torched.

The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness did an assessment and agreed to support the displaced people with 20,000 iron sheets but delivered only 5,000. As district leaders, we failed to distribute the 5,000 and agreed that we keep them until all the 20,000 iron sheets are delivered. At the moment, they are still stored; we have followed up several times but there is no response. What critical response do I take to the people I represent. They are still in an IDP camp in Bububwanga.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would advise the leadership in Bundibugyo to use the 5,000 iron sheets, which are now in the stores and yet are required for the population. 

They would reduce part of the problem by giving them to the most deserving depending on a transparent criterion. The delay has also been caused by budgetary reasons. As soon as resources become available, the remaining iron sheets will be provided. 

3.40
MR ABACANON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question to you is about the message from the Meteorological Department through climatologists and then the minister.

In June this year, a statement was issued to the effect that rain would not be available in the North from September, October up to the end of the year and some of our farmers were scared to plant any seeds. At the moment those who risked to plant are harvesting some food. What are we going to do with these people who obeyed the statement and did not plant anything for themselves? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, weather forecasting is, indeed, forecasting sometimes. There may be variations. It is incumbent on us political and community leaders to keep in close contact with those people responsible for weather forecasting and with the population and advise them accordingly.

Indeed, that is why we have sent out teams to advise people to take advantage of the rains that are currently available. Please, liaise closely with the agricultural officers, environmental officers in the area and more competently and collectively, advise the population on how to proceed. 

3.42
MR WILLIAM BEIJUKYE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government has extended power lines to many areas and people have established businesses along many town centres. However, the challenge is that the transformers being supplied are not durable; they last six months and burst. 

I am neighbouring Rwanda. Transformers there can last 20 years but for us, new transformers are bursting. Can’t Government find a way of buying durable transformers so that the Vision 2020 is achieved? 

Many people have borrowed money from the banks to purchase maize milling machines but they spend six months without working because of the problem of transformers. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, from what the honourable member has said, it is apparent that there may have been some poor quality supplied. We had received these reports and the matter is being investigated so that when we spend money, we pay for something valuable. This is going to be a case in point to ensure that we quickly get the answers so that Uganda now pays for better quality transformers. 

3.44
MS JULIET SUUBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about the Students’ Loan Scheme. This was a very big opportunity for our students that were unable to pay their tuition at the university, but there is a big problem that most of them were not taken. 

What should they do because these were qualified? To be on the Students’ Loan Scheme, you must have the admission letter, the qualification that takes you to university. However, they were not taken and they are wondering what to do because they are stranded and these are from very poor backgrounds. They want an answer from Government. Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, scholarships have been given to mainly science students. I think it is clear that if they are not getting the scholarship or the loan, then the parents would have to endeavour to do whatever they can to ensure that the children access education, which will in turn help the family and the country. 

3.46
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this wonderful opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will go back to the Sustainable Development Goals especially Goal No.4 to promote quality education through inclusive and equitable initiative.

We do have a policy within the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports and on thematic learning, which we believe is beginning to differentiate our learners because when you compare the rural parts of this country with the urban and metropolitan ones, you find that the metropolitan and urban areas are not following this thematic learning where children are taught using the local language given a very limited period to prepare for the national examinations. As such, this has affected performance across the country. I am sure this issue has not been raised for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, ask the question.

MR ACIDRI: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you tell us how – with such a policy – we will be able to achieve Sustainable Development Goal No. 4? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy remains, indeed, inclusive quality education. It is true that children in rural areas in particular, have sometimes had problems of learning because of language. I will ask the minister responsible to address the specific area to ensure that the policy of thematic education does not cause discrimination or disadvantage a particular group of Ugandans.

3.48
MR TABANI AMIN (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about health. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for giving us the medical equipment. However, we do not have the personnel that can operate the equipment. Therefore, my question to you is, what is Government planning or going to do so that we can acquire the personnel that can operate these equipment and we have our people healthy?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the shortage of personnel in our health institutions is known. They are now roughly about 60 per cent staffed. The Minister of Health and Health Service Commission are doing whatever they can to make quick recruitment so that our health institutions can be better staffed and equipped in order to serve the wanainchi.

3.50
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, first of all, I would like to thank Government for the various road projects in the country. However, it is observed that most of these roads lack requisite extra lanes for other road users, particularly pedestrians in urban centres. What is the Ministry of Works and Transport doing to address this matter?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport and Government have a massive programme for the modernisation of our road infrastructure. It is only fair that the minister responsible should come to this House and inform the country about the plans they have for urban roads in particular and those expansion plans they have so that the colleagues here can also be the conveyers of this good message to the people of Uganda.

3.51
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonjo East County, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is in regard to the town councils that were established in July 2016. Where I come from, there is Kisinga Town Council, which has not received the initial funding of Shs 90 million as indicated. We are already into the last part of November but there is no indication that this money is coming.
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, from the press, I learnt that there would be a merger of town councils. I also would like to know from your office if this is the position of Government. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point raised is a legitimate one. I am consulting with my colleague, the Minister of Local Government and he is trying to look for the money to ensure that these urban centres and authorities are supported. It is true that Government has put them in place in order for them to be functional but the flow of resources is sometimes slower than we want it to be due to budget constraints.

About the merging of urban centres and authorities, I am not aware of the plans to merge the different urban centres. Of course, there are plans – as you know – to have an effective Kampala and the Kampala metropolitan areas into one big planning area. That is what I am aware of but not any other plans to merge other different urban centres and councils.

3.53
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, I am just from Gulu where yesterday the district launched – for the first time in Uganda – the banning of drinking and sale of alcohol in sachets. 

However, there are issues that are emerging and one of them is that we have a very serious emergency as regards security in Gulu Municipality and the areas around. May we know how Government is prepared to ensure that while we enjoy the decade of peace in northern Uganda, security of the people of Gulu Municipality and the areas around are seriously contained? The “hit men” – as they call them – are the biggest scare.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I congratulate the authorities in Gulu for taking appropriate measures to ensure that security in the area improves. If other areas consider the drinking that you have described as the cause of insecurity, they are at liberty in accordance with the laws of Uganda to take appropriate measures to ensure that anything that promotes insecurity is dealt with accordingly.

3.56
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, on the 2nd of September, I wrote a letter to your office informing you about the poisonous cassava on the market, which left many people in Kibuku hospitalised and two dead. 

I wrote a follow-up letter to your office on the 16th and I have copies. They were received but there is no response. On the 18th of this month, I wrote another letter to your office requesting for your intervention. As I talk now, there are other people who, as a result of the poisonous cassava, are still undergoing treatment in different hospitals.

I also read in newspapers last week that Budaka had the same problem where 25 people were hospitalised because of poisonous cassava. This is as a result of famine, which has put our people on tension.

My question is, have you been receiving these letters in your office or my political assistant is getting stamps from somewhere else? If you have been receiving, what action have you taken since 2 September this year? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. The communications are being handled by some people in my office. I will cross check on that definitely. 

However, I would like to say that in an emergency nature that you have described, it is advisable that you involve the immediate district authorities and security or police so that together with you, they handle this emergency and work with them. However, we will take up this matter straight away and work with you to make sure that this problem is dealt with.

3.58
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the people of Kanungu, during the campaigns were promised that they would also benefit from the SAGE programme. Recently, they were almost demonstrating. I assured them that Government loves them very much and still remembers them. So, they should not disturb anybody. 

I also told them that in the next financial year, they would be on the programme. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you promise them that in the next financial year, you will include them? (Laughter) Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to salute hon. Karungi for being a very effective cadre for conveying the right messages to the population.  All of us should emulate that good example. 

The SAGE programme has been coming and expanding in phases depending on flow of resources. The plan is to cover the whole country but in phases. However, I cannot tell you now that next month or next year, this will be the case. What I know is that at the end of the day, Kanungu will definitely not be excluded but it will be included. Meanwhile, continue with that message to the wanaichi. (Laughter)

4.00
MS VIOLET AKURUT ADOME (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking Government. For quite a long time, Katakwi District has been lobbying for tarmacking of the road linking Katakwi to Moroto and Soroti. Indeed, Government adhered to our cry and signed a contract with a Chinese company and we started celebrating. 

However, the celebration was short lived because yesterday, the Chinese company that signed the contract to tarmac the road started destroying people’s property, they broke down their houses, trees and shops. I know about Government’s policy on compulsory acquisition of land but with adequate compensation of the individuals that are affected.  

It is, however, unfortunate that none of these persons that are affected; whose houses were put down and trees cut, have been compensated. As I speak today, the communities were demonstrating because of that.  Therefore, I would like to find out from the Prime Minister, if the policy on adequate compensation of individuals affected has changed and if it has changed, what is the alternative? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, the policy has not changed. Secondly, it is true, I was in Katakwi last week and the people are rightly enthusiastic about this road, which is going to be constructed. If people have not been sensitised, it is a big mistake. Therefore, we will ask the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure that people are sensitised and the legitimate questions that people are asking about compensation are adequately answered. 

I thank you for bringing this to our attention.  However, as a leader elected by the people, you will be part of this sensitisation programme. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is now 4 o’clock and we have exceeded the time. But Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I had on the Order Paper two statements, which now are not there. Being the Leader of Government Business, you are going to have to extend for me time so that I can accommodate a few more Members so that I am not very upset with the statements that have not appeared on the Order Paper. 

Are you agreeable to an additional 30 minutes on this matter so that we can finish with the Members that have urgent issues to raise with you and then the Leader of the Opposition also needs to speak. We agree on that? 

DR RUGUNDA: It is fine, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.03
MS JENNIFER KYOMUHENDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Kenyan Government is in advanced stages of constructing the Standard Gauge Railway. However, for Uganda, it is yet to commence. When is the construction of this important infrastructure likely to begin? Won’t this delay impact negatively on the transportation of our exports to the coast? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda is on course in as far as Standard Gauge Railway is concerned. Uganda is harmonising very well with Kenya, not only on the Standard Gauge Railway but also on Northern Corridor Projects that are being planned. When it is time for the railway to reach Uganda, Uganda would have been actually waiting. We are on course, ready and we are harmonising very well with our brothers and sisters in Kenya. 

4.06
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I understand it has been Government policy to urge all Ugandans to join sub county SACCOs. I understand that all Ugandans joined and saved with the sub county SACCOs. However, after join and saving with the sub county SACCOs – in my constituency in Butagaya, Buwenge Town Council and Buwenge rural sub counties, some of these SACCOs closed up with people’s savings. What is the plan of Government to ensure that these people get their money back?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true Government encouraged Ugandans to form SACCOs. Some of the SACCOs have performed very well while others have had some challenges. It seems the SACCOs you are talking about may be among those that have had challenges. The minister responsible will take specific interest in the matter so that the wanaichi do not remain with question marks but their issues can be answered and their money protected. 

4.07
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My concern is the senior citizens of this country especially the pensioners. These are people who served this country diligently and right now, they are living a miserable life. Some of them are deleted from the payroll and others have never received their gratuity. It is hard for the new entrants to access the payroll. 

I would like to find out from Government, what programme do you have to solve all these problems around the senior citizens who have served this country diligently? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the subject being raised of the benefits of the pensioners is a major subject where Uganda has faced scandals of very significant proportions and the law has taken its course. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is following up this matter. You may be interested to know that both Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Defence are handling this matter separately to make sure we pay more attention to veterans and people who have left the service.

I share the view that these are people who have served the country well and for so long that they should not be bothered or harassed looking for the little pension they have earned.

4.08
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the area I represent and even the neighbouring constituencies are very much hit by land disputes. Some of the disputes arise from former public land and other land tenure systems like Mailo land tenure system.

The Land Act, 1998 provides for the creation of land tribunals as legal avenues to harmonise some of these land disputes-  (Power outage.)

I would like to know what plans Government has in terms of creating land tribunals. Because at the moment, most of these land disputes are being handled by the courts of law and it is creating a huge backlog. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, under the law, these land tribunals were actually formed. However, there were mainly budgetary challenges in running the affairs. Therefore, Government is now reviewing to see how best to come and deal with this matter. 

I do agree with you, that with LC I and II elections now coming up in January, they will revamp the land tribunals. They would help decongest the courts of law with so many simple land disputes. The plan is to invigorate the LCs and the land tribunals, which suffered because of budgetary and running costs.

4.11
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister regards the orientation for the district and sub county councillors. It is now coming to six months since these people took office and we also know that most of the councillors are new. 

What plans does Government have in ensuring that orientation is planned for these councillors?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, this is an important matter because some of the problems we face are that people are given responsibilities without adequate preparation. We find ourselves condemning them when in fact, it is not necessarily their problem but because they have not been properly prepared. The Minister of Local Government has been struggling to mobilise resources. I am reliably informed that he already has about half of the resources required and will soon embark on a programme of preparing these compatriots to take up their responsibilities with knowledge.

4.13
MR LEE OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a lot of scientific research is taking place in Uganda involving importation, handling and transportation of pathogens and toxins in Kawanda. Genetic engineering, commonly known as biotechnology, is taking place. We know that in disease control centres and other virus research stations, scientific research is also taking place and this poses a biological security risk to the country.

In the absence of a biosecurity law, how is Government keeping us safe as Ugandans from all these threats taking into account that Uganda is always a target for the terrorists? With the influx of Sudanese refugees and other refugees from other areas, we have seen movement of animals into Uganda. It also poses a risk to our animals and crops. 

Therefore, I would like to understand what plans the Government has to respond to all these threats. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the comment made by hon. Oguzu about the dynamism in research and biotechnology is valid. Uganda is playing a leading role. Actually, there is a Bill in this House waiting to be passed. I am hoping, therefore, that the Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, when it comes, will be passed as quickly as possible so that the necessary measures can be put in place to protect the scientists, people and fauna and flora.

With regards to our brothers and sisters from Sudan and neighbouring countries and livestock moving into our country, we have a law in place. Let us make sure that it is enforced so that diseases that could kill our cows, goats and other animals are not introduced.

4.16
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I know from the Prime Minister what could be the reason behind the non-deployment of teachers in Kiyeyi High School, which was established in 1987, one year just after the NRM got into power? Letters have been written and trips have been made to all relevant offices.

May I now get from you what the reasons for closing that school without telling us are? Out of 28 teachers, there are only four and the school is dying. I went to that school and that is why I am here. Prime Minister, tell us why? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we should work together to make sure that hon. Oboth’s school does not die. However, I think the simplest approach is for you, hon. Oboth, to straight away contact the Minister of Education and Sports. The three of us will be able to sort out this matter. 

4.17
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that in Uganda, every county is entitled to a health centre IV but that is not the case with Adjumani. Above all, it is supposed to serve up to only 100,000 patients. However, in a situation where the population is bigger than that, what future plans do you have as Government? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is a policy and a manifesto commitment of the National Resistance Movement to ensure that we have health centres IV in every constituency and health centres III in every sub-county because of the realisation that there are some areas like Adjumani that do not have them. Therefore, our commitment is to ensure that those sub-counties that do not have health centres III and constituencies that do not have health centres IV have them in this kisanja as we now all know it. 

4.19
MS MARIA AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Government for rolling out the hepatitis B vaccination in Teso. The exercise is going on smoothly in all other districts of Teso except in Kaberamaido. 

The vaccines were delivered but with inadequate essentials like prickers, cotton wool, vacutainers and gauze. So in only one week, the exercise had stopped because of lack of these utilities. The people went on rampage; some were tempted to contribute money to buy prickers because they were so desperate. The turn up was so high but as I speak, the exercise is on-going only at the health centre IV and has stopped at the rest of the sub-counties and health centres III.

When they contacted the ministry, the ministry pointed fingers at the National Medical Stores. The National Medical Stores has not given us adequate information as to when they will supply more equipment. Why would an exercise for vaccination be taken to a district without adequate equipment? Only about 10 packets of gloves were delivered to an entire district. Why would this happen and when will more be supplied if the exercise is to continue. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, I have just been communicating with the Minister of State for Health, hon. Sarah Opendi. She has assured me that the National Medical Stores has more than adequate sundries and that all that is required is for the Director of Health Services in Kaberamaido to get in touch with the National Medical Stores and they will get the supplies required.

4.22
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as we are all aware, Karamoja shares borders with the Republic of Kenya and all the border points are well defined in the Constitution of Uganda. However, there has been encroachment on some districts in Karamoja by the Turkana ethnic group and the authorities in Kenya by two kilometres in some cases. The districts affected most are Kaabong and Moroto.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, may I know from you whether Government has a plan to redefine or clearly open these international borders as a way of averting ethnic and international conflict? Secondly, may I know how soon Government is going to take action on opening up the international borders in Karamoja and also other areas of Uganda with international borders?
     
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I did not realise that there was substantial hostility. What I am aware of is that depending on the weather conditions, our brothers from Kenya sometimes come to Uganda and our brothers from Karamoja sometimes go across. They sometimes do so even during election times.

However, now that hon. Lokii has brought this to our attention, we are definitely going to investigate it. Actually, there is already a committee under the Ministry of Lands which follows up land issues. They have already done work on the Tanzanian border because there was some dispute there, which has now been sorted. They are doing some work on the Uganda and South Sudan border and some work on the DR Congo and Uganda border, especially at Lukwanzi and Lake Albert. Therefore, I see no problem. We will ask the same team to examine the very point you have raised between Uganda and Kenya around the Karamoja area.

4.25
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the effort they have put in especially in the health sector, in supporting us as a country for better health.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask you a question in relation to availability of yellow fever vaccines at the facilities within easy reach of the community. I am asking this question because one of the conditions that are normally asked for even when you are travelling within East Africa is the certificate for vaccination against yellow fever.

A week ago, I  received a number of calls from groups of religious leaders in my district, who would like to travel outside the country. However, it is so difficult for them to get this vaccine within the region simply because it is mostly found in Kampala in Mulago Hospital, Norvik Hospital, Entebbe and KCCA. I wonder whether Government has a plan in place to decentralise these services so that our people can easily access them. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this issue of yellow fever had already been raised. In fact, people were extorting money from some of the people that required these vaccines. 

It is true that the Ministry of Health has designated certain areas for receiving this vaccine, mainly in the Kampala area. However, the ministry should consider expanding to more areas where the wanainchi can access the yellow fever vaccine. It is true that quite a number of countries require the certificate that demonstrates that one has had the yellow fever vaccine. Further, these places should also be widely publicised so that people do not have to hunt for them.

4.28
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Mr Prime Minister, we are aware that Government is going to fund the Electoral Commission to conduct LCI elections. However, there are districts where the LCI chairpersons did not get bicycles. May I know when they will get the bicycles, because some of them may not be voted back into power and the bicycles may come after their election? 

May I also know when Government is going to give bicycles to the LCI chairpersons who have worked for over 25 years for the NRM? For those who already got, I would like to know from the Prime Minister – Mr Speaker, I do not know if the Prime Minister is getting what I am saying because he is –(Laughter)- I beg that I repeat for the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he has heard.

MR WALUSWAKA: May I know from the Prime Minister whether those people who received the bicycles will retain them in case they lose in the coming elections.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of Local Council (LC) bicycles is one of the most discussed questions in this House for understandable reasons. There has been a problem of money and Government has decided that this coming July, the budget that we are discussing now will include money for LCs. 

On whether the current LCs who will be defeated will get the bicycles, the answer is “no”. This is because these are bicycles for LC leaders – [HON. MEMBER: “For the office.”] Yes, for the office; thank you so much. I salute my brother in the Opposition for making the point very clear. (Laughter) The House is very united over this matter. The bicycles are for the office. If you leave the office, you leave the bicycle behind.

4.31
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As I ask the Prime Minister a question, I will also seek procedural guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not in the same question. (Laughter)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: What happens if I ask the Prime Minister a question and I feel that I am not satisfied with the response? Most of the questions and answers are seemingly generic or ceremonial. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I am failing to understand the Prime Minister’s Question Time. The answers given today are the answers given the following week and the year to come. That is the procedural guidance that I am seeking. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our Rules of Procedure are so rich that if you have a matter that cannot be properly handled at Prime Minister’s Question Time, it is not the end of the world; we have questions for oral answer and opportunities to move motions. Therefore, there are various avenues where you can bring your matters on the Floor of Parliament. In case a Member frames a question to the Prime Minister at this time and it is not sufficiently dealt with, another avenue will be available.

Secondly, we have proposed a review of how we handle this question time for the Prime Minister. I had proposed in the past that if it were possible, an indication of the areas the questions are going to come from could be given in advance so that when Members are asking these questions, the Prime Minister is sufficiently briefed to respond to them in a comprehensive way. (Applause) This has not yet worked out and we are waiting for the rules to be amended so that we do this. 

However, you can also see that this works to bring out some of the issues that are picked on and motions can be framed later or oral questions can be asked later. The key issue is that the question is proposed, is on record and we can always revive it when the time is appropriate.

Honourable members, we have exceeded the time allotted for this. The Member of Parliament for Busongora North cannot ask the last question because the last question has already been asked. (Laughter) Let us please wind up this particular aspect so that we can proceed with the rest of the business. I will have the Leader of the Opposition – I have been notified that he is acting. 

4.34
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the acting Leader of the Opposition, I have just two questions to the Prime Minister.

One, when this august House was considering the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 last year, Government undertook to establish a constitutional review commission to consider various proposed amendments from a cross-section of members of the Ugandan society. When do we expect Government to establish the constitutional review commission?

Two, rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure directs the Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, in mandatory terms to make a statement to the House regarding the Government business of the succeeding week. This statement is to be made every last sitting day of the week. The present Prime Minister, to my knowledge and recollection, has never complied with this rule. When do we expect you to start complying with this rule before we invoke rule 211 and refer you to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for contempt of Parliament?

Lastly, as a Member of Parliament, my constituency has had two successful disasters; one was in 2014 and then this year. The District Disaster Committee (DDC) made reports to your office but no action was taken in 2014 and 2016. Should we expect any positive action or will it be business as usual? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising a number of issues. 

The Government is working on a constitutional review commission. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will be informing the House about this in due course.

Secondly, on the issue of a statement on the last day of business of the week for the following business, it is true that is one of the things we should be doing. However, Government is looking at it with a view to making some amendments on this matter when we discuss the Rules of Procedure. However, I think it is okay to make a statement on the issue as our rules say. 

On the question of disasters, there is no discrimination against Ndorwa East as a constituency of hon. Niwagaba. It is true that some assessment teams came, but there has been shortage of resources to respond to disasters or challenges. However, I must salute the people of Uganda who have had challenges of this nature due to hostile weather and have been able to brave it and steer through. I encourage Ugandans to continue doing that. 

Where there are desperate situations, Government may pop in. However, Government may not come in massively again because of limitations of resources. I urge hon. Niwagaba to continue, as hon. Karungi did, explaining to the wanaichi the challenges and how to deal with those difficult situations under your leadership.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable members. I apologise to Members who were not able to raise their questions but we have already stretched the time. Let us stop this here and we continue with business that is still pending. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we had an issue related to the one we had earlier, about the patients in Mulago suffering after the closure of Makerere University. The Minister of Health was supposed to make a statement. Now that she is here, can she make that statement, because she was not here when we started? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That statement will come on Tuesday. It came before and then there were discussions; so it will come on Tuesday afternoon. Will you be ready tomorrow, honourable minister? Can you be on record because previously we were told it was going to be on Tuesday? 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our statement is ready and we request that we are put on the Order Paper for tomorrow. We have already sent a soft copy to the Clerk and we hope it will be uploaded on the Members’ iPads. We are ready to make the statement tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow we will deal with the statement. Can we go back to those two statements that are ready for presentation?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, are you ready? Do we have copies of this statement on motor vehicle inspection? I thought they were being distributed. Honourable members, we had agreed that we will receive this statement because it is not very big. Can we listen to the honourable minister on vehicle inspection?

4.41
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the mandatory and periodical motor vehicle inspection. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that motor vehicle inspection was a compulsory requirement before issuance of a road licence for all vehicles until 1998. However, it was suspended due to alleged actions of corruption in the inspection process. 

Since early 2000, the Ministry of Works and Transport started working on modalities of establishing an objective and transparent way of carrying out motor vehicle inspection. The Ministry of Works and Transport is mandated, under Section 106(j) and 178(2)(j) of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 to make regulations for the technical inspection of all motor vehicles to ensure that they are in good condition. 

This culminated in the Ministry of Works and Transport signing a contract on 17 March 2015 with SGS of Geneva, Switzerland for the implementation of a compulsory periodic and transparent motor vehicle inspection system after an open international tendering process, which started in 2009. The contract is a public-private partnership under the “build, own and operate” arrangement. 

Mr Speaker, the overall objective of the project is to eliminate vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition, which we normally refer to as DMCs, which, as you are all aware, cause numerous accidents. It is also to reduce air pollution from vehicles. 

The inspection process will be automated. There will be no human subjectivity for components which seriously affect the safety of a vehicle. Examples of such components are the breaks, wheel alignment, exhaust smoke, headlamps and suspension. 

Mr Speaker, SGS has now completed the construction and installation of the necessary equipment at the motor vehicle inspection station at Kawanda on Bombo Road. There will be other stations, which are now under construction, at Namulanda on Entebbe Road and Nabbingo on Masaka Road. Construction of another all-purpose station will be in Namanve on Jinja Road. This is due to commence before the end of December. There will also be three additional stations constructed in Gulu, Mbale and Mbarara. 

The company has also procured three mobile vehicle inspection stations to serve areas with low vehicle population, where a fixed motor vehicle inspection station would be idle most of the year. When all the stations are operational to full potential, the ministry expects to create approximately 200 jobs to be filled by Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, my ministry is in close cooperation with SGS. We have commenced a communication and sensitisation campaign to the general public about the need for their vehicles to be inspected. This campaign will continue for a minimum period of six months and we will use all the communication means for sensitisation - radio, television, newspapers and billboard advertising. All information regarding the service will also be available from both the ministry and SGS offices and websites. 

All vehicles above two years from 1st January of the year of manufacture, including Government owned vehicles, are supposed to be inspected with the following regularity: 

    a) All private vehicles will be inspected at least once every 12 months; and 
    b) All commercial vehicles will be inspected once every six months. This is because the commercial vehicles are always on the road compared to private vehicles. 

Finally, it is important to note that the ministry does not expect all vehicles to converge at the completed motor vehicle inspection station, which is at Kawanda, because it has a capacity of inspecting only 150 to 200 vehicles per day. We are working closely with the traffic police to ensure that no congestion will be caused at the station or along the highway because of this service. We will closely monitor the inspection process to ensure that the service meets expectations of Government and the general public.

Mr Speaker, this service will be charged at the following rates:

    1. Shs 46,400 for motorcycles; 
    2. Shs 93,400 for cars;
    3. Shs 103,400 for passenger vehicles between 10 to 20 passengers, annually;
    4. Shs 50,000 for passenger vehicles between 20 to 60 passengers, annually;
    5. Shs 125,000 for medium goods vehicles, annually; and
    6. Shs 50,000 for heavy goods vehicles, annually.

After all the infrastructure has been put in place, those who will not comply will be penalised. I repeat, this will be after all the infrastructure has been put in place. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is one of those information statements that are in response to queries that were raised. Usually, we do not debate them much but we ask for clarification on issues that are not clear.

4.49
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister as to whether that statement has been put down into a statutory instrument and if the statutory instrument has been gazetted. I would also like to ask whether the prescribed fines for non-compliance have also been stipulated in the statutory instrument; and finally, whether that statutory instrument complies with the parent Act in its entirety.

4.50
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for bringing that statement because I raised that query. 

You talked about sensitisation of the public, Madam Minister. I represent people who are deaf and will not get this information in the modes that you have just talked about. Even the people who are going to do inspections do not know how to deal with deaf drivers. I think there is need to put in something practical into that.

I also would like to understand the penalties for non-compliance. What will happen? Will the car be taken or the driver taken? I would like to know so that we prepare our people on what is going to happen. This is because it is quite expensive for some of the people at the grassroots. Thank you.

4.51
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit uncomfortable about the time between the completion of all the stations and time by which all the vehicles should have been inspected. This is because with our police, the moment the arrangement comes into force, they may start arresting people whose vehicles have not been inspected yet. 

Even after completing all the stations, it does not mean that all the cars will go there at once to be checked. We, therefore, need a timeframe between the completion and the time when the police will start penalising those who may not have complied with the arrangement.

4.52
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification on two issues. I would like to know from the minister whether there is a comprehensive policy framework on the vehicle testing programme.

Secondly, apparently the minister seems to be focusing on safety measures but are there any testing procedures that are geared towards addressing environmental issues? Thank you.

4.53
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent,	Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you talked about the age of vehicles that are supposed to be inspected and you said that those ones that are two years and above are the ones to be tested. 

However, according to the research we have done, we have been getting reports that there are cars that are imported into the country when they have factory defects and after killing people for some good time, the manufacturers recall them. Toyota, for example, was recalling a certain type of vehicle because of some factory defects. What kind of research did you do to come up with the conclusion that we should only inspect vehicles of two years old and above? Thank you.

4.54
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One thing that I did not hear from the minister’s statement, on which I am seeking clarification, is that the programme was earlier suspended because of corruption. I am not sure how that is being addressed now. Although she has mentioned objectivity, I expected to hear about the whole programme being computerised and being traced back to the examiner, and stringent penalties where it is found that the vehicle had been passed based on corruption. I did not hear any of that.

Secondly, and one of my colleagues alluded to this, what exactly is it that is being tested? Of course, there is road worthiness but I would have expected to hear about things like emission. I have not heard it being mentioned. 

Mr Speaker, one of the reasons as to why many of these policies often fail is lack of consultation with key stakeholders. I have heard about the development of the partnership with SGS but I have not heard that there has been robust consultation with the key stakeholders like drivers, transport associations and companies.

Finally, I am anxious about seven centres being set up for the whole country and yet we have very many vehicles at the moment. The minister herself has warned that some of these centres will be able to take only 150 vehicles per day. I see a big problem with only seven centres taking the responsibility for all the vehicles we have in the country at the moment. I do not know what they think about that. Thank you.

4.56
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. She concentrated on the road worthiness inspection, which is not a problem. However, she has not mentioned why the used car importers are protesting. They are protesting because of the very high and skyrocketing vehicle pre-inspection costs and I expected this statement to at least mention that. That is where the bone of contention is. 

4.57
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I request your office to take such inspection very seriously. It is very scary at night; if you drove at that time I think you would see the importance of human life because most big cars only use one light. Most major deaths in our country actually take place at night. I have survived death three times so far because on all those occasions, I mistook a big truck for a boda boda. 

Mr Speaker, I do not have much to say but I request that if such inspection is to happen, then we should take it seriously in our country. Thank you. 

4.59
MR GEOFREY DHAMUZUNGU (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister. Since she was very clear in the statement on the charges, I think she should also be very clear on the penalties. Thank you. 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have written down some of the questions and I will answer them in no particular order. 

On the issue of sensitisation, my statement says that we have six months. During this time, sensitisation will be ongoing and the police are being trained. Much as the implementation process starts on 28th November, there will not be any penalties. The first period is for the people to get on board through sensitisation until such a time when we are ready. Therefore, there will be no penalties. 

The vehicles will go through the system and owners will understand it. The people will be told to go back and rectify whatever the problems are until all the installations are ready in the country. Thereafter, we will come up with a programme. 

Mr Speaker, somebody asked whether the statutory instrument was gazetted. Yes, it was gazetted in July 2016 and it was approved by the Solicitor-General. The due process was undertaken. The police are being trained and the penalties are stipulated and we will publish them. We are implementing now but when we are ready to start the programme efficiently, then the penalties will be published.

Mr Speaker, there will be no interface whatsoever with the examiners, and the whole process is computerised. That is the system that was designed to fight corruption or subjectivity. The key stakeholders are being engaged and that covers the six months because most of the vehicles are around Kampala.

One Member talked about the few stations. As I said, the company has bought three mobile vehicle inspection stations. These ones are not necessarily going to be used in Kampala but in areas where the traffic is not so much. 

Another Member asked about used cars. The issue of used cars is handled by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and the Ministry of Works and Transport is working hand in hand with UNBS on this issue. As we all know, most of the used cars are beyond two years. We are working closely with UNBS, which assesses the vehicles that come into the country. Mr Speaker, I think I have answered all the questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can accept clarification now. If you do not accept it, we will not have it. Who have you allowed to seek clarification, honourable minister? 

MS NTEGE: Mr Speaker, I have not accepted anyone.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is only fair for us to get to the bottom of whatever we are handling in this House because it is in the interest of all us as Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Works and Transport and it will be fair for the honourable minister on the other side to listen to issues from this side also. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to deny one side of the House from presenting issues yet all of us represent Ugandans and their interests? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have rules on points of clarification and information. It is the prerogative of the Member holding the Floor to allow or disallow. I think we know that rule. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Ikumbya Subcounty, Luuka District represented by hon. John Bagoole and hon. Esther Mbayo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from Bugaya Subcounty in Buyende District represented by hon. Geoffrey Dhamazungu and hon. Veronica Babirye. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, the copies are available and they are being circulated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are already on the iPads, so proceed. 

MS MUTUUZO: The statement is on the 16 days of activism campaign against gender-based violence, 2016. 

Mr Speaker, 25 November every year is designated as the start of the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence. A global campaign runs from the 25th of November, which is also the International Day of Elimination of Violence against Women, to 10th of December, the International Human Rights Day. 

The campaign is held to raise awareness, influence behavioural change and secure high-level political commitment to end gender-based violence. It draws actors from both Government and civil society to organise and speak out for increased attention on the prevalence and incidence of gender-based violence. 

This year, the national theme is “From peace in the home to peace in the nation: making education safe for all.” This is in recognition of the situation that affects millions of girls and boys, young women and men, whose right to education is impacted on negatively or cut short due to various forms of violence. There are more than a thousand reasons to look out for this year’s campaign as we shall be witnessing the launch of the National Policy on Elimination of Gender-based Violence in Uganda. 

The event is to be held at the Imperial Royale Hotel in Kampala on Friday, 25 November 2016. It shall be presided over by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He has already confirmed his attendance and this shows the significance he attaches to the subject matter. The policy was approved by Cabinet on 17 August 2016 with the ultimate goal to eliminate gender-based violence from all societies in the country. 

Mr Speaker, gender-based violence in the form of physical, sexual, emotional abuse as well as female genital mutilation remains a critical public health, economic and human rights concern. The new policy to be launched therefore embodies a strong foundation to tackle the vice as it stipulates three priority areas for action, including: 

1. 	Prevention of gender-based violence; 
2. 	Provision of care and support services to gender-based violence survivors/victims;
3. 	Ending impunity for gender-based violence.

The implementation of the policy is expected to reduce negative attitudes and practices that perpetuate gender-based violence, reduce prevalence of gender-based violence and increase access to justice for survivors and victims of gender-based violence. 

The significance of theme chosen for the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence lies in the unacceptably high levels of violence in homes, communities, in around schools and institutions of learning. This undermines learning and effective participation and education activities as well as safety and security.

The Government of Uganda’s policy on education is non-discriminatory and provides equal opportunities for both girls and boys. Government has enhanced specific legislation to provide an enabling environment, free of violence and non-discrimination, such as the Penal Code (Amendment) Act prohibiting defilement of girls and boys; the Domestic Violence Act, 2010 criminalising domestic violence in home settings; the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act, 2010, criminalising the act of female genital mutilation; the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, prohibiting trafficking in persons for gain and exploitation, which persons include children - girls and boys.

According to the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics (2014), there are 7.3 million households and of which, 30 per cent are female headed households, and about 42 per cent of the adults above 18 years are single, widowed, separated or divorced. 

The Government of Uganda recognises the family as the basic unit of society from which communities and the nation are built. A family provides a basis for national identity and patriotism, social, political and economic development. It is the family that translates and promotes positive parenting skills for the well being of its members. However, the family institution is currently facing numerous challenges in fulfilling its functions.

School-related gender-based violence is an appalling phenomenon that undermines efforts to provide good quality education. Available research shows that violence against children in schools inflicts pain, suffering and fear and undermines retention and performance of children. Parents, teachers and guardians continue to use different forms of violence against children as measures to foster learning and discipline. Disciplinary measures through physical and humiliating punishments is at times perceived as normal even when there are legal provisions against such practices.

The following are the proposed strategies for promoting a safe learning environment:

    1. Making education safe for all requires interventions based on a multi-sectoral approach of prevention and response to gender-based violence, to support and ensure that gender-based violence survivors have access to services, and incorporate activities to address gender-based violence in all programmes.

    2. Create awareness about the National Policy on Elimination of Gender-based Violence in Uganda and support implementation of its action plan.

    3. Strengthen coordination, collaboration and partnerships among diverse partners including local, regional and international advocacy groups and civil society coalitions, research organisations, faith-based and cultural institutions and the private sector, as well as bilateral and multilateral donors to prevent and respond to violence against women and children.

    4. Schools and other key education institutions should operationalise the reporting, tracking, referral and response guidelines on violence against children in schools.

    5. Disseminate parenting guidelines to guide parents, guardians, caregivers and duty bearers on how to raise responsible, patriotic and prosperous generations of Uganda through prevention of gender-based violence in homes.

    6. Strengthen the capacity of key institutions in order to provide appropriate prevention and response services that address the needs and interests of duty bearers and rights holders.

    7. Promote child participation and empowerment to prevent and report cases of violence in and out of schools and seek appropriate support to recovery and effective reintegration into the school system.

    8. Provide adequate support to referral structures within schools and communities, including law enforcement agencies, to provide protection and other relevant services to gender-based violence cases.

    9. Strengthen research and knowledge management for evidence based policy advocacy on gender-based violence prevention and response in and out of schools in Uganda.

    10. Schools and all institutions of learning should provide safe and secure infrastructure, which includes separate latrine stanzas for males and females and facilities for children with special needs and persons with disability.

In conclusion, besides the policy and campaign launch, there will be other activities over the 16 days involving various stakeholders. I, therefore, call upon Members of Parliament to show solidarity by attending the combined national launch of the Policy on Elimination of Gender-based Violence in Uganda and the commencement of the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence that will take place at Imperial Royale Hotel on 25 November 2016 starting at 8.00 a.m.

The Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) has also planned a launch of the campaign at Parliament to be held on Tuesday, 29 November 2016 starting at midday. The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, will preside over the event. I implore you, honourable members, to support and mobilise your constituents to mark the campaign and attend the launch of the policy on Friday. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the 16 days of activism campaign against gender-based violence is an annual event. It starts on 25th November and ends on 10th December, which is the International Human Rights Day.

This has been happening every year; so, this is the moment that has come this year. This is an information statement and an invitation as well. If there are comments, we will limit our comments to two minutes each so that we can cover as many Members as possible.

5.19
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for the national Policy on Elimination of Gender-based Violence. This violence is not wanted by women as it has many effects on our health, physical, sexual and reproductive aspects. It also causes mental behavioural changes in women and it even affects us economically. 

We must prevent it from happening and we cannot do that if we do not address the causes. Some causes are the negative cultural practices that are being carried out that disadvantage girls; they cannot own property and there is also widow inheritance and things like that. Unless people know what causes gender violence, there is no way we can eliminate it. 

One of the best ways is to sensitise. We are going to sensitise those who are concerned - the parents, the children who are victims and the women. It has a lasting negative effect. If your child watches you slapping or kicking your wife, this is part of what leads to juvenile delinquency.

I would like to thank Government so much and to call for sensitisation of law enforcement officers. This is because when people report to them, they normally ignore and say that these are normal things that happen. Sensitisation, especially of the girl-child who suffers and the parents who allow it to happen, is important, as well as prosecution of the perpetrators. Thank you.

5.21
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by appreciating the minister for bringing this statement before the House. I also want to particularly acknowledge His Excellency the President for coming out as a champion. For long, we have wanted this kind of engagement. As much as I remember the activism women have engaged in, never in the history of Uganda has the President presided over the 16 days of activism in terms of prevention of violence against women. I believe that the work that the women have been doing over the years has borne fruit. 

I, therefore, wish to appreciate the head of state for putting this issue at the centre. We believe that by doing that, the country is going to appreciate that issues that affect women and men in their homes and communities are going to be addressed and should be addressed more importantly.

Mr Speaker, as we commemorate this day, UWOPA has so many activities that we have planned. However, the highlight of the campaign that we have planned is not only the launching, which will be presided over by the Speaker at -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, as chairperson of UWOPA. 

MS AMODING: Much Obliged, Mr Speaker. In the status I am in, the men are so kind to me. 

Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform the male Members of Parliament that the highlight of the campaign is you. We want to ensure that we have more males getting on board to support the work that we do. We have realised that we are at such a stage where we cannot move any further. We want the men to come on board and we want more than 100 men to join UWOPA. 

The theme of this engagement, particularly in Parliament, is that we should move from the bedroom to the boardroom; it should be a continued partnership. If we think about this campaign and these things in that perspective, the men will learn to appreciate that we need to continue working together up to the public engagement.

Therefore, I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to participate in the various activities that we have organised and to support the work that the minister is doing greatly in this country. I believe that these issues are very important to the development of our country and our families. We want to see more men on board. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.34
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

However, I would like to say that there are many gaps in this issue of gender-based violence. The theme is very appropriate but if you say, “From peace in the home to peace in the nation” and yet most of the violence right now is at home - When we have violence at home, it is the girl-child that suffers most, especially the older children. When parents have problems, it is the girl-child who takes over the house chores of the mother and that is how our children get out of school.

I would like to say that this is a good time since it is an international event. However, as Ugandans, this is the time that our children are doing their exams and yet for us to disseminate information, schools are best vehicle that we can use. It is important that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development works together with the Ministry of Education and maybe finds an appropriate time to disseminate information on sexual and gender-based violence in schools, so that at least information can reach out to all.

You ably say that the women Members of Parliament or all Members of Parliament have to go back home and try to sensitise the people during these 16 days of activism against gender-based violence. I would like to tell you that it is sometimes not very easy. You do not send enough money for gender or community social development at district level. They do not have enough funds unless there are NGOs and community based organisations that can help.

Sometimes we cannot even address these issues on radio. Sometimes when we want to address issues like this on radio, for example, on Radio Mega in Gulu, if they allow us, they selectively take people to talk. They do this and yet it is very important for us as leaders to go and talk to our people on radio especially this time that we are advocating against sexual and gender-based violence. 

I would also like to say that much as we have the Domestic Violence Act in place, it is not properly implemented. This law cannot be implemented without appropriating enough funding for it. There is a very big gap. I cry for our girl children and right now in schools we have -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is two minutes and I am yet to get the support of the male Members of Parliament. 

5.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement and to appreciate His Excellency the President and the First Lady for the role they play in supporting women’s rights, especially education for the girl-child. 

Honourable minister, the strategies are good but how are we going to ensure that they are achieved? How are the communities going to be involved? You have rightly stated that there is violence in the homes; how are we going to make sure that the men get to appreciate that when there is violence in the home, the children are affected for life. We know that the fight has been on, but even with some of the legislations in place, cultures like female genital mutilation still continue. This is because we glorify male circumcision in the same communities. 

You should also support the family and probation sections of the police; they do not even have transport. You should make sure that women are able to go back to their homes and continue with their lives after reporting their husbands. When a woman reports her husband, he tells her not to go back to his house, that she should go and get married to the court or Government. We need to think about these things and see how we can protect the women so that they can enjoy their lives in a violent-free atmosphere. Thank you. 

5.30
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Gender and Culture. 

The Uganda Demographic Health Survey Report of 2011 indicated that the level of gender-based violence against women aged between 15 to 49 years stood at 64 per cent compared to 59 per cent in men. For the girls aged 15 to 24, it stood at 56 per cent compared to the boys at 55 per cent. 

We appreciate that this is a problem in the nation. I would like to find out about the progress made by the Directorate of Gender and Community Development in implementation of the plan for shelter homes to help women who face domestic violence. There was a plan in the ministry - the abused women and children emergency shelter plan. I would like to know how far the ministry has gone with this plan. Even if we are planning to make homes safer, after experiencing domestic violence women cannot immediately return home; they need to be kept somewhere for physical and emotional support. 

About the laws, like hon. Kamateeka said, even the distribution itself is wanting. I have been to some parts of the country like Kapchorwa and Bukwo and copies of the anti-female genital mutilation law have not been availed there. Some community leaders say that the copies are not enough in the communities so it limits their knowledge about the prohibition of genital mutilation. The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act of 2010 is little known in Bukwo and Kapchorwa. 

In some areas where I have been to, they also say that copies of the Domestic Violence Act have not been distributed countrywide. There is also a request that they should be translated into the local languages or simplified. Some communities said that the copies were too huge, so they requested for the simplified versions of these laws. Please avail them with copies and translate them where possible. Thank you. 

5.32
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, she should engage workplaces as well, especially the female workers in these mushrooming industries. 

Women are facing a lot of problems. There are a lot of harmful practices taking place in these workplaces, especially sexual harassment and exposure to dangerous chemicals. Some women do not even have the right to maternity protection. This also includes those who are being trafficked. You have heard what is happening to them through the press. Here, we are looking at schools and families, but there is also a serious issue with workplaces. We call upon you to work with us so that we can fight gender-based violence. Thank you.

5.34
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto East County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

From the strategies you have put in place, I realise that the major cause of violence, which is poverty, is not properly addressed. When a man or a woman comes home and there is nothing to eat, sometimes that anger goes to the children or the wife or husband. It is very rare to find women causing violence. It is mainly the men who cause violence when they are angry and they sometimes shift their anger to the women and children. 

Another issue we all need to appreciate is that women have majorly been sexually abused, but there are some cases which we need to address concerning males as well. Many of our young boys - I am a mother of boys - are sexually abused by older women and this has not been addressed. I would appreciate if we drew up a strategy to address the boys who are sexually abused as well. 

I appreciate the regional theme of breaking the silence and removing all barriers to bring out all these forms of domestic violence –(Member timed out)

5.37
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the good policy. 

I would like to ask the minister the extent to which they involve cultural and local leaders. Sometimes the basis for violence is our cultures. In some cultures, what we call “violence” is taken as good values. Therefore, I request the honourable minister that for the policy to be implemented successfully, we must bring on board the cultural and local leaders.

In addition, violence is seen more in villages or rural areas. Therefore, I am not happy when you launch the policy from here in Imperial Royale, Kampala. I would wish that you identify communities where violence is high so that we launch this policy in those communities. Thank you very much.

5.38
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see a situation where some districts may not benefit from the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence. This is because some of them do not have access to radios much as we may wish to sensitise them. Whereas in some districts the Members of Parliament or district leaders may go to the radio stations to sensitise the people, districts such as Amudat may not benefit from that.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I call upon the ministry responsible for gender to provide funding to the districts so that the districts can get in touch with the local people. I would like to give the example of FGM that the minister mentioned in her statement. In 2009, the President and the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, came to Amudat District to launch it. When the law was put in place in 2010, the people had already got the information and I think that is what is helping us. 

From time to time, as I go around, I also continue sensitising people with the help of development partners, without funding. If it were not for the development partners, such information would not have reached the people. Therefore, there is need to increase funding.

Finally, I would like to find out something from the minister. This activism against gender-based violence is in the budget for the Ministry for Gender, Labour and Social Development for a few districts. I was on the committee responsible for gender in the Ninth Parliament and we appropriated funds for that activity for a few districts in eastern Uganda. If I remember well, I think they were districts in Busoga. When will this programme be extended to other districts since it is a countrywide policy? I seek that clarification.

5.40
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity, first of all, to thank the minister for the statement and also thank H.E the President for having accepted to preside over this function. This shows how important the function is.

My concern, however, is in the last paragraph on page 2 of the minister’s presentation. You have indicated three priority areas. My question is on priority area No.2, where you are indicating provision of care and support services to gender-based violence survivors/victims. 

Honourable minister, we have health centres which you can call “reception centres” as far as victims of domestic violence are concerned. In Kassanda, we have a very big problem because most reception centres are non-existent. Take a situation where a lady goes to the police to report a case after being assaulted by her husband. After reporting the case, she cannot go back home because the husband has got information that the wife has reported him to the police. In most cases, the police have nowhere to accommodate this victim. They cannot put her in the cells because she is not a suspect. As a result, they end up sleeping on the verandas at police stations.

Honourable minister, my question is: what measures have you put in place to ensure that reception centres are put in place to ensure that victims of domestic violence have places where they can be accommodated?

5.42
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

The elimination of gender-based violence is a crucial policy. However, after a survey report and research highlighted a number of districts where this gender-based violence is highest, I hold the view that it is not a policy that should be launched in expensive air-conditioned hotels; it should be taken to those districts. 

This is an auspicious function, especially given that it is being graced by H.E the President. It should have been held in those districts where there are many of these survivors and victims of gender-based violence, to accord them psychosocial support. Secondly, it would also be a tool to raise the level of awareness in these communities.

Mr Speaker, I would also want to say that the minister should have mentioned some of these districts. In my heart of hearts, I know that Bududa should be one of those districts –(Laughter)- where gender-based violence is very high. The violence in this area has been caused by the water stress in those high-risk hills. This is because a lady takes three hours to go down to fetch water and four more hours to come back. If she has to bathe, there is actually a schedule of doing so once a week. If she does it twice a week, then she is in serious trouble. This is gender-based violence as a result of water stress and I would have loved such a function to be held in Bududa.

5.44
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for her statement. However, I did not hear the minister talk about the barracks in her statement. I would suggest that in future, we reach out to those people in the barracks areas. This is because normally, domestic violence may occur there but they do not have anybody to talk to or they do not have information on how to go about it.

Also, sensitisation has always been taking place but we normally focus on districts and regions and yet violence occurs in the LCI and LCII communities. Can we have a strategy targeting the local police posts as well? This is because they are the first people who handle those cases when reported. If those cases are messed up, we may not achieve anything.

My last comment is on the issue of defilement and early marriages. It is a serious issue in the rural areas, where girls are married off at an early age and they drop out of school before sitting P.7 exams. It is a serious concern. In Mityana, the P.7 dropout rate is at 17 per cent, which is very worrying, and the majority of these dropouts are girls. Can we have a strategy to focus on reducing cases of defilement and early marriages? Thank you.

5.46
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, allow me also to thank the minister who presented the paper today. A lot of information was given in the statement, but I want to add a few issues that could form part of the strategies that might be helpful in this regard.

The first one is that I would like to hear more about the children’s aid societies. I think their interventions can help a lot in reaching out and putting conditions to make sure that certain bad practices stop. 

The other thing that should be taken seriously is anger management. I think we can apprehend people and subject them to anger management counselling before allowing them to go back home. We need to focus on that kind of work in order to scale down on gender-based violence. 

There are mental health issues. Many times if someone has a mental health issue that has not been diagnosed, they end up restraining through violent means. There should be a focus on trying to make sure diagnosis is done so that you understand what you are dealing with.  There is also zero tolerance through the police force. I have seen policies like exclusive possession of the matrimonial home in a case where somebody has instigated gender violence. 

Those are some of the few things I wanted added to what has been said. Thank you for the opportunity.

5.48
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I would like to thank the ministry and Government for the good policy. However, I would like to make a few observations.

What is the place of men and boys in this policy? It seems to emphasise gender-based violence a lot more from the perspective of women and girls. Who will speak for those that do not have somebody to speak for them? This Parliament must refocus the policy to look at the men. 

Mr Speaker, sometimes you meet men when you are coming in and you see them with a little bit of a disfigured face. However, because of our societal nature, you cannot even ask, “Honourable, what happened to your face?” (Laughter)  We seem to imagine that men do not go through this kind of violence. I would like to see our policy also speak for those that our society does not expect to experience violence. I see hon. Felix Kulayigye is very happy about this; he knows what I am talking about.

Mr Speaker, we talk about Female Genital Mutilation (FMG). What about these young boys who hardly have seen the sun and their parents are running with them to hospitals and are quickly mutilating and disfiguring their members –(Interruption)

COL KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Circumcision for boys is recommended not only for their health but even performance in future. Please, encourage it. (Laughter)

MR ARIKO: Mr Speaker, I benefited from hon. Felix Kulayigye’s information. I raised this matter not necessarily from a health perspective but also from the “right of consent” perspective. For a child of less than a year, how will they ever be able to have recourse on whether or not they would have been happier to have this member look like the way we have preferred?  Therefore, I am looking at it in terms of the right of consent for you to change the way God made you. 

Mr Speaker, finally -(Member timed out.)

5.51
MR ABACANON ANGIRO GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement on the policy. 

I would like to address the theme for this year: “From peace in the home to peace in the nation: make education safe for all”. We need to address the mind-set of the people of Uganda. To me, it should be peace in the mind and then you go home where you make peace and then the nation will be peaceful.

I would like to raise a question about this education. At what level of education is somebody peaceful and non-violent? I grew up in a home where people were not educated but peace was available and there was no violence in homes. Now, it is worse than what I would wish for. 

I think we should first address food and alcoholism in the homes. Mr Speaker, there is a need to do this. When I drive from Lira to Kampala in the night, I meet almost five drunken people staggering on the road. You have to break your car fast to protect them. Why, therefore, can’t we put in place a policy that would ensure that when you see such people, they are arrested and detained for 24 hours so that they can realise that it is not good. Such people go home with hunger, in a drunken state and they fight without reasonable cause. 

Poverty is one thing, which has been alluded to. In most homes, poverty has caused violence but also riches. Some people have become very rich that they become very violent in their homes because they do not want to share the wealth they have created –(Member timed out.)

5.53
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for such a good presentation. 

In trying to fight this vice of gender-based violence, we should look critically at the causes. I would like to implore men, starting with Members of Parliament, to be at the centre stage of this because we seem to be the major perpetrators of this vice. (Applause)

Looking at what causes this, we need to address issues of alcoholism, polygamy, property rights in homes and early marriages. We are lucky that as Members of Parliament, we are invited to attend almost all functions. You find that sometimes you even know the person who is being married off - she was born when you were there and she probably is below 18. We should stand up and set a good example –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that it is true men have a role to play in this whole thing. When the person who is controlling the home because he is a male comes back home late, that becomes another source of violence. So men have a role to play.

Secondly, I am also aware that most men go for functions and they do not like to go along with their women. They want to go alone. It is upsetting. Mr Speaker, if you carry out an investigation, you will confirm that it is true. You might think that somebody –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You rose on information.

MR AOGON: I am giving information. (Laughter)  The information that I would like to add is that the men are supposed to be exemplary. If you go to places like Kumi, for instance, you find that some men delay to buy food to take home. Somebody comes back home and requests for supper and yet he did not buy food; that too becomes a source of violence. That is the information I wanted to offer to my learned friend. Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, honourable colleague –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to seek clarity from the minister on two issues.

Mr Speaker, early September this year, we visited a gender-based violence victim in Luweero District and there was a P.7 girl who testified to having been defiled by two teachers and a head teacher. The woman Member of Parliament for Luweero came here and made a submission on the Floor of Parliament. We realised the cause of this was due to the creation of boarding sections in UPE schools under the disguise of helping the P.7 and P.6 candidates. Actually, the motive behind this is to have access to these young girls by the teachers of UPE schools. 

We did request that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports take immediate action on these UPE schools, which are housing children of poor families in ramshackle structures without real staffing. They do not have a senior woman teacher or a matron, but the girls are there at the mercy of their head teachers and teachers. 

Secondly, I come from Namutumba District where we have a shelter home. I have three times tried to access this home where they house gender-based violence victims, but I have failed. I have been denied access. How often does the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development visit these houses to ensure that the victims have access to basic needs? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.58
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement and the team for this good policy of eliminating gender-based violence. I view the cause of violence as majorly income generation, which I did not hear the minister give a lot of emphasis to in her statement.

Secondly, many times we have made good policies in this country which remain in offices. I call upon Government to sensitise our people. Most people think gender-based violence is only for women but men go through torture too. Hon. Nabakooba has just confirmed that to us. I witnessed a case in Busia Municipality where I saw a police officer crying after being tortured by his wife.

I call upon Government to put up gender-based violence shelters that are managed by Government. The Member of Parliament was right to say that she went to visit a gender-based violence centre in her district and she was denied access. This is because they are managed by development partners. Government has left this area to NGOs.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that we include the concept of teaching our children gender mainstreaming in our curricula. As they grow, they should know there is a basis of respecting each other’s gender as we grow together as a society. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for inviting us to join in these 16 days of activism. I think all of us should make an attempt to be there because the subject matter is very important in our lives. 

Gender-based violence is really a vice that is deeply entrenched in our communities and in homes. It, therefore, requires a protracted approach so that eventually, overtime, it is completely wiped out.

I would like to wish that at the climax of the 16 days of activism, the activism should continue so that when we come to November next year, it becomes a grand climax of activism. We should continue with this activism like we do in churches and mosques so that eventually, it becomes a matter of course that one should not be violent at home, with their wives or husbands and children. We take it as a matter of course.

I would like to appreciate the minister for this. All I can say is bravo. Thank you.

6.02
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join Members in thanking the minister for the statement, but I would like to note about three key things.

First, this is a policy we are bringing out and I hope we have both the structure and the infrastructure to implement it. The minister might be aware that this country has very many policies, but the mechanism of ensuring that the policies are implemented to the dot is normally lacking. This time, I hope that aspect has been taken care of. We also have some structures that Government has created; for example, the child protection committees which are based in the sub-counties. However, they are not fully facilitated to be able to execute their mandate. 

Secondly, I would like to draw your attention to the issue of access to justice. Most of the survivors of sexual and gender-based violence need to access some medical help and this evidence is necessary when submissions are made in court. However, the police stations that we have are not resourced with police surgeons. While there are many medical doctors, they are not trained to testify in court. Normally, cases fail because the evidence that is given in court is not up to the required standard. Therefore, you could consider ensuring that our police stations have specialised medical practioners that are stationed there and are available to support cases of sexual and gender-based violence.

Lastly, I would like to draw our attention to cases around northern Uganda, which my brother also mentioned. We need to understand the environment these families operate in. We have a number of people who have not been attended to. They are traumatised but we do not have a trauma or psychosocial centre that can help rehabilitate the minds of people who have experienced this violence.

The ministry could actually consider giving some attention to specific areas and to understanding the dynamics of things that had happened before this period. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.04
MS MARIA AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for that report. 

I would like to add my voice to my colleagues, especially regarding men. Indeed, the call for men to join this cause is very crucial. Men are suffering quietly and it is high time they are helped to open up. (Applause) In Kaberamaido, recently we had two cases of murder where wives simply killed their husbands with no provocation –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, in this Parliament, we have a rule which says that when you make a statement which could be controversial, you must give an explanation or background information as to why you have made that statement.

For you to say men are suffering quietly, we would like to know –(Interjections)-  Yes, we saw men clapping when she said men are suffering. (Laughter) However, when we said that women have been suffering for all these years, I did not see men clapping. 

Mr Speaker, I would like hon. Ajilo to clarify how men are suffering quietly and which men are those because mine is not. (Laughter) Definitely, Mr Speaker, you are a man and I do not think you are suffering quietly. Can the Member holding the Floor clarify to us which man is suffering so that we can help him suffer loudly like us? (Laughter) Thank you.

MS AJILO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the person who has just spoken joined us late, but I was referring to previous contributions in which it was said that this should be balanced, that we should not only look at women but we should also look at men. What I am trying to say is that the policy should bring men on board as well. I was giving a recent example in Kaberamaido District where two men were killed simply because the women were provoked and so they hit them to death. 

The other point I want to put across is that there is a lot of suffering going on because there are so many issues that go on in our heads these days and are getting into the minds of people. Therefore, I would like to suggest that counselling and guidance should be taken very seriously in our policy both at work places and in the communities. We need to go through counselling sessions, be guided and be given all the psychological attention that we need. 

Of late, suicide is on the rise because there is a lot that goes on, but people do not have any help. I would, therefore, suggest that every place of work and community should have a section or unit for psychosocial support to help our people. Those in the workplace -(Member timed out.)

6.08
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to commend the efforts by the Minister of State for Gender and Culture for bringing this programme in this country for the first time. 

Violence, as a form of settling disputes in society, should be condemned by all friends of humanity. If the unreported cases were brought to our attention, they are more than what the Uganda Bureau of Statistics reported. Violence is actually intertwined in our families and communities, as hon. Muruli Mukasa has said. So, what should we do today? 

Honourable minister, the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the least funded. Therefore, we should have a more comprehensive plan on how this programme is going to be accomplished. 

Secondly, we should also utilise all possible avenues, including counselling and guidance services. Thirdly, we should also take advantage of the cultural and religious institutions because it is an avenue for sensitisation of the population. 

Mr Speaker, as representatives of people with disabilities, we know that there has been gender violence amongst all children with disabilities, both boys and girls. Often, they are not exposed by the families and they are not given priority in education. All these are silent victims of violence. We should also improve on the court’s adjudication of cases of violence -(Member timed out.) 

6.11
MS RUKIA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are not the only one who mistakes me for the member from Kamuli District. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for this paper. This is a sensitive matter and I am happy the President is coming in. However, I would request the minister that such a programme should be rotational. If it was done last year in Kampala and then this year it is still in Kampala, you may find that it is only rotating among the same people. I would, therefore, request that if funds allow, let this programme move out of the centre so that people out there can get to know it. 

There is a time when they brought one of the functions to my own village. People had never heard anything about it but it was well attended. I feel if such a programme goes to the villages, many people will benefit from it. 

I would also request that programmes like life skills should be taught in schools to help those who are violated against, especially those who are defiled. Children should be taught life skills like assertiveness, problem solving and others, and they will be in a position to know how they can defend themselves in such situations. 

There is an issue of degeneration of the family structure. When I was growing up, families were very close. They were always together and advising each other. However, today all this is lacking. I feel like that is something that should be explored. It has reached an extent where when a husband has a car in the home, he drives it but his wife might not be the one moving with him. If you see a husband driving a car and he is smiling with a lady, then you know that she is not his wife. That is violence. When he is with his wife, he zips his mouth and looks very rude. (Laughter)

Therefore, violence has gone beyond the schools and it should be stopped. I kindly request that violence be kicked out of the villages, beginning with the highly affected districts. I –(Member timed out.) 

6.14
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make a comment on page 2 of the document where the minister talks of the new policy that will prioritise three main areas: one is prevention, two is provision of care and three, the ending of impunity. 

Mr Speaker, I think this is the wrong way round. The first task that we should do in formulating this policy is to diagnose the root cause and deal with it effectively. Uganda is known world over for having the best laws and policies but no implementation process takes place. 

In our statutory books, we already have a law against gender-based violence. Why should we come up with a policy now? We can only come up with a policy now to say that we have failed to implement the law and, therefore, this is how we want to enhance the effort. However, you are not coming out with this. We have to be practical in the way we are approaching gender-based violence. 

Secondly, when you talk about provision of care and support services to gender-based violence survivors, how are you going to identify a survivor of emotional and psychological trauma? How are you going to identify somebody who has been subjected to an environment of polygamy, where one woman has been denied everything else including provision for the children? This is psychological torture. This is where the children of one woman do not get the same treatment like the children of the other woman. How do you identify these differences? 

By coming out with this kind of statement, which is not clearly defined, this is how we waste resources. We need to clearly define what we are going to do- (Member timed out.) 

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, I am grateful to colleagues for the guidance, the input they have made and the passionate discussions they have had concerning this paper. I will only respond to some of the few issues that I think have been tackled and perhaps we were too charged to note them.

First of all, the theme is, “From peace in the home to peace in the nation: make education safe for all.” The campaign this year is being dedicated to support children in primary schools and higher institutions of learning. 

Perhaps to give you some brief background, research conducted by the Ministry of Education and Sports in 2014 indicated that 77 per cent of the children in primary schools had faced gender-based violence, 82 per cent in secondary schools and 43 per cent in tertiary and higher institutions of learning. For this year, we dedicated it to schools. Perhaps the children would have felt more comfortable at home but they have made the schools their second homes because they spend more time in school than at home. 

Secondly, this paper was not designed to incriminate males against females. Actually, we have mentioned both males and females five times in this paper. Wherever there is a male, there is a female counterpart. Therefore, it is sensitive to gender issues across the board.

The other concern is that campaigns are going to be held in Kampala. For strategic reasons, when we are talking about launching a policy, it is only fair that policymakers get the information first. This is because we would be sure that they would disseminate the information to every part of this country because all these parts are represented, especially within Parliament. 

The campaigns cannot only be limited to radio. We are also using church-based organisations, cultural institutions and all fora where we get attention, so that the information reaches the responsible people and some of the institutions where reports are being made. This is because some people like the police, for example, may not be very conscious or sensitive to follow up these matters.

I implore the honourable members in this House as stakeholders to take up these matters. I implore you to take this information far because even the ministry cannot monitor every area where gender-based violence is taking place. This information will not reach every home but it is us to move out and use multi-sectoral and various approaches to get the information out. We shall then change the mind-sets of the people because once the mind-set is liberated or well informed, I am sure people will be able to discipline themselves and engage self-control.

On workplace harassment, we are registering workplaces and the gender ministry has also put up a mechanism of reporting through a call centre. We shall popularise this call centre so that whoever feels affected at the workplace is free to call. We would then be able to act and follow up with other institutions that are mandated to work on mechanisms that bring about sanity and peace. Entities like the Judiciary, lawyers, the police, councillors and doctors are all involved. 

The other concern is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not have a specific budget on this particular item. It is actually donor-aided and sometimes the civil society organisations help us. We have been holding the campaigns using the few available resources. Whenever we get the time and opportunity, we talk about these things and design polices. 

In light of that, we are appealing to honourable members that when the small budget comes, we beg for your support in this area, so that we begin dealing with these concerns, because they really affect our nation. Uganda’s population is composed of more young people. About 73 per cent of Ugandans are below the age of 35 years. The earlier we get to the bottom of this matter and deal with it proactively, the better for our nation.

There is a feeling that some areas may not benefit from the 16 days of activism. We feel that we should begin at the centre and spread out. The campaign begins on 25 November and ends on 10 December. This period would be enough to be able to reach out from the centre and also to the children who would have returned home for their holidays. I am sure that by 10 December, many of the schools would have closed for holidays and since the campaign will still be on, we implore you to take the message back.

One of the critical concerns raised, which we are working on although we cannot be a monopoly, is the challenges faced by women in collecting water and firewood and doing other domestic chores. These expose them to gender-based violence. When the cooking is done so late, some of our counterparts will complain. When there is no water, there will definitely be a complaint.  Such complaints lead to gender-based violence. Therefore, the water and energy ministries will have to get involved. 

On poverty, there is Operation Wealth Creation. However, as a ministry, we also now have resources for the young people; the Youth Livelihood Programme has allocated around Shs 78 billion and the Women Entrepreneurship Fund of Shs 43 billion is targeting the poor of the poorest. We believe the resources could help support women to get empowered, especially those that did not have the opportunity to own property. This is just the beginning of this year. This allocation will be on every year.

The people in the barracks have not been tackled in this paper because the advocacy for this year was targeting the children and students in higher institutions of learning. However, as a campaign, we would have to look at it in a broader perspective and make sure that we tackle all the areas while we do the campaign.

On defilement and early marriages, there are communities that have adamantly kept on condoning these marriages of 13-year-olds to 15-year-olds. It is not easy to fight it alone. It is important to engage all the sectors of those communities that have continuously condoned the practice even when the Constitution is very clear on the age of consent.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, please wind up. 

MS MUTUUZO: On the teachers who have been involved in defiling the children, we have set up a mechanism on how the children can be able to report, not only to their schools but to any agencies concerned. They would also be able to receive protection, which we report is done. We are carrying this out as a mass campaign to reach out to the parents and all concerned persons who are in charge of children.

Honourable members, the other issues raised have been taken note of and we shall consider them and continue popularising them as they come. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, it is now 25 minutes past 6.00 p.m. We usually stop at 6.00 p.m. since we start early. This House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
