
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Tuesday, 29 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have a few issues to communicate. The first one is that today we shall not have matters of national importance. We shall handle them on Thursday under Rule 28.

The second one is that the President has returned the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill to enable us review the issue concerning the Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs). According to the President, the understanding of both the Government and the existing licensees has been that there is cap on allowable deductions for income tax purposes. The cap is set at the cost recovery limits, which have been specified in respective production sharing agreements. This is evidenced in the economic modelling of the existing agreements and the licences and is included in their various field development plans submitted to Government for approval.

Therefore, according to the President, restricting the cap on allowable deductions will be a change in this position, which has always been understood and acceptable by Government and the licensees. Therefore, the President is proposing that we review and delete section 6 of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act.

He has made some proposals for our consideration. We shall send this matter to the committee so that they can review it and give us a report. This will enable us to conclude this Income Tax (Amendment) Act.

Honourable members, in 2014 we enacted the HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act and therein, we established the HIV and AIDS Trust Fund. However, two years down the road, the fund is not operational and so we are not able to raise any revenues. We think that as of now, we have incurred a delay which has cost us over US$ 2 million per year, which we would have collected through the HIV and AIDS Trust Fund.

We understand that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been developing guidelines, but we think that two years is a long time. Therefore, we would like to ask the HIV/AIDS committee to follow up with the Ministry of Health, expedite the approval of the trust fund and the regulations by Cabinet and bring them to Parliament. When our committee has sat, they should set a deadline for bringing those regulations to this House. This is because we are not utilising the trust fund as we had hoped.

Honourable members, we have had a problem in Kasese. I know that we shall have time to discuss it, but I would like us to stand up for a moment of silence in remembrance of the numerous people who have died in the conflict.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, last week this august House gave me express permission to go and prepare a private Member’s Bill on a national graduate service scheme. However, the Minister of State for Labour is moving from one newsroom to another saying that Government has rejected the Bill. I am wondering whether this is the normal procedure for us to follow. If it is not the normal procedure, Madam Speaker, I would request you to advise the minister to stop misleading the country using rumours. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just ignore the radio stations. Bring your Bill here for the first reading. We gave you authority.

Honourable members, I forgot to announce that the Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet, Mr Lukone, has died. He has been a long serving civil servant and I think he will be buried tomorrow. I thought you should also get that information.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SITUATION IN KASESE DISTRICT

2.50
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me the opportunity this afternoon to explain to the country what has been happening in the past few days in the Rwenzori region.

Honourable members, as you may be aware, by now His Highness Charles Wesley Mumbere, the Omusinga of the Rwenzururu Kingdom, was arrested from his palace on the afternoon of 27 November 2016 by a joint security operation. This was a result of the attacks, which had occurred on the 26th and 27th, conducted by the cultural guards - the Kilhumira Mutima - who are said to be the creation of and under the command of the Omusinga.

On 26 November 2016, these cultural guards attacked a joint operation within Kasese with a petrol bomb. They went ahead and stabbed and injured a soldier. This attack in Kasese town was immediately followed by simultaneous attacks in Ihandiro Subcounty, Kagando Hospital in Kisunga Subcounty, Bwesumbu Subcounty, Kyabarungira Subcounty, Mubuku in Maliba Subcounty, and Ibanda Township in Bugoyi Subcounty.

During these attacks, 16 policemen lost their lives and six guns were taken away from the police. This is a situation that I would like to take a few minutes this afternoon to explain to you, honourable members.

I would like to try to take a step back into history to enable us understand where we have come from to where we are now. The Rwenzururu agitations started way back before Uganda got its independence. First, there were the struggles between the Bakonzo and the Batoro around the 1900s when the colonial government failed to recognise the Bakonzo as an independent ethnic group and instead placed them under Toro Kingdom, which later became Toro District in 1910.

These struggles by the Bakonzo are well documented. The agitation for autonomy by the Bakonzo continued to become a concern for the colonial government and this history, which I have just mentioned, is well stipulated in Sessional Paper No.1 of 1963. 

In 1974, two districts of Rwenzori and Semiliki were created. In 1979, Semiliki was renamed Bundibugyo and Rwenzori became Kasese District. These two districts were created for purposes of enabling devolution of power and resources between the local communities of the region as a response to the long-standing agitation and demands in this region. 

In 1982, the Obote Government reached a political deal with the Rwenzururu Movement in which the current king, Iremangoma Mumbere, agreed to lay down arms in return for development funds for social welfare, education as well as material incentives plus Government scholarships for his people. However, there was a disgruntled faction of the Rwenzururu Movement led by Richard Kinyamusithu, the then Chief of Staff of the Rwenzururu Freedom Movement, which later, as we all know, became the National Liberation of Uganda (NALU) under Amon Bazira.

When the NRM allowed the restoration of cultural and traditional institutions in 1992 and the matter was later constitutionalised in 1995, it is important to understand that the Rwenzururu Movement of the Bakonzo continued to agitate for the recognition of the Rwenzururu Kingdom, which was eventually granted in 2009. Therefore, the ongoing situation in the Rwenzori region is an offshoot of a long history and not a creation of the NRM government.

The conflicts in the Rwenzori region may be attributed to some causative factors within the political, cultural and economic areas as well as specifically around land issues. Within our media, news has been awash of a Bakonzo state called “Yiira”. Government has been clear on this; it is impossible to create that state. We suspect that this agitation for Yiira state could have an influence on the situation in Rwenzori as we are witnessing now.

The creation of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu and later Obudingiya bwa Bwamba was hinged on achieving political and social harmony in this region. However, most unfortunately, this instead created jurisdictional and control tensions between these two cultural institutions. Again, we think that these tensions may be playing into what is happening as of now and we will continue to investigate to establish what is really behind all this.

Claims and counter claims over land rights between the Bakonzo and other communities are also thought to be one of the other causes of the conflict in this region. Indeed, the Kajura Commission of Inquiry of 2005 recommended Government intervention on the matter of land rights. This matter, as I said, is being studied and we will establish the truth behind it. 

The communities of the Bakonzo, especially those on the fringes of the mountains, find themselves in a hard economic situation. Powerful individuals within these communities seem to be taking advantage of these most unfortunate people, promising them, albeit falsely, economic emancipation and therefore playing into the situation in this region.

It should be noted that the current security situation has no connection – 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, where is the statement you have distributed? Just read your statement as you have distributed it.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: I thought that Members were following. In the interest of time, I was trying to summarise but I will stick to the text.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please allow the minister to present the statement.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: It should be noted that the current security situation has no connection to claims of political persecution by some leaders in this area. The Government lost elections in several areas in the country and there have been no such occurrences in those areas. In any case, the attacks in the Rwenzori region occurred in 2012 and 2014 and yet there were no elections in those years. The occurrences are a matter of insecurity and criminality to which some individuals have to take responsibility.

In July 2014, there were attacks occasioned by cultural guards of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu across the Rwenzori region against security installations. In Kasese, for example, the cultural guards attacked the police at a weighbridge along the Kasese- Mbarara Highway. Two police officers were killed and their guns taken. In Bigando Subcounty, 11 people, including a UPDF soldier, his wife and child were killed. In Kibuku in Ntoroko District, the royal guards ambushed a UPDF patrol truck and cut a soldier on the head. They also attacked the main police station in Ntoroko and took three guns.

In Bundibugyo, they attacked a Uganda Wildlife Authority post and took away two guns. They went ahead and attacked the central police station, killed four police officers, including the officer in charge of the station, and made away with six guns. At Kanyamwirima UPDF Barracks, they killed four soldiers and injured one. They made away with one Rocket Propelled Grenade (RPG) launcher.

While in 2014 the attacks were conducted by Isyomango syo Businga, (the youth of the kingdom) in the recent wave of violence, the attackers have graduated into a militia, which is trained, uniformed, armed, camped, and under command and control. This new structure is composed mainly of the Kilhumira Mutima (the strong hearted and keepers of the secret). They are the ones who have occasioned most of these attacks. 

It should be recalled that in 2014, a total of 68 attackers, most unfortunately, lost their lives in the violence. Additionally, 23 civilians died and 10 members of the security forces also died. Those who were arrested and prosecuted totalled 179. Of these, 155 suspects were leniently pardoned by Government. In this round of violence, 500 others who had fled after the attacks benefitted from the Government amnesty. They returned and were rehabilitated and re-integrated into the community. Among the 500 were two ministers of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu.

In the year 2016 alone, many civilian killings were noted to have been conducted by these same criminal groups. Fifteen people died in Bundibugyo after the February 2016 elections, and 139 houses were also set ablaze in a period of four days. 

As the Bundibugyo clashes seemed to subside, a similar situation developed in Kasese District following the local council III elections in Hima Town Council. On the night of 10 March 2016, in Hima Town Council, a group of 30 people armed with machetes, knives and clubs injured four UPDF soldiers. On 11 March 2016, the attackers critically injured two police officers and grabbed a gun from one of them. 

On the evening of 15 March 2016, the GISO of Kyabarungira Sub-County and his brother were attacked and stabbed in Kasese town by suspected Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu youth, leaving these two seriously injured. On the morning of 23 March 2016, clashes in Ntotoro Subcounty of Bundibugyo left 20 people dead, sparking a fresh wave of internally displaced persons of approximately 5,000 who sought refuge in Bubukwanga Camp.

On 23 March 2016, a gang associated with Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu cultural guards armed with pangas attacked Kidodo Police Post in Kasese Municipality, leaving one police man dead and his gun taken. 

These, including an incident where they critically injured a Commissioner of Police in Buhuhira Subcounty in Kasese, are some of the incidents that have occurred this year.

Following these various incidents and attacks, several political initiatives and security engagements were undertaken and are still ongoing. These included:
 
    a) The Rt Hon. Kajura Commission of Inquiry of 2005 set up by Government, which brought to light useful insights to the situation in the Rwenzori region. Among the recommendations of the Kajura Commission of Inquiry was the need for Government to recognise the Kingdom of Rwenzururu as a cultural institution. This wish was granted by an endorsement of Cabinet on 17 March 2008. Subsequently, His Highness the Omusinga was coronated in 2009.

    b) There have been meetings by senior security officials with His Highness the Omusinga and Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu officials on the situation.

    c) The Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs of this Parliament, I think in April this year, visited the Omusinga and Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu officials to discuss the situation in this area. I believe that the chairperson will talk about this later on.

    d) In several high level meetings with the Omusinga, it was agreed that the cultural guards should be disbanded and the UPDF and police should provide security to the Omusinga in the palace and other areas, like is the case with other cultural leaders.

On 21 November 2016, a regional security meeting was convened at Kabarole District Local Government headquarters, which was attended, among others, by Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), district chairpersons, security leaders and other district leaders of a different calibre from the seven districts within the Rwenzori region. This meeting resolved that all camps, which had been established by the Kilhumira Mutima in Kamabale Village of Nyabiswa Subcounty in Kabarole, Ihandiro Subcounty in Kasese, Kakibuta and Kakimiara both in Hima Division of Kasese, be dismantled by security forces.  

It appears that on learning about these impending operations, the cultural guards started attacking police stations and police posts. These attacks were carried out in a similar manner across the districts and as I mentioned earlier, we now can report that 16 policemen were killed and six guns have been lost. The names of the deceased are attached. Only 13 names appear there but I have an updated list showing 16 and the actual police stations from which they were killed. I will be able to give it to you because I got it after I made this statement. 

They also ambushed and burnt a police patrol vehicle, which had gone to Kiburara to reinforce the unit there. In all these incidents, the attackers used assault rifles, petrol bombs, grenades, machetes, spears and daggers. 

Most unfortunately, in response to these attacks, 46 cultural guards have lost their lives while 149 have so far been arrested. Following these actions, most of the Kilhumira Mutima cultural guards retreated into the palace with their weapons. This led to the negotiations with His Highness the Omusinga by both security and political leaders, for these attackers to surrender and hand over the weapons they had retreated with. 

When this did not succeed, there was an operation, which followed. In that operation, an assortment of weapons were recovered from the palace, including seven Sub Machine Guns (SMGs), pistols, ammunition, machetes, spears, improvised explosive devices and a total of 16 petrol bombs. 

It should be noted that the security forces ensured the safety of His Highness the Omusinga. The Omusinga was arrested and is in safe custody at Nalufenya Police Station. As I speak to you now, His Highness the Omusinga is appearing in court to be charged for his role in the activities in Rwenzori.

The joint security forces are continuing with investigations into this matter. Appropriate legal action will be taken on all those who have been responsible for the death of Ugandans. We want to thank the people of Kasese for continuing to cooperate with investigations.

In conclusion, I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, all those who promote the ideology of extremism and violence. (Applause) The UPDF and the Uganda Police Force have a constitutional mandate to protect all Ugandans, their lives and property. Anybody who takes armed action to destabilise the security of Uganda will be dealt with in accordance with the law of this land. (Applause)

The joint security forces have taken full control of the situation and the people in the region have gone back to their businesses in peace. The joint security forces continue to monitor the situation and we would like to thank, unreservedly, the people of the region for their support to the joint security forces. We appeal to the public to remain calm, vigilant and to continue to cooperate with the security forces in ensuring sustainable peace for this region.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I thank you for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This is a ministerial statement and it will be debated for about an hour. Before I invite contributions, I would like to inform Members that we are compiling a directory of Members of Parliament. It will contain your biodata, education and employment history. When it is printed, it will be circulated to all the Members. 

We have sent a form to your pigeonholes. Look at what you presented when you were swearing in and correct the information in case there are inaccuracies. This is a serious exercise, honourable members. If you keep on changing your information, it can cost you somewhere in the future. Please, peruse through the document and return it to the box provided on the table near the pigeonholes. Some work has been done; 49 forms have come in. We need all this done by Friday, 2 December; so honourable members, pick the forms and respond.

Secondly, this month we have the 16 days of activism against violence. The Government launched the programme last Friday and Parliament will launch its programme today in the South Wing car park. After we finish work today, we are inviting you to go to the car park to launch the 16 days of activism. There is a lot to discuss over certain issues, so please, do not avoid going there.

Let me invite hon. Centenary to speak on behalf of the Kasese people and then we shall call the other Members.

3.18
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity to speak on behalf of the duly elected Members of Parliament from Kasese District.

I bleed, with tears, watching our colleagues clap their hands and cheer when an honourable minister from Government stands here to give a false statement against the people of Rwenzururu, the Bakonzo. Today it is happening in Kasese, tomorrow it will happen elsewhere. We should be very careful –(Interjections) - I am not going to be intimidated by anybody who is responding. You should listen to our account before you pre-judge us.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR CENTENARY: This is not a political party affair but an issue of Ugandans. Madam Speaker, I would like to give an informed account and I believe that after listening to me carefully, Members will agree with me. You are already judging my statement as biased before you even listen to it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give a background to this matter. The Minister of Internal Affairs, the Uganda Police Force and the UPDF have given their account on this matter. I would like to request honourable colleagues to listen to me as I give our side of the story. I will not take this august House to the history of the circumstances and conflicts that resulted into the formation of the Rwenzururu Kingdom because the minister has already highlighted this. I will go to the recent interventions, more specifically those that happened this year.

Early this year, around March, the President invited the elected leaders of Kasese to Mweya Safari Lodge. I recall that we arrived there at around 9.00 a.m. but met him at 8.00 p.m. We discussed with the President and gave him our side of the story. I remember we insisted that we wait for him for that long so that we discuss Kasese matters conclusively. However, at around 10.00 p.m., he told us that he was very tired and that he would invite us for another meeting where we would discuss Kasese issues comprehensively. We waited for this invitation in vain until we came here. 

I remember the day we went for recess, hon. Nzoghu had had a discussion with the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), Gen. Katumba Wamala – I wish he was around – and they scheduled an appointment with the President to meet with the Members of Parliament from Kasese District. Unfortunately, as we were preparing ourselves to go and discuss the Kasese matters with the President, we got to learn that he was meeting with NRM leaders and elders to discuss a matter pertaining to the split of Kasese District. 

We sought for a second appointment, which the CDF actually offered to make with the President. On the day we were supposed to meet with the President, hon. Nzoghu made numerous telephone calls to the CDF who did not pick the calls. As such, we did not meet with the President and yet the reason why we wanted to meet him was to discuss the security matters of Kasese District.

Efforts to meet with the President have been futile. On 17 October, two days before the 50th coronation anniversary, a meeting was held with the Minister for Security after allegations had been made that the anniversary was going to be used to declare the Yiira Republic. There was heavy military deployment but the day’s events were peaceful and colourful. 

On the same occasion, recognition medals were conferred on a number of personalities who included the honourable Prince Christopher Kibanzanga, the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and also Member of Parliament for Bughendera County on the NRM ticket and brother to the Omusinga; hon. Loyce Bwambale, former Woman Member of Parliament for Kasese District, NRM; and the Mayor of Kasese Municipality, Godfrey Kabyanga. 

It was, therefore, laughable watching the police spokesperson, Assistant Inspector General of Police (AIGP) Felix Kaweesi displaying some of these medals as those given to militias and royal guards depending on the number of security personnel they kill or put out of action. He insinuated that the medals were given on the basis that if a royal guard killed 10 people, he would get a gold medal; if he killed five people, he would get a bronze medal and so on. If that was the case, I am interested in knowing how many security personnel hon. Christopher Kibanzanga, hon. Loyce Bwambale and the mayor killed because they earned themselves gold medals on that occasion. 

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MR CENTENARY: If you think you have the right information, come and present it here. On Friday, 25 November 2016, there was visible and heightened tension inside Kasese town. This was days after reported insurrections were reported in Bunyangabu, Kabarole District, due to unknown insurgents. There was heavy deployment of military personnel in Kasese town and not in Kabarole where the insurrections were. 

That evening, Government security personnel surrounded the administration offices of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu among other areas. This went on until Saturday morning. The royal guards at the administration block of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu chose to lock themselves inside the premises for fear of attack.  As a result, the Government forces acquired ladders on which they climbed and sprayed tear gas and water inside the office administration premises of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu with the intention of flashing the royal guards out. When this failed, Government forces shot the padlocks and forcefully entered the offices. The Government forces then used water trucks to spray water inside the premises and clean up any blood stains. Reasons for this act are unknown. 

From the pictures accessed from the scene, all property, including computers and paper work, with the exception of some furniture, was destroyed. Eight dead bodies were carried away from those offices and placed at known mortuaries and these mortuaries remain cordoned off.

Madam Speaker, the deployment was extended to the royal palace on Saturday, 26 November 2016 and the palace was completely sealed off. His Majesty the Omusinga remained held up in the palace and kept on communicating with the respective offices in a bid to forestall a possible attack and unnecessary letting of blood. 

At about midnight, His Majesty received a telephone call from the President. Among other things, the President ordered him to disband the royal guards before 9.00 a.m. of the following day, Sunday, 27 November 2016. The President informed His Majesty that he was sending Brig. Peter Elwelu, the Second Division commander, to convey his message and to negotiate the safe handover of the royal guards. 

It should be noted that despite this directive, Brig. Peter Elwelu never, at any one moment, set foot at the palace to deliver the message even when His Majesty had been told continually that he was coming over. He later on sent the Deputy Resident District Commissioner to deliver the message from the President. Shortly after the Deputy RDC had reached the palace, she was called and instructed to leave.

Madam Speaker, as these events were unfolding, I, together with the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition and all the other four Members of Parliament were on our way to Kasese and we were in constant communication with the CDF, Gen. Katumba Wamala, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, Brig. Peter Elwelu and other commanders who were on the ground in Kasese. We requested that before they take any action, they should give us an opportunity to intervene to avoid bloodshed. 

They gave us a positive response and we trusted that they were actually waiting for us to have a meeting with them at the Kasese Central Police Station. This is because we were supposed to discuss the process of executing the President’s request. While we were getting to Kasese, they kept on sending us signals that the President’s ultimatum was expiring and we asked them to give us a little more time because we were travelling by road. 

At that moment, we requested hon. Atkins Katusabe of Bukonzo West, who was in Kasese, to go and stand in as an advance team and carry on with the negotiation process as we made our way to Kasese, to which he obliged. He went to the palace and he was in communication with the CDF. He had a discussion with the king and it was agreed that the royal guards be handed over. He then requested the CDF to send means of transport to take them out of the palace. 

In the middle of the negotiations, I remember the CDF even sent him a text message and I believe he will give that information when he comes to deliberate. They asked him to leave the palace saying that the time had elapsed, there was no more room for negotiation and that they were coming to attack the palace. 

We had actually reached Hima and were approaching Kasese town to discuss with the commanders on the ground when we were told that the palace had been bombed and the king had been arrested. We were also informed that there was nothing much that could go on between us, the leaders, and Government. This was despite the numerous efforts that we had put in to ensure that bloodshed does not occur. 

Members of Parliament, we have had several interventions of this nature. The Karimojong disarmament process took a number of years; I do not understand why it was impossible for the President to be patient and grant time and opportunity to the duly elected Members of Parliament of Kasese to intervene and ensure that the lives of Ugandans are not lost in a senseless genocidal type of attack from Government.

Madam Speaker, we know that there have been accusations and counter accusations between Government and the Bakonzo, who are Ugandans. This impasse has been on for a very long time. The unfortunate scenario is that Government is not willing to discuss, engage and find a lasting solution to this problem with the legitimately elected leaders of Kasese.

It is quite a pity that as we speak, even though the minister has said that the king has been produced in courts of law, a few minutes before I came to this House, I was told that His Majesty was recording a statement today after being in detention since Sunday. Nothing like court proceedings have taken place, unless they have started during the time that we are here in the plenary.

We have our own concerns as citizens and leaders of the people of Kasese:
 
1. 	That our king should be immediately and unconditionally released. 

2. 	The shooting, bombing and attacks on the people of Kasese and the Obusinga institution should be stopped immediately. 

3. 	Government should stop the arbitrary arrests, detention and victimisation of people on falsehoods. 

4. 	The Prime Minister, the CDF and the commanders who were on the ground, both of the police and the UPDF, should step aside and allow investigations into their conduct of negligence of duty and carrying out illegal orders against humanity, which resulted into crimes against humanity. This is genocide against the people of Kasese, specifically the Bakonzo. 

5. 	The bodies of those killed in this assault should be subjected to a post-mortem in the presence of their relatives and family representatives. 

6. 	Government should account for every life lost, including the lives of the security personnel because they are all Ugandans. 

7. 	Government should compensate all the victims, including the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu institution, for the gross damage caused and more specifically, reconstruct the palace and the administration building that was destroyed by the security forces of Government. 

8. 	The Minister of Internal Affairs should commit to guarantee personal security to the Members of Parliament. You heard from his statement that he is accusing some political leaders of fanning this conflict. The local council chairperson, other elected leaders and the cultural institution leaders should also be granted security to guard against threats to their lives and property.

We stand firm as the people of Kasese. We are not going to be intimidated by anybody. We shall seek redress at whatever level possible, and we shall do everything possible within our means to ensure that justice prevails. We shall ensure that the lives and property of the Bakonzo are protected because they have a right to be protected. They are citizens of this country and no one is going to deny them the right to enjoy their full rights as citizens of this country.

Madam Speaker, the statement of the minister came in at a point when we had already prepared our statement. I believe that at the right moment, when given an opportunity, we shall be able to give a factual response to the statement of the minister. 

If this impasse between the Bakonzo and Government of Uganda cannot be resolved, we will require that an independent investigator or commission of inquiry be constituted to resolve the difference between the Bakonzo, who are Ugandans, and Government of Uganda. This is because it appears that Government is not willing to accept where they have erred. 

Many lives have been lost. Government is ferrying these dead bodies to different mortuaries. The purported scene of crime, as alleged by the Government, is Kasese. We are wondering then, if it is true that the king has been arraigned in the courts of law in Jinja, why not in Kasese where the crimes were committed?

Secondly, as we were in Nalufenya yesterday to speak to our king, two police trucks escorted by a police lead car and another car arrived. These trucks contained members of our community- our tribesmen transported all the way from Kasese naked. This is alarming because Government has given prisoners yellow uniforms in the prisons; why would it warrant this kind of inhumane, degrading behaviour of ferrying naked men and women on the same truck from Kasese to Nalufenya prison?

I remember that we even tried to engage the officer in charge of Nalufenya Prison and asked him if it was really fair to bring people’s children, mothers and fathers together in the same truck, men and women, naked. Honestly, this is unacceptable. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. First, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Hopeful Secondary School in Kayunga. They are represented by hon. Nantaba and hon. George Nsamba of Bbaale. Here they are. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also welcome pupils and teachers of Sunrise Junior School in Mukono. They are represented by hon. Peace Kusasira and hon. Betty Nambooze. They are there. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I think the circumstances have changed since we entered this House. If the matter is in court, we may speak about it but we cannot make a resolution. Honourable members, I am saying that if this is in court, the situation will change. However, let us have limited debate and then we will need confirmation about the court issue. That will guide us because if it is in court then we cannot offer opinions.

3.44
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking the minister for giving a very good statement –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank you for giving us an opportunity to respond through our representative and I would like to thank hon. Ogwang, who is a commissioner.

I would like to say that the people of Kasese and Rwenzori have more information on this. It would be fair that the Members from Rwenzori sub-region be given an opportunity first -(Interjections)- Other Members can come in and pick up from there. That would provide an opportunity to Members to debate from two perspectives and catch up with the debate.

Madam Speaker, the Members from the Rwenzori sub-region have more information on this. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to give us, Members from the Rwenzori sub-region, an opportunity to speak first and then we have the other Members speak later?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you informed me that you had a representative, hon. Centenary. 

Secondly, I want to read the following names of the deceased policemen: Cpl Elai, Cpl Anywar, Cpl Kuluba, PC Malinga, PC Baluku, PC Awach, PC Periyo, PC Oyuci, SPC Cyprian Masereka, SPC Jonathan Bwambale, SPC Christopher Kamango, SPC Salimo Luzinda. Therefore, yes, the issue happened in Kasese but there are other Ugandans. 

MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to send my condolences to all the bereaved and to begin with those of the armed forces, our brothers, and particularly for me, Cpl Malinga. I speak with pain because he is from my constituency and the manner in which he was killed is very painful.

When we are here, I want to ask my colleagues to speak with honesty. As leaders, we should know how to address a problem that is at hand; for instance, what is the purpose of anybody thinking of having a militia group in Uganda where we have a national army? Could anyone tell me the purpose and the work of a militia in this country of ours where there is the rule of law?

Honourable members, I would like to say that I am happy that the minister has given the history of what is happening in Rwenzori -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order against my colleague. I have three subcounties among those that I represent that have the Bakonzo community. I have been following keenly what has been going on in Kasese - 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: My colleague is alleging that this was a militia group. I am well aware that these were royal guards. Royal guards are not a militia group. I am raising a point of order because all the information, save for the statement of the minister, which is coming from Kasese refers to them as royal guards. Is he in order, therefore, to call them a militia group?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, investigations are going on. We cannot say at this stage who is who, so you are out of order.

3.51
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have four supplementary questions to ask the minister.

One, in Pader we have lost two people, Cpl Patrick Anywar from Puranga Subcounty and PC Henry Oyugi from Pajule. This name has been misspelt. What assistance are you giving to the family members since they were not in any way a party to the activities that cost them their lives? One is being buried today and the other one is being buried tomorrow. 

This question refers to all the dead because not every Member will be given time to speak for their fallen soldiers. What assistance are you giving to the families and what protection are you giving during the funerals? People at home are not very happy that their children can die for a fault that is not theirs.

My other concern is that I saw pictures of nude women in a line.  I would like the minister to tell us if it is true that the UPDF officers or any officer with a gun was involved in stripping women naked. I am asking a question because if the pictures we saw of over 20 women in a line are true, this must be condemned by anyone and unequivocally by both sides of this House. (Applause) That is not acceptable.

My last contribution is just a plea to my friends from Kasese. I am pleading with you because we have had insurgency in the north, and I may not get any other platform. Please restrain your people. (Applause) Starting it is very easy but ending it is not easy. It took us 25 years. 

Every time Acholi Parliamentary Group came to this Parliament, we were only asking for peace talks. We were not in any way encouraging the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) to continue. Therefore, please restrain your people. My condolences go to all those who have lost relatives. May their souls rest in peace.

3.54
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am still recovering; I am in total pain and at a loss because I cannot imagine that this is the Uganda that I call my country. I have just heard a presentation from the minister and I am here to tell you what happened, Madam Speaker, as an eyewitness and not somebody that got hold of a newspaper or listened to Mr Kaweesi or Gen. Jeje Odongo. I was there and I saw it happening.

Madam Speaker, I am at pains because a minister holding an honourable office that is supported and funded by taxpayers who lost their lives, can come with a completely distorted picture. I am at a loss. I was there since Friday. These concoctions that the royal guards - I am royal guard No.1 and you can ask my king; royal guard No.1, Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament, Bukonzo West. When the Speaker went to Kasese two weeks ago to preside over -(Interjection)- My honourable colleague is saying royal guard No.2.

When Madam Speaker went to preside over a function of our Queen opening and commissioning a school, I was comfortable sounding myself as royal guard No.1. Therefore, it pains me when somebody demonises an institution that was only responding to a cultural call. Everybody from Kasese responds to this call; it has nothing to do with the militia. We love our country called Uganda, we love peace and we are law abiding citizens. 

Madam Speaker, every time our king gets an opportunity, there is nothing else that he preaches apart from peace. These generals, honourables and Mr Museveni have all had the chance to meet with the king and with every opportunity, he preaches peace. Even when I saw him yesterday, he was sounding peace and nothing like war. 

Madam Speaker, this is evidence that I have. What hon. Centenary has just relayed to us is what exactly happened before the so-called natural reaction occurred. The UPDF and the police broke into the prime minister’s office, floored eight innocent, young, harmless Bakonzo men who were pleading for mercy and saying, “Please, save our lives; give us another chance to live again.” The UPDF, mercilessly, following orders from above, shot eight Bakonzo dead before anything happened. 

I was in the palace when all these things occurred. At 1.01 p.m., the CDF sent this message to me and I was with the king right at the table before the attack happened. I have to read this SMS message because it is very important. You have my number, 0772693729, and this is the message: “Honourable, I have reconfirmed my instructions that they should come without the daggers, knives or pangas. They should show that their hands are free of any form of weapon. They should not wait for darkness.” That was at 1.01 p.m. and I was with the king. 

We had all agreed and assembled the royal guards. Everybody had their hands up, ready to be given safe exit from the palace. However, what did we see, Madam Speaker? The guns! Even when they started pushing and beating up our king, stepping on him and hitting him on the head, the UPDF who was in the palace was saying, “But these are guys who are crying out for mercy and have surrendered everything.” The guys said, “The instructions are, kill everybody in the palace.” (Interjections) I was there.

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I am appealing to this country and this world not to believe the distortions. The numbers that they claimed died in the palace are in hundreds because we had assembled the royal guards and told them to wait for the trucks –(Member timed out.)

4.00
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for this elaborate statement to the people of Uganda. It is quite elaborate, factual and gives us a clear picture of what is happening in Rwenzori. Thank you very much, honourable minister. If I was in charge of giving medals, I would give you a gold medal. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I speak with a lot of pain because the people of Bundibugyo, who I represent in this Parliament, are affected directly. Last week, I stood here to raise the same issue but up to now, the people who were displaced by the same royal guards in March are still in camps. 

I am not happy that people have died. In fact, I send my heartfelt condolences to the people who have lost their relatives in Kasese but also in Bundibugyo. Some of the people who were killed are from Bundibugyo. As you are all aware, we are relatives; the people from Bundibugyo stay in Kasese and vice versa.

I expected my colleagues from Kasese, especially hon. Centenary Robert, to look at the statement from the minister and disagree with the facts presented therein rather than coming here to tell us a lot of untruths. To me, what is in the statement is the true picture of what happened. 

Madam Speaker, these people stripped themselves naked in protest against arresting their king and they refused to put on their clothes. The soldiers had no other option but to take them the way they wanted –(Interruption)

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we are discussing is not a simple thing. It is neither a joke nor a political issue. This concerns all Ugandans. It hurts all of us, from Karamoja down to Kisoro. Some of us experienced this kind of thing before.

Madam Speaker, I rose on a point of order because the honourable member is saying that those people stripped themselves naked. The social media was feeding us with all the information. We saw a number of women stark naked, with their hands tied behind. Can I believe they even tied themselves like that? It is embarrassing, barbaric and shaming to the image of the women of this country. Is it in order for him to say they stripped themselves naked when actually we saw a different thing? 

THE SPEAKER: Substantiate and conclude.

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, what happened is that before they were arrested, they were still in the palace. In protest against the arrest of their king, they all stripped, including men. Those were not women alone –(Interjection)- They have done it before in Bundibugyo. They wanted to intimidate the soldiers so that they do not arrest them. 

I want to talk about the inconsistency in the report. They are talking about mobilising and going to meet with –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, from around 8.00 a.m. yesterday, we received calls from Kasese saying, “Your mothers, sisters, brothers and children have been bundled up on police trucks, naked”. When we received that message, we did not believe it. However, it so happened that they arrived in Nalufenya when we were there. When they arrived, they spoke to us while they were pushing them into the trucks. They told us, “They stripped us naked and transported us naked”. 

Madam Speaker, we were even very shy to look at our naked mothers, sisters and brothers on the trucks. Even the bodies of those who were killed in the palace were stripped naked, bundled up and tied up on the trucks. Is the Member in order to insinuate that they stripped themselves?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters are still under investigations. I am not sure which side is telling the truth.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point, with an equally heavy heart. We need to guard the way we proceed in this House. We are talking about 16 members of the security forces who have died and about 40 –(Interjection)- I am following the list. I do not want to be party to a House that will want to vulgarise the debate on the dead. I believe when hon. Otto rose and condemned the nakedness of the people, there was agreement. We are now leaving the real issue and focusing on nakedness. Nobody would love to see another person naked, unless -(Laughter)

Madam Speaker, you have been guiding us very well and the procedural guidance is about the lives lost. This country is debating the possible causes of the conflict. It did not start yesterday. There is a chronological history about this and how it has been happening. You are debating about royal guards, but you should ask yourself, why would a royal guard kill a policeman? Why would a policeman kill a royal guard? That should be the course of this debate.

Madam Speaker, I seek further guidance and urge that we stick to the main issue in the House without vulgarising the debate.

4.12
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora South County, Kasese): Madam Speaker, all of us swore by the Constitution of Uganda and agreed to protect and uphold it. In that Constitution, it is provided that every one of us has a right to life. Therefore, it is on this note that I convey my condolences to the bereaved families of those who have passed on in such circumstances, both the forces and the civilians. However, the issue we are discussing today is why and what we should do. 

Madam Speaker, I have read the statement of the minister, but in this statement there are some facts and some falsehoods. First of all, on the issues of the security officers who have died in these circumstances, indeed many have died. However, on the issue of the royal guards being a group that was trained and commanded by the Omusinga, that is not true. I am a former minister and attorney-general of the Kingdom of the Rwenzururu. In 2012, the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the police in Kasese trained 85 of them and gave them certificates. I do not know when Government started training forces to be declared militias. On that point, this statement is not factual.

Madam Speaker, the second point is on the President allowing this problem to reach this far. Three times, we talked to him and he asked us to leave the king to him since he is his nephew. I did not know that the forces being trained then would later be turned against the institution. I thought that His Excellency the President was handling the issue with his brother; I never expected the issue to come this far.

Unfortunately, we have lost 139 civilians at the palace. I did my best, Madam Speaker. I talked to the commander of the UPDF and the Government Chief Whip about this issue. Nobody listened to me. However, here we are now discussing post-mortem.

I would like to ask this Parliament that as we debate here, let us remember that there are some people out there whose lives are at stake. The way we conduct this debate will determine a lot because this can end up in genocide somewhere else. Therefore, I would like to request this Parliament that we debate soberly. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, the matter we are addressing is extremely fragile -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when Gen Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs, made a statement, I believed that was a collective position of Government. I do not see any financial implications in this matter that would allow the minister to jump in before the backbench members. (Laughter) 

Is it procedurally right for the minister, whose colleague has presented a collective position of Government, to interject before the Members finish?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement of the minister did not address the relief issue. I believe the minister is going to talk about relief for the people of Kasese.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to inform my dear friend, hon. Okupa, that this matter has got so much implication in terms of finance, which is difficult to quantify. That said, this matter is an emotive one and it is extremely sensitive. By our nature, some of us do not get angry quickly or show bad faith. I would have shown bad faith but we have lost lives. In fact, honourable colleagues, there should be no laughing as this matter is being debated.

I now speak as your Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Every time there is an incident like this, it damages the name of Uganda internally and internationally. That is why I agree with my colleague who said this matter must be discussed with soberness. It is not something to laugh about. It is unfortunate that this has happened and anybody who deliberately involved himself or herself in this inhumane act should be condemned.

Finally, Madam Speaker, as leaders, the best way to solve problems or disagreements is to talk. I agree, for the first time, with hon. Odonga Otto; at times we do not agree. There is nothing that we cannot discuss. These kinds of things should happen as the last resort. I know somebody said here that the President had promised to come, but he did not. You should also appreciate the problem the President has; he is constrained by time. Let us be patient. This is our country. Nobody will come here to protect Uganda if we do not. You can wait three or four months, but let us talk. This question of resorting to violence should be condemned with all the strength we have. 

I do not know now what is going to happen to the economy as a result of this incidence. The reaction is not going to be good. Our economy has just been downgraded for reasons you all know. Now we behave like this and we think we will have a sound economy and get richer? God bless us. May those who lost their lives rest in eternal peace. However, remember, we should talk until we resolve our differences.

4.21
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I pass on my heartfelt condolences to the people in the Rwenzori region and also our soldiers who lost lives. It is very unfortunate for our country.

Madam Speaker, as stakeholders in Rwenzori, in the Rwenzori-Kabarole Research Centre we conducted a study in Rwenzori about conflict. The title of the study is, “Stuck in the Mist: Contextual Analysis of the Conflict in the Rwenzori Region”. We have been at the bottom of this conflict. We have suffered as a result of the conflict in Rwenzori. We have been coming up with our own initiatives to see how we can coexist. The different tribes in Rwenzori - the Bakonzo, Batoro, Bamba and others - have been making this effort.

It is very unfortunate that this has happened regardless of all these efforts engineered locally and the very important reports prepared for Government consumption. I have personally handed over a copy of that study to the President. It brings out all these underlying intentions that we have.

Madam Speaker, it is extremely difficult at this point in time to sit as Parliament and find a cure for the problems of Rwenzori. They are so deep-rooted that it needs a lot of concerted effort as a country. A national commission of inquiry should be formed to find a lasting solution.

One of the fundamental problems that we can now testify about is the genesis of cultural institutions. This business of creating cultural institutions without a clear history is extremely dangerous for the country. (Applause) I would like you to show me the school of cultural institutions here in Uganda. When you look at the royals in the UK, they have been nurtured for centuries and yet here in Uganda, within a short time, somebody can emerge as a king. Do you know how a cultural institution is supposed to be established?

Madam Speaker, we do not have a national policy on cultural institutions. We do not have regulations that govern cultural institutions. We have had this business - I do not know whether there is a god who creates these cultural institutions but there is a fundamental problem.

Now as a country, this is a fundamental problem that President Museveni is going to leave behind and this is very deadly for this country. We are going to face a real problem because if we cannot allow the country to stick together, then there is a fundamental problem. I am speaking as a pan-africanist and nationalist. 

I would like to give you information, Madam Speaker; some of the investors, especially those who have invested in the hotel industry in the Rwenzori, have informed me how they received cancellations of their bookings. Therefore, as a country, we are not going to generate money. 

This is not something small that we are dealing with. It touches all of us. We are going to fail to finance our budget. These are fundamental problems. That is why when the Minister of Finance stood here, he said we must talk passionately about this matter; it is serious. Unfortunately, here in Uganda, we take these fundamental matters lightly. I do not understand why. Why can’t we love our country and stand for it? 

Madam Speaker, let me end with this point; it is the duty of Government to provide security to the cultural leaders. It is not the duty of cultural leaders to provide their own security. Government trained these royal guards and now the deal has boomeranged and you are coming here with a problem. Therefore, we must learn how to take responsibility. Government must take responsibility for the trouble caused for the people of Rwenzori.

4.27
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. As a leader in this country, today as we sit in this chamber, the mood of the House should have been different.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we have lost lives. In my view, what has happened in Kasese is a loss to the Government, the people of Kasese and the country at large. Therefore, as leaders, when we sit here today to talk about this, I expect us to be mourning; unfortunately, it became light to some people and it became a laughing matter for some people. We are not solving the problem which happened in Kasese; we are adding salt in the wound. As a mother of this country, I speak on behalf of my people in Kitgum Municipality and they are all watching what we leaders are going to say today in this House. 

Unfortunately, as I had earlier indicated, the Government, the people of Kasese and Ugandans have lost. Therefore, we are not in a better position – other than mourning - to discuss this issue. Madam Speaker, you have seen trading of accusations. We are not gettng to the bottom of this. 

I thank my brother, hon. Ruhunda; sometimes we think alike. The issue at hand is serious. If I, Beatrice, confront a Member of Parliament from Kasese or Gen. Jeje Odongo, God will judge me harshly because I am not a soldier, police officer or a Member of Parliament from Kasese. However, this House brings us all together. It would have been nice to get the facts and we advise on a way forward. Due to that, our deliberations today are adding more fuel and salt to the conflict. 

Personally, it is not nice to see the dignity of a woman being degraded. Equally, it is not nice to see that a police officer or anybody in uniform -(Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude my submission, my view is that as a Parliament of Uganda, it would be prudent-(Member timed out.)-

4.32
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonjo East County, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am speaking because I know that my constituency was heavily affected. I would like, therefore, at this point to register my sincere condolences to the families of the fallen Ugandans, men and women, who died in this attack.

Madam Speaker, the issue of Kasese has not been hidden under pages. This is an issue that has been written on the walls with the best and thickest ink that anybody could read at a distance. I would like to, with respect, refer to the words of the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who indicated that the President has a problem of time. I would like to mention that in a country where you are leading people - human beings with a life - you need to spare at least some minutes for that one life so that people can survive.

Madam Speaker, we travelled while we communicated with Government leaders, operations officers of UPDF and police in Kasese. They showed us a positive attitude right from Kampala - for 360 kilometres. When we were 10 kilometres away from the time of discussing peace, the execution of the attack that led to genocide – the killing of more than 100 people - started. I think that there is a lesson that we need to learn as a country.

Madam Speaker, while I was bleeding here, it still did not go well with me to see women on the opposite side chanting and cheering after a presentation saying that women were paraded naked. I would like you to look at this scenario as if these women are your mothers and sisters in their menstruation periods but are travelling from Kasese to Jinja naked. The women members of Parliament here have not thought that they should provide any sanitary support to these women. I wish you could look at only this reason. If you see the yellow leaves falling down, the green ones just need to get –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kasilo, I would like to convey condolences to the bereaved families. 

I would like to start where my colleague has ended. When honourable members talk of some people being paraded naked, they are not blaming the UPDF because it could be indisciplined officers. I would like you to note that I am a living example of that experience. In August 1988, I spent two weeks – and you are laughing, honourable member! This is not a laughing matter. I and other men and women spent two weeks naked at Olio Primary School where we were detained. I was heading to Teso College Aloet. I did not blame the NRA but the individual officers who were manning the Serere detach at the time.

We need to know that these things happen and it is not that the whole system conspired to do that. When you say that this cannot happen – I come from a war torn area and I was also kidnapped by the rebels who undressed me. These things happen in such situations. We need to fight to ensure that we do not get to such situations. We must guard ourselves from reaching those levels because that is what happens.

Colleagues, I would like to appeal to you. My brother, Gen. Jeje Odongo, talked about doing studies on the causes of these conflicts, which I think are taking long. Hon. Alex Ruhunda has tried to mention some bits of information from their study. We need to follow these up because people are dying. 

I am grateful to you for refreshing our minds on the historical background. However, I would like to thank the UPC Government because I think that in 1982 – according to your statement – they handled it better. (Applause) As you had said, the CDF and Members of Parliament from Kasese should have been the people to solve this matter. If we had given dialogue a chance, we would have been able to achieve something. We could have erred here and there but we could have been able to achieve better results. I would like to encourage the Government and the people of the Rwenzori region to continue dialoguing and to come to a fruitful conclusion in this place.

Honourable minister, I also see from your statement that you gave the number of guns that had been recovered. You also mentioned pistols but how many pistols were there? It is very important for you to specify the numbers –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Honourable members, as a point of information, I would like to say that the issue of rights of anyone during any conflict are very important. The minister clearly said that when they pounced on the palace, they shot after being shot at. However, the question is: how would you draw a difference between those that had killed the 16 fallen comrades and those that were innocent? It is the one million dollar question.

Secondly, if the law still had its opportunity, comrades are saying that if Government suspected that there were weapons inside the palace like you ended up discovering, there was the option of using a search warrant -(Interjection)- This is true. (Laughter) You could have got an order from a magistrate and even on a Saturday, you could have searched. If you had carried it out and they objected, that would have been the only justification to use force to enter.

Now what happened is that the Government forces entered and shot indiscriminately. If they ask you who killed the 16 officers, would you account for those? The families are asking for the people who killed their people. If you cannot produce them, will you claim that it is the deceased persons who did it?  

We are also seeing in the media corpses with hands tied behind their backs. Honourable minister, please give an explanation as to why those photos are awash on media. That is the point of information that I wanted to give. However, the best way is peace talks, going forward, for a harmonious country.     

MR OKUPA: Thank you. In conclusion, I think the minister can try to clarify on the negotiations that hon. Katusabe talked about and the UPDF – (Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is sad that what happened has happened. I would like to clarify to the House that the issue of search warrants cannot apply when you are being shot at. If you are going to search for guns and you are being shot at, then there are guns - [Mr Nzoghu: “Order.”]- Which order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you; all those over 100 people who died have left their people in pain. If we are going to speak and inflame their emotions, that will not be good. Can we work towards finding a solution and strategy? Please, do not inflame the emotions of the people who are bereaved because it is bad enough that their people are dead.

4.42
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, my first submission in the Tenth Parliament, after we had some polarisation in the country around the time of swearing-in, was that the country requires a national dialogue so that as a country we can agree. I said that this would be followed by the setting up of a constitutional review commission so that the matters people are bringing here, like the need for regional governments or districts, the need to increase the powers of the kingdoms, how we can improve on professionalising the army, land reforms, equity and regional balance are handled. Unfortunately, nobody seems to be considering the above as a priority. 

It is unfortunate that our country has lost count of the number of citizens that have lost their lives in civil wars. The Swahili call it “vita yawa nyewe kwa wanyewe”.  We have lost count of those who died under the guise of liberation from Tanzania. We have lost count of those who died in Luweero. We have lost count of those who died at the hands of the Allied Democratic Front (ADF). We have lost count of those who died in the war in the North. Therefore, we can cheer when we have lost 160 citizens including soldiers; that is very unfortunate. 

During this Tenth Parliament, we expect to become a middle-income country, but the Minister of Finance has told you that with this polarization, it will not be possible. This is not a partisan matter, and I am happy that in the Tenth Parliament I am independent. This is not a partisan matter for people to be cheering when one side speaks. This is a matter of common good; this is a matter of our country. 

The children were watching us from the gallery and they could not believe that there were people taking sides. Can we, as a country, stop this disease which is preventing this country from experiencing transformation? This politics of divisionism and extremism, politics of hardliners and those –(Member timed out.) 

4.46
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I want to quote our brother, the President of the Republic of the United States. He said, “We do not fear the future, we shape the future”. Honourable members seated here, we must shape the future of our country, Uganda. This is the right time as honourable members to think rightly. You have been told the history clearly; this has been a problem that has not been solved. Therefore, it is the honourable members here that must do it and we must do it rightly. 

First of all, I want to condemn –(Interruption) 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, honourable member. In the minister’s statement on page No.3, he used the words, “Likely causes of the conflicts”. This means that the minister himself was not clear or sure of the actual causes of the conflict. Therefore, is hon. Okot Ogong, the one who was supposed to be President, I am told –(Laughter)– in order to lie to this House that we have been told clearly of the actual causes of the conflict in Rwenzururu Kingdom yet the minister himself is not clear?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the information on which he is basing; proceed. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I hope my brother read this statement clearly. The President gave us a clear view of what has been happening since 1940 with the Rwenzururu problem. The minister stated clearly that there has been a problem and Government has been trying to handle it. 

I, therefore, appeal to the honourable members of this House to help shape the future of our country by standing above this and doing it. This is how we are going to shape the future: First, we must condemn violence in our country from all sides. This thing happened in the north – in Lango when our brother started arresting people. They went into flames and for 20 years, we could not solve the situation. This conflict you are seeing can take us back to that. So, we must handle it today.

The second point that we need to arrive at is this: Everywhere I go, there are undercurrents. In all the communities I go to in Lango, in the north, in Buganda and in the west, there are some undercurrents going on in the country. They must be listened to. Therefore, I want to suggest that we appoint a committee of inquiry so that we dialogue as a country. We need to listen to one another and know what the problems are. 

My ears are on the ground. Even the people from the north, where I grew, are dissatisfied especially because of the imbalance in the Government parastatals and institutions. The statements made by some people do not make us one Uganda and one country. Therefore, I want to appeal to all honourable members. I love this country and I know you also do; we all need peace. 

As I end, I would like to say that it is simple; what happened in 1981 where some people went to the bush should never be repeated because it caused the problems we are facing up to now. That is my final statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.51
MR TONNY AYO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The late Detective Cpl Richard Elai is my brother. On Friday, his wife called me and told me that her husband was killed. I asked her how and she said they had gone to arrest a suspect and they were rounded up and hacked to death. As I speak, I mourn the death of my brother and I also sympathise with the innocent youth of Kasese who, unfortunately, because of little information are misled by some elements in Kasese to get themselves involved in unnecessary death. 

Madam Speaker, I want to understand some things. The question of Rwenzori region should be answered by Government, but they have not made it clear as to what exactly the question is. That is the question that must be asked clearly so that Parliament can get involved in helping Government deal with it. This should come from the people of Rwenzori and Government. 

This is what I discovered, because I took interest to study something: the historical aspect is there, but the main problem in Kasese revolves around the feeling of marginalisation from positions of government and not benefiting from Government –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, protect me because I have very little time. 

Two, there are feelings of marginalisation among the other cultural groups within the region. The conflict then comes from the fact that the land question has become a big problem among the Bakonzo, the Basongora and the Bamba and is fuelled by the dominance of one tribe over another. These are issues that must come out clearly. 

What has transpired now is a silent feeling of violence that has been created as a result of sentiments that now wait for any small spark and then there is war and violence in Kasese. These are the issues that the leaders must bring out and government has got to deal them. Madam Speaker, protect me –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also begin by conveying my condolences to the people of Rwenzururu and the entire country. I also thank the minister for presenting this kind of statement.

I think this problem is beyond the Ruwenzori region. If you look at the people who have died, some of them do not come from there. In addition to that, let us also be compassionate because those are our fellow countrymen. Also, like the minister said, the country is going to lose economically and socially.

Madam Speaker, if we want to help our people, despite the fact that a Select Committee may be established, let us also use our intelligence. Some people may act in a hypocritical way by not telling the truth as to the cause of the war in Rwenzori. However, if some silent people go there without wearing uniform, they can find out the actual cause of the war.

Madam Speaker, as the war goes on – I look at it as war – there is a calamity that is already happening. May I ask the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to provide relief in terms of food to the people of Rwenzori as of now? This is because I know that people are now not doing business, they are not cultivating and they are hungry and in hiding. Can they get some food to survive on as negotiations go on?

Madam Speaker, I also think, like other Members have said, that this is not a political party issue or a colour issue. This is because in the Rwenzori region, there are very many tribes that exist; the only issue is that one tribe wants to dominate the other and this is the cause of the war.

I also want to put this question to the august House; Before you blame one side – either the cultural institution or the Government - may we know who is above the law? Why do you carry illegal guns in your premises and you think you are acting legally? - (Interjections)- I am reading from the minister’s statement which said that in the palace, there were submachine guns, machetes and improvised explosives. Even if we have cultural institutions, we are under one government –(Interruption)

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In constructive submissions from colleagues, we thought that we needed to prioritise and handle this in some constructive way. Investigations will go forward. 

My point of order is this; Is it in order for my honourable sister to basically reinforce her submission on the basis of concoctions? This is because I have just mentioned here that the guns being displayed are a fabrication. The king in the palace had royal guards. The CDF had given instructions to that effect and the operation commander was also given unlimited access to the palace to search for the alleged weapons.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for my sister to mislead the world by claiming that there were illegal guns and yet they were only discovered when the UPDF took over the palace? These were guns that were brought in by the UPDF and nothing else. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are getting into difficult areas. First, the Omusinga has been charged with treason in the High Court in Jinja. He will be returned to court on 14th of December. I do not know who else has been charged. 

The difficulty we have now is that investigations are going on and we may have to be guided by the outcome of the investigations. So, please do not touch the evidence; let us leave the evidence and work out a strategy.

5.00
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. However, he must know that our people have died and many of them died innocently. Some of them died innocently believing that they were genuinely protecting their king. Some of them must have been caught up in the line of fire – crossfire. So our people have died and we are hurting. 

Our issue of concern is: Did Government exhaust all the avenues of dialogue before going in to shoot? Why be quick to shoot? I wanted to ask about the weapons but I will now not ask. Why were they very many? Where are those that are being taken away? Where are they going?

Madam Speaker, Government cannot run away from the responsibility that they failed to protect Ugandans and it is painful. However, for me, what is most important is what the Government is doing to ensure that such a thing does not happen again, whether in the Ruwenzori region or anywhere else.

If this is a historical problem whose causes we may not know, why has it taken very long for us to put in place mechanisms to ensure that the people of Kasese are protected, so that our people do not have to die? Right now, we hear of people taking up machetes and killing one another; where is the Government in this, honourable minister? Why is the Government not coming in to protect our people? We hear that some bodies are floating in streams and rivers. 

We want the Government to come out strongly to protect the people and to tell us in no unclear terms that such a thing will not happen again. I express my condolences to the people of Kasese and all those who lost their relatives.

5.00
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to all families that have lost their dear ones, especially the workers who died in the line of duty – the police officers.

Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs clearly elaborated the incidents that have been happening since 2012, attack after attack. What has the Government been doing to sort out this matter? To allow these groups to form a “force”, as he said in the statement, that transformed from royal guards to militias and reached the extent of becoming a serious threat that engages the UPDF and the police in a fire exchange, even reaching the extent of –(Interjections)- Hold on as I put across my point; I will give you a chance. They reached an extent of engaging a combined force with guns and other things. What guarantee do you give us that we are all safe as Ugandans?

Madam Speaker, we have been talking about royal guards but which law in the laws of Uganda constitutes royal guards and not police officers, the army or security guards who are registered by police? (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the entrance of this building, right after the security checkpoint, you can clearly see the owners of Uganda engraved on the walls. There are symbols of particular kingdoms that make up this nation. Those that do not appear there and were actually in existence are well represented. We know what kingdoms are, both African and traditional; kings must be protected. When we talk of protection of kings, we do not talk of the police or UPDF-

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR KASIBANTE: Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to insinuate that it is illegal for royal guards to protect the king? It is traditionally and culturally right to protect kings. 

THE SPEAKER: To the extent that there is no Act to manage recruitment and the deployment of royal guards, he is in order. 

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I want to help my brother, hon. Moses Kasibante, to understand that I know the laws of this country. Unfortunately, if you are not aware, you should consult me. There is no law that allows a king to constitute royal guards. They should be protected by the police and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). 

Madam Speaker, as a way forward, honestly as Ugandans this is a very shameful act- (Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: From pages 4 up to 5, the minister has highlighted all the people who have lost lives and the period. Honestly speaking, if the Government is in control, why should they wait for all this time? There is a paragraph which says that it is criminality and they had uniforms and guns. What have you been waiting for? The guns are illegal, so if somebody possesses them, why don’t you go and get them out in time? 

Madam Speaker, what amuses me in this House is that since 2012, nobody has been condemning these actions; there is no record on the Hansard. It is now, in 2016, when Government is coming up when things are hot. Please, Government, we fought for justice; take charge and protect the lives of the people. 

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you so much for the information. My humble request to my brothers from the affected region of Rwenzori is that, let us mobilise our people and put them in order because violence is not a solution. It is a shameful act in this century to find that Ugandans are fighting each other. It is an embarrassment to the whole world. 

It is also an embarrassment to find that witchdoctors are guiding our behaviour; they tell people to undress so that bullets do not get them. Let us not stand here and play games because it is a shame to all us. It is an embarrassment as a country and we should condemn it and avoid it. Let us sit and talk. Those who have been participating or politicking should be punished without mercy -(Member timed out.)  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, for the last two hours or so, this Parliament has had the occasion to elaborately debate the minister’s statement. Since then, dynamics have literally changed. First and foremost, the Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu has been charged and that in a way restricts us to what we can do.  

Secondly, this Parliament handled this issue on two occasions, and the House business can prove this. In both the Ninth and Tenth Parliament, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has carried out elaborate investigations into this issue and there are two reports pending. A conclusive debate of those two reports will give this Parliament an opportunity for a thorough debate on the core causes. It will also be a sober moment, not mixed with emotions that currently prevail in this Parliament. 

Therefore, my procedural prayer is that we conclude this debate, probably give the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs only one week, and then request them to present the two reports. This is in order for this Parliament to have an elaborate debate on the causes of the issue.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a procedural point. I had thought that having listened to colleagues as well as hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, it would be imperative for us to give a listening ear right now to the people of Rwenzori, who for some reason want somebody to at least listen to their challenges. Bringing those two reports together would certainly be very useful. There are new issues that have emerged, including this very recent incident. It is very unfortunate and indeed we sympathise with whoever lost relatives and we send our condolences. 

In the spirit of nationalism, this is the only national assembly that we have in the country. What the people of Rwenzori are praying for now is to see the national assembly and institutions of Government for the first time move to them in a unique way. They need to be given a chance, through listening to them. We need to find a comprehensive solution to this challenge before it escalates to the entire country. 

In addition to the two reports, we would probably need to give them another hearing. My prayer would also be not to only dwell on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs but to set up a select committee of Parliament that is more comprehensive and inclusive- (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable colleague. In the Ninth Parliament, we actually had this same issue; the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was tasked to go to the Rwenzori sub-region and to-date, they have never presented their report. 

That notwithstanding, even in this Tenth Parliament, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was again tasked to go back to Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo to investigate after we had cried out that there is a problem in the Rwenzori sub-region.
 
Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear on the period in which a report must be processed. They have gone over and above the period in which they were supposed to present their report. 

I, therefore, think that hon. Karuhanga is moving in the direction that the reports of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs have been overtaken by events. We complained that we were going to die but this committee never presented these reports. It would, therefore, be unfair to suggest that the committee brings the reports now when people have died.

Madam Speaker, it is fair and pertinent that a select committee is constituted to handle this task instead of handling issues like a post-mortem. 

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are almost ready with the report and I believe that we are still within time because we went in October 2016. We just need to be apportioned time and then the report will be presented on the Floor of Parliament. 

5.16
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, some of these issues are fresh; some are of a human rights nature and others are land issues. The issues are quite comprehensive. It cannot be only the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to handle this, with due respect to the committee members. 

Madam Speaker, sometime back you initiated an outreach programme where Parliament was reaching out to the communities and Ugandans actually appreciated it. For the first time, they actually saw their leaders sit with them in their communities and listen to their challenges. This would be an opportunity to say that there is a solution that is non-violent to this situation. This can be done if we have a committee that is – Honestly, we must put aside all these political patterns; it was so painful to see colleagues here jeer! These are 160 lives and the issue is so fresh! 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that, in your wisdom, you put together a very objective select committee of Parliament to give us a specific candid report that Ugandans would indeed agree to and pride, in as the foundation of the solution to the Rwenzori sub-region challenge. It would still have an impact on the entire nation. I beg to move.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I listened to the submission of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and the adjoining submission of hon. Gerald Karuhanga. My view is that they are not talking at cross purposes; the only distinction is that we can harmonise their debate and not attempt to denude or even downplay the work of a committee of Parliament. 

Instead, with your indulgence, we can reconsider the terms of reference of this committee, with a defined timeframe to deliver to Parliament. They should bear in mind the following: one, that there are some new issues emerging and yet the committee has done some work; two, some issues have taken a legal twist and therefore, they are in court. This will enable us to avoid overlapping with the mandate of another arm of Government.

Madam Speaker, if with your indulgence the terms of reference of this committee are looked at once again with a view of capturing possible overlapping issues, I believe we can do justice for the people of Kasese and also legislate for posterity for the people of Uganda. Otherwise, I sense a situation where we actually disempower ourselves as Parliament and that is potentially dangerous.

I am very sure that the committee members here are not oblivious of the emotions of this matter. I do not think that they can afford the luxury of a shoddy job. I so pray, with your indulgence, that we look at the mandate initially given to this committee with the view of capturing matters hitherto not thought through to be able to bring to Parliament a much more elaborate report. This will take into account emerging issues, considering matters that are in court. I so pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my personal capacity, I am a friend of the Omusinga and the Nyabaghole. When I discussed with them about three weeks ago, they were very excited about the visit of the committee and they were looking forward to the outcome.

5.21
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope we are not on the procedural matter because my interest was to debate this issue. I strongly believe that new events have taken place and we are allowed to supplement or extract issues from the report of the minister. I will, therefore, proceed to debate if you allow me.

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into issues of evidence, exhibits and the like.

MS ABABIKU: It is so sad that we want to re-write history. If we reviewed this at a global perspective, including East Africa and Africa as a whole, no one would wish to lose the peace that we have. However, I still have hope - because I did not hear from this report that it is an external arm which caused these events. The events have been caused by Ugandans and we are to blame.

I also believe that we have a solution to this issue. Will this be the last time it happens? We caused it and we are here; let us put an end to it. Government has the responsibility to protect the lives and property of this country. 

I also believe so much in the work of security. I believe in information gathering, management and utilisation. Having heard from the report, many of the attacks were successfully carried out. Where was the intelligence work? Can we strengthen the intelligence gathering system of this country? Let us have information so that we can protect our people regardless of the causes. 

Madam Speaker, I am still worried about the guns that are outside there. We do not know where they are and what the holders intend to do with them. Can Government tell us how these guns are going to be recovered? There is a lot of abuse of arms. 

In conflict management, we need to accept and have a win-win situation. Can we prioritise the lives of Ugandan regardless of our position? Can we cherish the peace that we have in this country -(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The last paragraph of page 8 of the minister’s statement says, “This led to the negotiations with His Highness by both security and political leaders for the attackers to surrender and hand over the weapons.” However, before we are told how the negotiations went, we are taken to the effects of the operation. The next sentence, after talking about negotiations, talks of operations. 

I would like to inform my honourable colleague that in the minister’s statement, you do not see any political will to solve these matters amicably. Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: The information I would like to give to the House is that in a civil war, there is no victor and no vanquished. All you get are dead bodies of the same nationality. Therefore, in this case, it is the Ugandans who won and lost. Instead, we should devise a way forward; we started it, we should find a way of solving it.

The next question I would like to answer is on the guns. I am a soldier and I am in charge of military doctrine; I know how we fight and why we fight. I am also in charge of establishments, so I know which gun should be where and when. Therefore, for 100 human beings gathered in one place, armed or unarmed, and they agreed to negotiate and we told them we were coming – Gentlemen, how many states do we have? I want everybody to think about it. We cannot have two states. There is something called sovereignty. You cannot have two armies in the same unit. You cannot say that you have a chief of staff - That is what we are getting. I beg to be advised.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, we must follow the laws that govern our country and be able to resolve issues in cognisance of the fact that everybody matters. (Member timed out.)

5.29
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As leaders, we feel so saddened about the loss of Ugandans in Kasese, both those that were on duty and other citizens that hail from the Rwenzori region.

Madam Speaker, when engaging in matters to do with peace, conflict resolution and reconciliation, what is key in the mind-set of the people is always the aspect of justice and fairness. Any human being would always want to question a system or a government in terms of whether or not there was procedural justice, interactive justice or distributive justice.

I would like to address myself to the statement of the honourable minister. When we come to listen to a matter as Parliament, we are looking for a way forward. What we expected was for hon. Jeje Odongo, as the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, to address himself to both sides of the matter. Whereas we have a list of the officers of the police force that were killed, we also needed an opportunity for Parliament to know how many other Ugandans died in the course of these skirmishes. Why is that list missing here? That is a matter of procedural justice.

Madam Speaker, from the report, we hear of the militia, terrorists as the commandant, Peter Elwelu, was saying, and then we hear of royal guards. What exactly is the definition of this group? If we want to be able to come to a situation where we can solve a matter, truth telling is very important. It is not about looking for where you should place the blame; otherwise, the fear that the Ugandans and the Members of Parliament have regarding escalation of what we went through -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ariko for giving way. Madam Speaker, giving rightful information is very important. Today, I watched NBS television between 8.00a.m. and 9.00 a.m. and the honourable minister in charge of ICT, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, was telling Ugandans that those who were killed were bandits and fools. He mentioned it clearly on national television. When we are giving information to the nation, we have to give information that will unite the country.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member. I would like to conclude. On the aspect of how we let people know of a matter, truth telling is very important. If we continue to try and cover up, it lets people bleed internally. When they find nowhere to seek justice, that is when the matter escalates to unimaginable levels.

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister mentioned a possible economic factor as one of the reasons why certain youth are being misled. Here we get to the element of distributive justice -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR ARIKO: People get into subservient and sometimes discontent activity because they feel they do not have any other opportunities. The Government and Parliament must device means of ensuring that all spheres and all areas of Uganda are addressed in terms of opportunities, personal growth and development. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I wish that this Parliament comes up with solutions that will bring lasting peace to Uganda. Thank you. 

5.34
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me at this painful moment to convey my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved on behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality and the people of Teso sub-region. Madam Speaker, you might not get time to convey your condolences, so let me do it on behalf of the people of Kamuli as well. (Laughter)

We feel for those who have lost their lives. This is not a time for anybody to be laughing because it is a serious moment where we need to mourn with those who are mourning. God is wise because He made man with two ears and one mouth so that we can listen more than we speak. I thought this is a time for us to listen more so that we become wise men too. 

Madam Speaker, the issues of Kasese and the Rwenzori sub-region are not issues to be played about with. My family and I shall offer our prayers to the people of Kasese; I feel for them. You can laugh when you do not have a problem in your house while somebody is crying but the day the problem arrives, you will feel it and you will know how it feels. I, therefore, would like to pray that this House comes together and forgets about colours. Let us talk about Kasese and lives because we need lives more. 

What hurts is that the President gives an authoritative statement and tells you to get away from there and you do not oblige. I think that is unfortunate. Secondly, someone goes to attack somebody who is surrendering but they shoot that one dead; is that okay?

Honourable members, we need to be honest with ourselves. When you become dishonest, God too will become dishonest with you one day. I, therefore, would like to pray that we become one now because this is the time. Thank you so much. 

5.37
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mbale, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to all those who have lost their lives. We stand with you. We mourn with you.

Madam Speaker, this is how things started when genocide was committed in Rwanda. This situation could have been avoided and negotiated peacefully. If the ultimatum had been extended for another one hour, we could have never lost all these lives. Even the military could have used teargas or cut off power or used water cannons, which could have avoided a catastrophe where all these people were killed. 

As I speak, the foreign policy of Uganda is at stake. When I look at Minister Okello, I sympathise with him because the whole world has seen what has happened in Uganda. When you commit crimes against humanity - The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here, I do not know whether he is still around, but he knows what is going to happen to this country. The issue of human rights has affected our nation, Uganda. Now, when the whole world sees the pictures that have gone live all over the whole world, surely, it is going to be very hard for this country to implement a foreign policy. 

The members of Parliament from Kasese tried and this was a political issue which could have been avoided, but now we have lost lives -(Ms Adoa rose_)- I do not have much time to take your clarification. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest a select committee of this Parliament should be set up to deal with this issue and not the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which is going to be chaired by somebody who is on that side. We would like a select committee to investigate and come up with a report on the issues of Kasese, Bundibugyo, Bwamba, Busongora; they have been there for a long time and we know it.

5.41
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): My condolences to the families of those whose relatives have lost their lives. However, we have not heard in the debate how many are in hospital, how many are injured and how we can help the injured not to lose their lives. 

It is a pity that hundreds of Ugandans are dead. I come from Kabale and I neighbour Rwanda. This reminds me of the time when Rwanda had genocide and you would be downhill and see blood flowing from one side of the hill down. When it rained, you would literarily see blood flowing down the hill. It is a pity.

However, I always ask myself one question: why do we wait to suppress revolts other than prevent them? Why would we not facilitate the Internal Security Organisation (ISO), the District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) and the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) very well in order to have better information? 

Let them be paid better because a DISO earns literally below Shs 800,000 take-home. He needs airtime, fuel for his vehicle, stationery and he also needs to facilitate the informers who are giving him this information with a transport refund. A GISO on the other hand takes less than Shs 300,000. How do you expect them to work under such hard conditions? Even then, their payments come very late and this has been happening for many years. In the Ninth Parliament, we discussed this here and they had taken four months without pay. We need to put ourselves in their shoes. Other than putting these robot-like men on the frontlines, let us prevent them from reaching the frontline by having a better system of governance. 

We have seen a lot of pictures on social media. What is it about this Yiira currency? Do you have a copy of it? Do you know it or it is just Photoshop? Does Government have any record showing that they have a currency that is being used? Where is it operating? Where do they do the exchanges from? We need to wonder and ask ourselves whether it is in existence. I first thought that –(Member timed out.)

MR TWINAMASIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The king of the Rwenzururu, Charles Wesley Mumbere, has been charged with murder and remanded until 13th of December. Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to move on with this debate when it is a court matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told you not to touch the evidence. Talk about other things. I have told you many times. In addition, it is not about one person; other people were also arrested.

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from the district of Kanungu, which borders Kasese, and the vibrations in Kasese can be felt in Kanungu. I was there over the weekend and I would like to send condolences to the people who have lost their dear ones in Kasese and the rest of the country.

Madam Speaker, we need to treat this matter soberly as has been urged. What is not coming out clearly is the issue that resulted in the death of many people, and the honourable Members of Parliament from Kasese are also not helping this House by not telling us. The honourable minister’s statement outlined some of the possible challenges, but they are not definite. I would like to challenge the Members of Parliament from Kasese, because I have heard them say they have a report, to clearly tell this House what those issues are. They are talking of dialogue and discussion with Kasese leaders, etc. but on what? Those issues are not being brought out clearly.

From the debate and also from what has been going on, the issues seem to rotate around the conduct of the leadership of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. Therefore, the issue is, are those challenges, which the people of Kasese face, matters which cannot be handled by Parliament, for instance? 

I heard references to the need for land reforms and different ethnicities living in Kasese. These are matters that I am sure if given time, we should be able to engage on. I heard questions about marginalisation, but in what sense? I have been in Parliament since 2006. Every year, we sit here and appropriate the budget. Are we saying there are things that Government does for the rest of the country and leaves out the Rwenzori region? That should come out clearly. If there are any underlying issues, should they be resolved through criminality? Are there no channels through which these issues can be debated?

Going forward, Madam Speaker, I heard the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs saying their report is almost ready. I also heard hon. Centenary saying the Members of Parliament from Kasese have a report on the issues which hurt them. I would think that we may not need to set up a select committee because in any case, have we seen the report from our committee and found it deficient in terms of raising the issues? –(Interjections)- What has changed? 

We requested our own committee of Parliament to look into the issues of the Rwenzori region –(Interjection)- No, you cannot say that because they have not reported. The chairperson of the committee said they went in October and they are almost ready with the report. 

I would like to suggest that we give time to the committee, maybe next week if they are ready, and also to the Members of Parliament from Kasese. If they have their report like hon. Centenary said, they can also table it and Parliament is given time to debate if there are those critical issues in the Rwenzori region which need to be handled –(Interjection)- I know the time may not there, but-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to remind you that the committee is bound to report because they are doing work for us. Therefore, we cannot stop them from reporting.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, when you critically look at the issues which propelled Parliament to assign the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to handle and investigate these issues in the Rwenzori sub-region, they were premised basically on the fact that they would avert this crisis that has already happened. –(Interjections)- Yes, I am the one who raised those issues on the Floor here. That is why I think that it is no longer necessary for a committee to report as a way of averting a crisis when the crisis has already happened.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like this Parliament to be aware that it is now a matter of the people of Kasese and Government. It should not be taken as tribal clashes –(Mr Gafabusa rose_)- I am not interested in your information, honourable. I do not want you to misinform me and the House.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee, hon. Judith Nabakooba –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter we are discussing is not a matter of Kasese District only. It is a matter of Kasese, Rwenzori and Uganda at large. Is it, therefore, procedurally right for us to continue localising a matter that concerns all Ugandans to Kasese only?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think what he means is that the centre of activity has been in Kasese. That is why they are interested. Please, conclude.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Chris Baryomunsi, the only problem with having to discuss the report of the committee, which has now taken a few months instead of the 45 days, is that it will not cover the events which happened on Friday and Saturday. 

The concern of Members who are raising the issue of a select committee is to get to the gist of the events that happened on Friday, Saturday and Sunday and also combine those with what happened in Bundibugyo, which I thought the minister would also cover in his statement. There was this issue where they said people had been displaced in a school and health centre. How could that have happened without the knowledge of the security team? Those are the issues. The other one is for issues which happened in 2014 and 2015, but we need the select committee for the issues which happened just last week.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable members, for the information. The Speaker has warned me about time. 

At the time when Parliament asked the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to investigate, the clashes and fights between the Bamba and the Bakonzo in Bundibugyo were the very issues happening in the Rwenzori region because of the conflict between the Obusinga and the Obudhingiya Bwa Bwamba and so forth. It is true these incidents have occurred, but they are not very different from the issues which have been happening there. 

I think Parliament can continue to get an update from the Minister of Internal Affairs on what is going on, but we should give a chance to the committee to present their reports. I am sure the report will capture the issues which are affecting Rwenzori region and we should be able to make a contribution and find a lasting solution.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to also caution ourselves on the issue of social media. I think the media sometimes inflames the situation; for example, one of the pictures which was being referred to as a picture of women tied in Kasese was downloaded from the internet. When you look at it, the women are not Ugandans but there is a mix up -(Interjections)- I saw that picture and if you are ICT competent, you can easily tell. The caution I would like to give is that we should restrain ourselves as Ugandans from inflaming a situation where lives are -(Interruption).

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether it is fortunate or unfortunate that I have been created a woman and the minister has never been and will never be a woman. He does not know, even though he is a gynaecologist, the shame and degradation a woman feels when she is exposed. 

These are women who were shown on social media. I do not know the criteria he used to identify that those people are not Ugandans. The honourable member said they were paraded and brought in a lorry when they were naked and sent to prison, but here is somebody denying that these women are Ugandans. Madam Speaker, is he in order to deny that those naked women who were exposed with their hands tied are Ugandans? Let him tell us the country they are from then.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think whether the women are Ugandans or not, any conduct that degrades a female’s body is not acceptable.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and I agree with it. However, the only point I was making is that the picture I saw with even encryption clearly indicated –(Interjections)- I am a medical doctor and I know the physiology of women. They were not from Uganda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.57
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief and straight. I really speak with a heavy heart because every Ugandan life lost innocently causes sadness and I would like every Ugandan who has lost a relative to know we share their grief.

Madam Speaker, secondly, I speak with a heavy heart because we are doing everything to make tourism a driving force for economic transformation and every time we have de-stabilisation and insecurity, it deflates our efforts. Right now, we are getting travel advisories and people are cancelling their planned trips. It is a heavy cost for this country.

Madam Speaker, I would plead with Members that when we are speaking on this matter, we focus on the fundamental factor causing all these rather than dwelling on the symptoms that take so much of our time.

I attended the coronation celebrations of the Omusinga just last month and fortunately, hon. Centenary and hon. Muruli Mukasa were there. Therefore, what I am going to speak can be confirmed if it is true. I represented the President at the coronation celebrations. I arrived at the site - this is a true story – and there were no policeman and UPDF soldiers at the coronation. The whole security at the functions was being handled by the royal guards. Half of the crowd which was there were definitely not Ugandans. I am giving facts only-(Interruption)- 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, I am perturbed by your statement. The clarification I seek is: did they request to have the UPDF and the police and they refused or they did not want them? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I can clarify on the information I got. However, what I wanted to give as evidence is simply this: At a function where the head of state was invited and he was represented, there was no central Government police and UPDF. All the security was under royal guards. The question I would like to pose is: would you like to know the fundamental reason? I was there and I realised that half of the crowd came from the Democratic Republic of Congo. There are three issues you need to answer - (Interjections)- Yes, I know because I saw and talked to them. I have evidence. 

Madam Speaker, I saw the essence of a state. Honourable colleagues, whether you want it or not, the essence of a state is the monopolisation of the means of coercion. The moment those means are in two hands, then you have a problem. That is the question he raised: How many states do we have in this country? (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, it is the duty of Government, the army and the police to provide security to all Ugandans. The minister is proceeding in a manner that is not clarified. The police and the army were not restricted by anybody. It is not the role of the cultural institution to deploy police and the army because they do not have them. 

Is the honourable minister in order to insinuate and try to allege that it is the cultural institution which should have deployed the police and the army, which they do not have?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the level of the guest of honour is what determines the security situation in any particular place. If the President was not coming, why would the army be there? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I know your position once you have ruled. Thank you very much for your guidance. However, hon. Nzoghu was not there. 

Let me pose the second question, Madam Speaker, to show the fundamental problem. You have a king with a kingdom whose boundaries are not defined. As he was addressing the audience, I was there. He was addressing his subjects in Congo who are in Uganda and appealing to them - literally declaring a war on a neighbouring country when you are in Uganda.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I have a republic constitution here. This is the Constitution and I can read and ask you, Madam Speaker, about it because you come from areas where there are cultural leaders. The Constitution states thus in Article 98: “The President shall take precedence over all persons in Uganda, and in descending order, the Vice President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice…” When you are in Busoga, does the cultural leader see you as taking precedence over him? 

The moment cultural leaders do not recognise that precedence, you have a structure problem. Are you in a republic or a kingdom state? This problem must be solved. When I was there representing the head of state, I did not feel I took precedence over the kingdom -(Laughter)

6.05
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, the tragic loss of life of Ugandans is indeed deeply regrettable. We must condemn the circumstances that have led to the tragic deaths in Kasese. Indeed, it is a serious challenge to all of us here as Ugandans that such a thing has happened.

Given that it is a challenge, this is not the time for us to point accusing fingers. It is not even the time for us to play a blame game. It is now time for us to offer true strategic leadership without losing sight of our strategic national interests. 

There are very many interests but peace, stability and security are very important strategic interests. Therefore, we should avoid any emotion and go a step ahead and see what eventually will clear all these circumstances that lead to tragic loss of life, not only in Kasese or the Rwenzori area but anywhere else. What has happened in Kasese maybe has a precursor. We saw something like this here in Kayunga several years back and we do not want a reoccurrence of that kind of thing.

This is the time now to go a mile further and even rethink and review the entire foundation of these cultural institutions – legal, policy, mind-set, constitutional. Maybe what is happening is that the systems are not working properly in that whole environment. There is an embedded conflict that is likely to come up and is coming up if we do not take strategic direction.

Therefore, it is okay that the committees have been put in place and they will give their reports. Possibly, the Speaker will also allow the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs a few weeks or so, so that they can update their report. In that way, when it comes here, we can then address ourselves to the real issues and make sure we do a thorough job and put in place an arrangement which will not pit one section of the country against Government or alienate any of us and –(Member timed out.)

6.10
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Within the two minutes, I hope I will be able to get done. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I come from Alur Kingdom that survived the wrath of abolition even by Dr Obote because it remained so insignificant, unnoticed but we remained formidable. Most of the Alur people are in Congo and therefore most of the subjects of the bigger parts of the kingdom are in Congo. Many times when the President visits or attends any kingdom function, he invites the Congolese more to go and shake his hands. Therefore, this raises the question of what then is peculiar with the kingdom we are talking about. The peculiar issue here is, if the President can call the king and even share issues on phone, that means the two gentlemen know the fundamental issues between them.

Madam Speaker, the problem in this country is that we use the creation of kingdoms as a political vehicle to achieve a political end. You have the Toro Kingdom this time and then you bring the Bwamba with specific instructions and intention. This is where we go extremely wrong. Therefore, we must re-evaluate the operationality and the operations of the kingdoms that we have in this country.

The minister who was on the Floor – the friend to hon. Okupa – said something and if that was an intelligence report that he gave to the President, and if the President is not in his right state of mind or he is kind of heated up, he can order anything.  Therefore, we have got to question even the quality of the intelligence briefings we give to the head of state. Sometimes our security briefings inflame situations –(Member timed out.)

6.12
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Amuru District, allow me to extend my deepest condolences to the families that have been affected. It is really sad. 

I would like to emphasise one key thing and that is dialogue. I must say, dialogue or peace talks are cheaper than violence. We can opt for that. If we are to begin counting the cost of the violence that has already taken place, it is too much. However, if we had opted for dialogue, it would have been cheaper. 

We need not to emphasise what happened in northern Uganda. It took a shorter time for issues to be resolved when people dialogued. Much as we did not reach a conclusion, at least there is a bit of calmness. Therefore, the emphasis I would like to give is that dialogue must be given a priority. I am happy the leaders of Kasese are ready for this. It is time for each party to swallow their pride and go to the negotiating table and then set the facts right for the good of our people.

When I saw the picture of women tied up and naked, I said to myself, “I hope, and God help me, these pictures are not real because if they are and these things are happening in Uganda, then as a country we are doomed.” We cannot play about with the dignity of women and survive as a country. We cannot. I am still hoping they are wrong. However, with the things I am hearing, I am in shock and we need to pray for our country. 

Today in the catholic chaplaincy, we dedicated the people of Kasese and all the families that lost their lives in the hands of the Lord. We are praying for this country and those who really pray, let us do it earnestly. Pray earnestly for our country. Women and men, let us go on our knees and pray for our country, Uganda. Our motto says, “For God and my country”. This is my prayer and appeal. Let us not laugh about it. Philly Bongole Lutaya said, “Today it is me and tomorrow it is someone else”. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MR GUTOMOI ANGIRO ABACANON (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the constituting of a select committee of Parliament to investigate these recent attacks in the Rwenzori area, so that the whole world gets to know clearly what the truth of the matter is. You cannot arrest and undress women, transport them for a long distance and detain them and you think you have hidden all the necessary information that we demand.

Madam Speaker, this country has written yet another piece of history. This is the second king’s palace which has been attacked in this country and people therein killed, like it happened to King Charles Wesley Mumbere. We cannot hide from this; it is true that it has happened. Now that this has happened, according to what I have observed here, it seems that you kill and you talk or you talk and kill, neither of which is good. We need to learn to talk and reconcile; if we cannot do that, then this country is already no more.

Some three men came to my home yesterday morning from my constituency. They were going to a show in Lira. One of them was fairly old and educated and he was holding a newspaper in his hand.  He asked me, “Honourable, can you understand this picture you see here?” I asked, “What is your take on it?” He said, “This man started from Luweero triangle, he went to the north, went to the east and now he has gone back home”. I then asked who this man was. He said, “You should know the man very well.”

I asked him what his suggestion was and he said that he should not try it in northern again because it would be very serious. We have suffered and you can see how people are being killed and heaped like firewood. What are they going to do to those kind of people? Is it not a public shame to the whole world? How could we get to this without talking? Therefore, it means that the guns talk or arrest. Now, there is no warrant of arrest except the gun. Look at how the guns have arrested these people the whole day.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am surprised to see people divided over death; whether in the Opposition or not, this is a very serious matter. I would like to find out how the intelligence of Uganda failed to learn about what they called an attempt. Was there an attempt by the king to overthrow this government? Let the minister be very clear about that. 

I would also like to know if the minister is serious about why the UPDF was called in as reinforcement. I would also like to know if these dead policemen were all killed before the UPDF were called in for reinforcement or they were killed while shooting at each other, in which case they could also be shooting themselves - we do not know the story. Let us be clear about this. Thank you.

6.20
CAPT. EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to personally express my heartfelt condolences to the people of Kasese and Uganda who lost their dear ones during this scuffle. 

Honourable members, I would like to mention that what happened on Saturday could be a spark of issues that have been pending. I would also like to pray that we give the committee a chance to give us their report and work along with members of Parliament from Kasese to come up with concrete issues such that we provide proper solutions. If we look at what happened on Saturday only, it is like treating symptoms. Therefore, we need a proper diagnosis through the report that the committee will give us; work along with honourable members from Kasese.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to comment on the issue of the media. Social media has put out a lot and I would like us, honourable members, to take caution because some of these things could be true and some false. When we are commenting, we are the torches of Ugandans; what comes out of our mouths can either kill or build our nation. Therefore, we need to be extra careful about the comments we give about these photos. Thank you.

6.22
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I bring our heartfelt condolences from the people of Kapchorwa in particular, Sebei sub-region and eastern region in general. 

I will give an example of a similar conflict or dispute between Sebei sub-region and Karamoja sub-region. It started in a small way back in 1930 but when it came to the 1980s, we had deaths that are even more than these of Kasese. Therefore, when I see this happening in Kasese, it takes me back to what we went through. 

Until the Eighth Parliament, solutions had never been given. Whenever they called the people around, all of them were pulling ropes. Karamoja was pulling ropes as well as Sebei sub-region. In the Eighth Parliament, as parliamentarians of the sub-regions, we called for a meeting and looked into the real issues. I, therefore, would like to say that even if we institute a select committee now and the people of the sub-region are not ready to give the real issues, we are wasting time. 

Even at that time, we had select committees. We would go there and people would not give the information. If somebody gave the information, they would go and harass them. Therefore, even if you institute a select committee and the committee presents the information and the information that was given to them is not the real information that these people had internally, we shall be wasting time. I, therefore, call upon our friends in that sub-region to be the pillars of peace in that area –(Applause)– whether you are a Mwamba or whatever. 

Madam here was with us and the honourable member, Vincent, was with us. We called a meeting and said we must bring this conflict to an end –(Member timed out.)

6.24
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the honourable members to convey condolences on behalf of the people of Serere and especially the women of Serere. Some of them have been calling me since the other day. We share with you, our colleagues, the leaders, during this trying moment; it is not easy. However, we also want a solution and you should help us as the women MPs. 

You talked about women who were arrested and taken to Jinja. We want to know how many women are in prison, because it helps us to lobby and to buy them some items like clothes. We can give them to you to take or some of our members can go there. So, we want to know how many women there are. 

We also want to know about this picture on social media. When you look at it closely, there are about 20 women lined up inside a certain perimeter wall. I am a woman and I know the figures of women from different regions of Uganda –(Laughter) – I want us to be genuine. There was a girl on social media saying she is stranded in Kampala because she had just arrived from Kasese and she had nowhere to stay. However, when you look at this girl, she has very long nails –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to complete.

MS ADOA: I am requesting that we all tell the truth. If these women are indeed the ones in prison, we want to see how we can support them. We want to go and –(Interruption) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know that in this country there are people who resemble each other cross-culturally. I also know that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs visited the palace and the Members on that committee know the identities of some of those women in that photograph. Hon. Judith Nabakooba, please be honest and tell us because you went there. 

Is it in order, therefore, for a Member to insinuate that the Bakonzo look in a particular way and therefore the people in that photograph do not have any resemblance with the Bakonzo?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is under investigation; let us first establish who those people are. 

6.28
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What has happened in Kasese has affected all of us as Ugandans. It has also affected some of us directly because some of the people who died come from our constituencies. 

You heard my brother, hon. Odonga Otto, saying that two of the police officers were from Pader. I want to take this opportunity to correct the record. One of them is Corporal Patrick Anywar from Pajule Subcounty, and that is the subcounty where I come from. I come from Pajule Subcounty and we lost Patrick Anywar. The other one is Police Constable Gaetano Awucu. I think they spelt the name wrongly; the right name is Gaetano Awucu and he comes from Puranga Subcounty. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is about the remarks that the President of this country has been making during national functions. Recently, when celebrating the Independence Day, he made the same remarks that nobody can disturb the peace and security of this country. However, people are dying. Even here in Kampala, people died only recently. The other day, I raised an issue about how Akena Kenneth from Pader was killed. People are dying. So, where is the peace and security? 

Can we hear from the President also? I know the minister has made a statement on behalf of Government and on behalf of the President because it is the President who assigns the minister. However, I want to hear from the President in relation to the remarks he has been making in this country of peace and yet we still see people dying. 

As a leader in Pader District, I have failed to find words to calm my people down. Three people were killed gruesomely within a span of two weeks. Madam Speaker, that is terrible and we are in pain. As I talk, we are waiting for the bodies. Hon. Odonga Otto said that they are now being buried but the bodies are still in Kasese. So, Madam Speaker, we need explanations that can calm down our people. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall want to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs about their arrangements for these people to be taken to their homes for burial. We shall want to know whether there is facilitation for the dead officers to be taken to their homes for burial. 

6.32
MR INNOCENT KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have noted with concerned and appreciated the discussion of my honourable colleagues.  I have seen that the biggest emphasis has been finding a long-term solution to the problem of Kasese. 

As someone who has knowledge in crisis management, I want to draw your attention to something. This time round, when there are still a few clashes, people are not able to access food and medical care and they are a little scared and scattered. What can we do as Parliament to make sure that these people access food, get security for their lives and access other social amenities? After that, we can talk of the long-term measures, after being sure that life is going on normally. 

The other issue is, I have noted with concern that the Members of Parliament from that region, with respect to the different clans that they come from, are clashing here. This is on record. This is a very fragile moment when every statement from a leader can spark more trouble. I request that for the sake of building peace, let us try to agree and calculate our statements. 

The other thing is that, I want to challenge Government to always act quickly to avert such problems. If they had acted on those previous reports, we would not have reached here. As we noted, the MPs and the other leaders in the area have always wanted to meet the President –(Member timed out.)

6.34
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am now looking at the way forward. First, on behalf of the people of Bukedea, I send my heartfelt sympathy to the people of Kasese. 

If we are going to look at a formidable select committee, we should have a moment of brutal truth from the Kasese team, especially the leaders and the kingdom people, and then from the Government side. We also would need dialogue between the Kasese people and the Government and there should not be counter-accusations. People should put aside egos and Government should also give the people of Uganda a hearing. 

Also, it is not about the President; we should learn to delegate. If people delegated, we would not have this kind of problem. The presidency is not His Excellency Yoweri Museveni; it is an office. If there was somebody who was to come in to solve this issue, I do not think we would have had this problem.

We should also regulate the issuing and use of guns. Over the weekend, we lost Hajji Kiggundu but nobody is talking about it. Akena’s case is still pending and nobody is talking about it. It is just because the Kasese matter has come in but the same way they shot Kiggundu is the same way a Member of Parliament will be shot if we do not regulate the use of these guns. It is up to the minister now to come out and see who should be given a gun and how it should be used, other than saying, “We got illegal guns”. Thank you.

6.36
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Dokolo and Lango generally, I join the rest of my colleagues to express my condolences to the relatives of the people who have died in Kasese.

Madam Speaker, we should be debating in tears. Yesterday, I got a message that the Speaker wanted me at 6.30 a.m. I thought the Speaker wanted to tell me that women would be dressed in black today to appear in Parliament. I did not know that we had another event. This matter is serious; it does not only touch on the security of this country but also the disgrace of women in this country. 

I will address this matter in two ways. First, in this debate, let us come up with one voice to condemn what has happened in Kasese. That should be unconditionally. We do not care whether the Government was trying to defend somebody or the militia were doing something, we have to condemn what happened in Kasese. The Government has the power and all the machinery to control whatever is happening anywhere. 

Some of you people do not know the pain that the people of Kasese are feeling; we know it because we come from the north. Madam Speaker, when you were still Deputy Speaker, a time came when we walked out and marched as the people of Lango because we were telling the people of Uganda that the Langi were dying but no action was being taken. We thought that it was useless for us to sit here and hence we walked out.

We thank you, Madam Speaker, because the Parliament of Uganda came out in one voice to say that something had to be done and indeed, something was done. We opted for a peaceful resolution of conflict in the north. Therefore, we have no other way of resolving this issue other than Parliament coming up with a statement that whatever is happening in Kasese, we do not want to point fingers -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute for the Commissioner.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, whether you accept it or not, I think it is a fact that the joint military operation has overstepped its boundary. There is some element of brutality on the part of the joint military operation. There could be evidence of some militia operations in the area but there is a better way of handling that.

Finally, I suggest that we come up with a select committee. We cannot leave this unresolved because of the seriousness of this matter. I cannot go and sleep on this matter; we can debate up to tomorrow. You can choose because I know you are a mother and are feeling the same. We cannot get out of this chamber until we agree that a resolution has been found. 

I must say that the people outside, as we debate now, are watching. They were very happy with what Parliament did on the issue of sand mining. So, if we were very concerned about the mining of sand, what about the lives of the people of Kasese? (Applause) Madam Speaker, I have resolved that if we do not come up with a statement, I am going to sleep here. (Laughter) Thank you. 

6.40
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully looked at the statement from the minister. On page 1, the minister gives statistics of only the army and the police but he does not give statistics of the civilians and other people who were killed. 

In one of my subcounties alone, Bwesumbu Subcounty, they shot dead 23 people, who were not even royal guards. In Maliba Subcounty, they also killed more than four people. In Bugoyi Subcounty, they killed more than four people. In Kisunga Subcounty, in Bukonzo East, they also shot more than four people. In Ihandiro it was the same. However, the minister is not reporting about them. You wonder what type of statement this is and whether he is a minister of Government or a minister of fabrication. This is unfortunate, Madam Speaker, because we must come out clearly and mention where the problem is.

That notwithstanding, you recall that on 25th November, I had a function in my constituency, where the Queen of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu was the chief guest. Since the two functions ended very late, we had to accompany the Queen to her palace together with the Leader of Opposition, and we stayed there up to 10.00 p.m. 

While we were still there, the Omusinga received a call from people who were outside the house that there were soldiers moving towards the palace. The king then asked who those people were because the Government had withdrawn the UPDF escorts from the Omusinga. The minister has not told us what the Government did after withdrawing the UPDF from the Omusinga. How would the Omusinga have security when the UPDF had been withdrawn? That is a fundamental question that the minister should have also addressed.

The people of Kasese are peace-loving people who have no fundamental problem with other tribes -(Interjections)- No, I do not want information right now; you wait. 

When I scrutinised pages 2 and 3 of this statement, this is what I come up with: One, in my assessment of this statement, the Government has failed to mention one critical aspect - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude, please. 

MR NZOGHU: In the 6 July 2014 attacks, there was a gentleman called Kapilongo, that commanded the attacks right from Kasese to Bundibugyo. He mobilised our people in that region and this culminated into the attacks. To the dismay of the people of Rwenzori, Kapilongo, who caused the death of our children in the barracks and army installation, was given Government protection. 

Two, the people he mobilised were arraigned before court and yet he has never been arraigned before court. People are asking why this is happening because he was the same person that arranged this. (Interruption) 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague from Kasese is that the said Kapilongo as reported in the statement, was indeed the leader of that group in 2014 that carried out simultaneous attacks in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko. 

When the army pursued them, there was an arrangement for the leaders and the fighters to surrender. Kapilongo was one of those who surrendered to Government and asked for amnesty. He helped more than 100 fighters get amnesty from Government. The fact that he is not arrested is because he asked for amnesty from Government, which he was granted, together with over 100 fighters that he came along with. 

THE SPEAKER: I think your time is up. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I am just concluding. I have looked at this statement and I can see a lot of gaps. The events that transpired after 25 November 2016 clearly need a new spectrum in this Parliament. We must set up a select committee to undertake this and even to be able to uncover what happened before. 

It would be unfair, Madam Speaker, for us in this Parliament, where we have leaders who are on the Government side and are representing all of us, to give very false accusations. We have over five million Bakonzo staying in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and we have relatives across Congo. When we have functions in Kasese, they come and attend; it is not a problem. 

I recall very well when we were debating the issues of cultural institutions in this Parliament, the honourable Speaker and Chair on that day was hon. Jacob Oulanyah and the question asked was: does culture have any boundaries? His ruling was that culture has no boundaries. That is why the Kabaka of Buganda can even go and meet his subjects in London. The Kyabazinga can meet his subjects in Sweden because there are people who pay allegiance to their cultural –(Member timed out.)

6.48
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to convey condolences from the people of Budadiri East to the people of Kasese, who are actually our cousins. We share very many cultural norms with them, so we bring our heartfelt condolences. 

My issue here is that we are all enjoined by the Constitution and it requires us to respect the law. I know that when such situations happen, there are acts of lawlessness and there are people who perpetuate lawlessness. I know that right now, there are people in Kasese who are thinking about what they should do now that the king has been arrested. I would like at this juncture to appeal to our brothers, particularly leaders from Kasese, to calm down the situation and the people. We should allow the due process of the law to take its course. We know that if we do not do this, the situation may escalate.

I would like to also advise that if possible, we need to sensitise the public. We need to go to the media such as radio and mobilise the public. They need to know that the situation is under control. You can involve some of us in the sensitisation process. Let nobody now begin taking the law in their hands. That is my humble appeal. 

I would like to also advise the police to do a lot of community policing in the area because I know that there are quite a number of groups that may form. This should be discouraged and the police should take charge on this. I thank you. 

6.50
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also wish to convey my condolences to the bereaved families. When I got this information and I saw the news concerning the frontline of the gun battle that took place in Kasese, I was not happy at all, because I saw the blood of Ugandans actually flowing without any cause. 

Although we might be having some problems, I did not expect them to get to that extent. When I looked at the weapons being used by the Omusinga’s royal guards, their weapons are not that superior; they are still using very remote weapons. Therefore, in my view, there was lack of intelligence in solving that problem. How could a whole UPDF attack people who were armed with arrows? It is very embarrassing. Our army is a protection army; if there was anything, they should have deployed the mobile police to handle these people. 

When I got the story from my colleague in Kasese, he said eight unarmed youth were shot. That commander should be investigated because what they did is done in the battlefield. How do you kill someone who has put his hands up? If we are setting up a committee, let us resolve that the commander who shot unarmed young boys should not be part of the UPDF. 

The President should meet the Members of Parliament from Kasese and some prominent elders. Let them sit together and discuss these issues in a serious atmosphere to find the right solution to this problem. Although the idea of forming a committee is a good one, the first people that are supposed to pacify that area are the leaders of Kasese. Let them be given an opportunity to air their views freely so that we get to know -(Member timed out.) 

6.53
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At last I have caught your eye. I would like to thank the minister for giving this statement. I want to also convey my sincere condolences to the people of Kasese for the loss of their dear ones. 

Madam Speaker, I come from Kagadi District and last evening, I received a call from my constituency that there are about 100 people that have fled from Kasese to Kagadi. They are now internally displaced in my district. Therefore, this is a problem not only for Kasese but for the entire mid-western region. 

Peace is a principal factor in development. If there is no peace, there is no development. The Government has been credited for keeping peace for the last 30 years but this credit is dying away. You all know that every week, there is someone shot and killed in this country. We are here saying that we are investigating and yet several investigations do not end or we do not get a report back. 

I would like to give a solution, like you have proposed, that Government should re-call all guns in private hands, just like what they did in Karamoja during the disarmament exercise. The same should be done in the regions that we are suspecting to be prone to insecurity. If they re-call these illegal guns, we shall not see problems like the ones in Kasese now, or what happened in Masanafu here in Kampala, where someone was shot, or what happened recently at Lugogo, among many others. We need to get a mechanism of reviewing who has a gun – (Member was timed out.)  

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the House in sending our sincere condolences to the people of Kasese, who have lost their dear ones. I also would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the timely statement and Members for the discussion and the debate that has happened here.

I rise to support the suggestion by hon. Kivumbi, hon. Mathias Mpuuga and the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. It was unfortunate that the report of the Ninth Parliament was never debated. Maybe we could have found some solutions by now as a House. It was this House, which gave a special assignment to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go in Kasese and Rwenzori and find out what was happening. We are glad that the committee is at the tail-end of finishing their report. 

The problems of Kasese did not just start on Friday last week. They have been there and the committee looked at this. We were told that they met the king and the religious leaders, the local leaders and they spoke; they literally spoke to everybody. What they have not yet tackled is the arrest of the king and the killings of Saturday. I therefore think, and I would like to move the House, that we support the proposal that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs hurries up with the report and gets back –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Bahati. Madam Speaker, it is important that we understand the magnitude of the problem. However, it is also important that we understand the timeliness of our operations as Parliament. Even in this Parliament, our rules are very clear that any report from the committee needs to be processed within 45 days - not one, two or five years.

How would this report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs help this Parliament when what we speculated and what we asked Parliament to guard against is what has happened? How would it help?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that they should never report? That is what you are proposing.

MR NZOGHU: I am not saying that they should not report. I am saying that it would be good for a select committee to handle this issue and then they can work jointly with that committee. They can even get information from them and be able to compare notes instead of leaving them to do work as late as this.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, what we want is to find solutions to the problems affecting the region. We want to find these solutions as soon as we can. We have a committee of our own, which we gave a special assignment. It was never in their line of duty at that time; we gave them specific guidelines on what to look at. Therefore, since –(Mr Amodoi rose_)- Just give me a minute to give information before I lose the point. Therefore, if this committee is – (Interruption)

MR AMODOI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to this august House is that, a few months ago, you gave the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs a task to call hon. Pecos Kutesa, because he alleged here on the Floor of Parliament that he saw cows moving to Karamoja and Lango in Acholi and Teso. However, this committee, where I serve, has done nothing up to today. That is the information I wanted to give. I, therefore, support a select committee to handle this matter. (Applause)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I belong to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. If we are to present our report now, I think it has been overtaken by events. There are very many new things that have taken place. Unless Parliament gives us new terms of reference, then we go on the ground for more weeks and then present the report, but if we are to present it as it is, there are many things that have been overtaken by events. The select committee may do it better. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In that respect, if the committee thinks that they need additional information to complete the circle, they can have one week and update their report. 

Let us respect our committees. They have used parliamentary resources to do this work. They should report and we solve this problem as soon as we can. After all, for a select committee – We do not need another 30 or 40 days to discuss the issues of Rwenzori region. Thank you.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I suggest that as a committee, we should be given some time to present our report. If you are not satisfied with our findings, we can then recommend a select committee. You cannot simply dismiss our report before it is even presented. Do you know what is in our report? Do you know what its contents are? You do not know; so, please do not be biased.

Lastly, honourable members from Kasese region - I will still emphasise this - you remember when we met, I told you to be the first people to advocate for peace. Be the ones to preach peace. If you go with that anger back to Kasese, you may escalate the situation and get it out of hand. I strongly advise that you advocate for peace. Preach dialogue and I believe we shall be in a position to contain the situation. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Herbert Ariko rose_)

7.03
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Sit down (Laughter) Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure are clear. This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It is guided by the Rules of Procedure as well as the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda -(Interjections)- I am raising a point of order. 

Madam Speaker, I had risen with the purpose of catching the Speaker’s eye as an elected Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality. Rt Hon. Moses Ali is an elected Member of Parliament. In rising up, I was exercising the privilege of representing the people of Soroti Municipality. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, no matter the age, the rank, the status, the position of the honourable member, for him to shout at me to sit down?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not think I heard. I think it was not on the Hansard and that it why I did not hear.  (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally, I did not feel that I shouted. Therefore, I do not know who shouted on my behalf. I actually sympathetically appealed to him to sit -(Laughter)- because we have taken a lot of time on this issue. I think we should give each other a chance. Thank you for the wise ruling as usual.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government, I want to pass on our condolences for the loss of Ugandans in Kasese. What is common is that it does not matter whether you are termed as royal guards or police or civilians, the result is that everybody there who was shot and died. It has led to a lot of grief for many people throughout the country. Therefore, on behalf of Government, I would like to convey our condolences to the family, friends and relatives of the deceased for reasons beyond their control.

Secondly, the reality on ground now is that, since this happened in Kasese, the situation has changed. I will start with the decision you have taken that people should debate this without encroaching on what would be termed as the “sub judice rule” because the matter is in court. I really appreciate your decision because the time you have given to this House to debate this matter has proved that Parliament has taken this issue of how this matter could have been stopped. 

I have been following the debate and indeed, both sides are aggrieved. Everybody wished these things could have been avoided. However, now that they have not been avoided, it has brought us to this new situation: One, many people have died and we could not stop it; two, our king is now not only arrested but also charged in courts of law. That is a new situation. What is left for us all here, whether in Government or not, is how we will manage the damage. 

We must now concentrate on damage control and how we will stop any further damage from happening to the people, property and everything. Therefore, that means that the court will definitely take its course. However much we debate here, it will not stop the law from taking its course. There are three branches of Government; you can understand this the way you like but the court proceedings will take their course if you are charged. I was once arrested and charged with treason and the court was given its chance to take its course. It took me almost three years to get out. Therefore, because this matter is national, my appeal is from now onwards is for us to stabilise and not be too emotional.

This country has gone through difficulties. In 1966, I was sitting my O’ level exams in Old Kampala -(Interjections)- I do not know where you were (Laughter). You know how far Lubiri is from Old Kampala. That day, we all ran away from school because we heard a lot of shooting. We did not understand. From 1966 to today, how many years are those? If you can break it up, from 1966 to 2016, how many years are those? Those are 50 years. Therefore, it means that this country has gone through many problems but it depends on how we handle our situations.

I do not know how long our king will take to overcome this problem in court. It takes 14 days, whether investigations are adequate or not, for someone to keep appearing. I do not know whether we are going to have the opportunity to start negotiations without the principal - the king. Is he going to lead the negotiations? What is going to happen? Are we going to wait until he finishes with court? I hope that he will overcome it. I am talking from experience. I am speaking the truth. Even if we say we start negotiations, with whom? There are many MPs here and those people in the villages may perhaps need to form a committee and get guidance from the king.

Therefore, I would like to appeal, that the previous Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, who have the reports, present them. Even if it is one year, there is no time limit; let them present the reports here and let us see whether there are some good things there. A select committee may find difficulties; even if they go to Kasese now, whom are they going to meet? The principal is not there. Everybody will have their own interests. There is a lot of division there. (Interjections)- No, please, Madam, allow me not to accept any further interference.

THE SPEAKER: That is your choice.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am not interested in any of this. What we are supposed to do now is to bring peace to Kasese. The absence of shooting is peace, so stop people from shooting anyhow in Kasese. 

Madam Speaker, the minister has given us his report but the other colleague did not give us a report. I do not know whether it is too late for us to receive that report. He read a lot of information here but we do not have it. Bringing peace is now a concern of everybody, whether you are from Kasese or not. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is not an issue of the people of Kasese alone. Honourable colleagues have spoken I do not know how many times, as if it is an issue of only Kasese; no! Without the whole House, nothing will be decided on Kasese if we leave it as you are suggesting. (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is our senior colleague and we have listened to him. The honourable member did get up wanting to interject but he was ruled out. Is it now in order for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to go personal and continue in that line? 

Instead of proceeding, he is going ahead pointing at the honourable colleagues. Our rules do not allow us to go personal. Is the honourable Prime Minister in order to point fingers directly and take things personal to a colleague when you had ruled for the Member not to interject? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal for calm from all the Members. I know the matter is emotive and I know we have sat for a long time but 179 people dying is not a small matter which we can discuss in 20 minutes. Please, keep calm and let us conclude the debate. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have really tried to show my personal grievance also but people try to localise this matter as if it is only regional; no. This matter involves all of us. During the war in the north, they said it was a northern war but they did not know that everybody has suffered in this country because of that war. Even if you are not at the frontline, you pay heavily on taxes because you have to-

THE SPEAKER: General, please, conclude.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I do not know why I should not be given enough time when everybody here has been speaking. Why wouldn’t you allow me two minutes? Thank you; I assume you have given me one more minute.

THE SPEAKER: Provided you focus on a solution. Do not continue inciting Members.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: How do I incite, Madam Speaker? I have been incited for three hours and I kept quiet.

THE SPEAKER: The difference is that you are a General and others are not. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The reality is that let us all go back home and keep calm. Let us be united, fight for peace in this country and pray for our king to overcome his problem as soon as possible, so that he comes out to lead his people. 

Let us also hope that Parliament continues with whatever information we have on these problems. To me, a select committee is going to be very impossible because the principal is not there. Whether you will be allowed to see him or not, we do not know. We cannot just form a committee to go round. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable Members of Parliament. Now, the question is whether we carry out further investigations in order to conclude the report. The committee did some work and I think they had the benefit of meeting with the principal and maybe other actors. However, as they say, the situation has changed and we do not know where the new committee will start from.

However, I would like us to put our heads together, see whether there is a need to either add to the terms of reference of the committee or let them report and we discuss from there. We need to think about it and take a decision on Thursday. Let us look at it and also see if there is anything we need to formulate, which we think is not in the old one. We can then decide on whether we should have a select committee or our existing committee. However, let us take the decision on Thursday after discussions and reflecting- maybe just to identify Members who can put their heads together.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. Listening to the Prime Minister and the passionate submissions of colleagues from Kasese, you can feel the tension in the House and the passion about this matter. 

Let us bear in mind that when we eventually choose to go with a select committee, by implication we shall have rendered the other reports nugatory. Therefore, going forward, we have had the experience here in this House of those kinds of situations and we would implore the Speaker to consider those kinds of situations. 

Madam Speaker, as a form of a repository, remember we had a challenge in the Ninth Parliament when we had reports of -(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Is it procedurally right for one Member to be making a contribution on the Floor and another Member is standing up? Hon. Jeje did not come to this Parliament as a Member who is blind. Therefore, he was able to see clearly that there was a Member standing and speaking. I just want clarification because I thought maybe something has happened to our procedure. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mpuuga.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I was trying to draw your attention and that of the House to a similar experience we had during the Committee on Local Government report problem and how we handled it. Eventually, a select committee was able to work with the existing committee to break the impasse and produce a report to Parliament. If that can be thought through, this Parliament can have headway, of course bearing in mind the timelines and need for us to break down the emotive nature of this situation emerging in Kasese.

I would also like to reassure the General that even when the principal is on remand for the next 14 days or so, he has recourse to bail. There are many avenues the law provides for a member to be interacted with. The laws of this land have not changed to make one unable to be attended to by any group of people that needs them to try and curtail a situation. 

Therefore, I pray that we make use of our history in the Ninth Parliament and find a middle line so that the key interest of Members, especially from Kasese, are taken care of without derailing the intensity of work that has been done by Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us reflect on those issues and take a decision on Thursday. On that day, I will ask hon. Buturo and hon. Odur to speak first on our proposal.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it would be appropriate to calm down the people of Kasese. It would be appropriate for Parliament, after this session, to issue a statement condemning what has taken place while on Thursday we go forward to look for the framework within which we can handle the bigger issues. As of now, people are dying, bleeding, in disarray and displaced, from the stories we have heard. What statement is coming out from us to calm down the situation? 

I would like to plead with you, Madam Speaker, that arising from the debate today, Parliament should come up with a statement of condemnation of the acts of brutality and killings which have taken place in Kasese, and that we will find a way of resolving the matter, including looking at the bigger picture. It would be appropriate if somebody could draft a statement to that effect. We cannot just leave it there when the situation is very volatile and hot. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in terms of what has happened today, the Minister of Internal Affairs has addressed the nation and come to this House and read a statement, which we have debated. If you look at the conclusion of the statement, which we have debated and in one way or the other concurred with, we are condemning, in the strongest terms possible, all those who promote the ideology of extremism and violence. Therefore, the House is really in line with the minister’s statement. 

It becomes very complicated – I do not know under which rule we will be working if Parliament issued a statement. Since we have not resolved this and we will resolve it on Thursday, we could probably wait until Thursday and conclude this statement and make those resolutions. As of now, the House and the whole country know where Parliament stands. They have listened to us as we speak because the debate is live. Thank you.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I have been listening carefully and how we conclude this matter this evening is very important, owing to the fact that there have been circumstantial developments – the charging of the king and remanding him. You do not know what implications it has created on the ground. Therefore, it is not proper for us to sit and walk out of this House without issuing a well guided statement, particularly coming from Parliament, which is a neutral force in this.

The killings that happened in Kasese were done under orders and the orders were from the Executive. Therefore, it cannot be the same Executive to issue a statement that will calm the situation down there. I go with the proposal by hon. Cecilia Ogwal that Parliament as an institution, guided by the debate that has taken place here, should come out with a statement of harmony and peace to calm the people of Kasese and say that steps are being taken to conclusively look at this situation. Otherwise, leaving it like that or going by the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs will not help the situation. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. My considered view is that bearing in mind the issues presented by the minister in his statement and the rebuttal from the leaders of Kasese, this House can today move under rule 50(k) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda – a motion without notice - to take care of the following:

1. 	The issue of the disputed numbers of people that allegedly disappeared.
2. 	The decent handling of the dead.
3. 	The issue of handling suspects in a manner that borders on dehumanising and degrading treatment.
4. 	Matters relating to fair trial.
5. 	Matters relating to reducing on the tension by security and issuing a misleading statement. 
All these are fanning unrest in the community. I beg to move.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our other colleagues and you had earlier informed us that this matter is already in court. Would we be proceeding rightly when we look into the issue of handling the dead decently, the issue of –(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear in the minister’s statement that the person who is before the courts of law is the king. There are people in Kasese who are on tension but are not before the courts of law. There are also people who are dead and are not before the courts of law. 

Is it, therefore, in order for a Member to deny a proposal that accords a dignified treatment of the dead and a conducive environment for the Bakonzo and non-Bakonzo living in Kasese, including officers, on the premise that one or some of the victims is before the courts of law? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a difficult debate. People have died and we are here asking the minister whether he has taken care to return the officers to their homes. We do not know yet. However, supposing we urge the Government to ensure security, peace and humane treatment for the people, especially those who have been arrested, and to ensure decent burials for the dead, would that be a problem?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That was what was running in my mind because we have not concluded the debate and we cannot have a motion. It is in that area, as you have suggested, that Parliament calls for calm in Kasese and that it is handling this matter. On Thursday, we shall take a position but in the meantime, we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond to the issue of giving the families and friends of the dead access to their bodies and we leave it at that. 

We cannot handle the issue of the motion now but we appeal for calm in Kasese. We also urge Government to help the bereaved families to give a decent burial to those who lost their lives at that time. If on Thursday there is need for the motion, then we shall bring it.

MR AMORU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Going specifically to the issue at hand, there is still a lot of information we are processing at this stage and the debate also awaits conclusion on Thursday. Therefore, we would want to come with a well processed position on this issue. If we did it today, we could leave out some important issues and probably, also send another message that could be overtaken by events. 

However, on the issue of calling for peace, I think that has been emphasised by everybody and maybe, we could round it up without going to the specifics. It seems we still have a bit of information to process.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need to do is to inform the country that we request the people of Kasese to remain calm and that Parliament has taken up the issue. We shall not do any other work until we finish this matter on Thursday. We are taking into account their interest for now and on Thursday, we can do the conclusion.

Honourable members, tomorrow we shall not sit. I am going to Kapchorwa for the campaign against female genital mutilation and the Deputy Speaker is not here as well. Therefore, we shall reconvene on Thursday to complete this matter and do the other work. 

I also would like to refer the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to review section 6 on the power sharing agreements as requested by the President.

Honourable members, let us go for the function to mark the 16 days of activism. There is a function out there; let us walk straight there and support the cause of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. on Thursday. 

(The House rose at 7.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 December 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

