Tuesday, 5 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Rt Hon Deputy Prime Minister, members of Cabinet and members of the House, I welcome you back from the recess. I hope that you had time to interact with your constituents and to take a rest. 

I want to announce with sorrow the death of hon. George Marino Abola. Mr Abola was a member of the NRC representing Aswa County. He died on 17 October 2013 at Mulago Hospital and was laid to rest at his ancestral home in Gulu. In the recent past, he was our High Commissioner to Canada, Ottawa. He gave distinguished service to this country in various capacities including heading a number of parastatals in the 1970s and 1980s.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, we offer our sincere condolences to the family, the people of Gulu and Uganda upon the death of Mr George Abola. I request honourable members to stand up for one minute in honour of Mr George Abola.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on a very happy note, I am delighted to inform you that on Thursday, 31 October 2013, as you may have read from the press the multilevel car park was handed over to the Parliamentary Commission. This project took two and half years and cost Shs 36 billion. I congratulate the Parliamentary Commission and the Members of Parliament upon this achievement. It is the first underground car park in the country. (Applause)

We also want to thank His Excellency the President for providing the funds through the Ministry of Finance. We have not only inconvenienced you but also inconvenienced the city of Kampala. On some occasions, Members’ cars have been clamped for parking on the pavements and sometimes they have been vandalised. I, therefore, thank you for your patience. 

The facility is virtually ready but before we commence using it, we have invited His Excellency the President to commission it on Friday, 8th of November at 8 O’clock in the morning. So, I invite honourable members to be present at that commissioning. 

I want to advise that each Member will have one slot marked with his or her constituency. Do not attempt to park in a slot that is not yours; we shall tow your car away. Anyone who has no space down there should not go there. So, we will see you on Friday for the commissioning.

Because of constraints of space, we have been working towards increasing facilities in this building. Now that the car park has been completed, we are looking to the second phase of the redevelopment of the parliamentary building. We have embarked on the construction of additional floors on the south, north and the east wings of the parliamentary building. We expect you to be cautious as you move so that the items do not land on your heads. Just be careful as you walk. Precautions have been taken to secure the areas where the construction is taking place by providing shielding material to block flying objects. However, as I said, please walk with caution. 

Thirdly, honourable members, we have finally secured the iPads. We received them on Friday, 29th October. We are working on the distribution schedule; it will be released in due course by the Clerk to Parliament, so that Members can know when to collect their iPads. I know you have been waiting for this facility but I beg for your indulgence just for a few more days.

I also want to inform the public and the country that the iPads are being bought from the savings from our stationery budget. We have been spending Shs 12 billion on stationery. I have to direct the Clerk to print more copies of documents all the time. We are saving Shs 8 billion by purchasing the iPads. I do not want to anybody to think that this is a new facility; it is part of our budget. 

No more papers; let us use the iPads so that we also become modern. It will also help us in presentation of reports because you shall receive the Order Paper on your iPads and the reports will be sent to you in advance. So, the chairpersons do not have to labour for two hours to present reports because you will have got them already.

We have initiated the procurement of the access to parliamentary network systems, which will allow you to access the parliamentary network for documents and e-mails around the country, including in your constituencies as long as the service provider’s network covers that area. We have initiated the process of procuring office high definition software to enable Members get documents from their network and manipulate them for their own use. As I have said, the Order Paper, notices, committee reports etcetera will be accessed from your iPads. We are carrying out initial configuration of the individual iPads. We are carrying out verification and registration of the iPads in a database, labelling the iPads, installing device management software so that they are available to the server. So, the schedule will be distributed. 

Honourable members, on parliamentary business, we have commenced the Second Meeting of the Third Session. This means this session is soon ending, in December. We have 18 Bills, various motions for resolutions, reports and petitions, which I have referred to the committees and are at various levels of consideration. I want to urge chairpersons of all the committees to expedite the process of handling business so that the plenary can have work to do. 

I also wish to remind Members that this Third Session is the final session of this Parliament because I am sure by the Fourth Session, a lot of Members will be thinking about other things. (Laughter) So, we need to do the work now when we are still a bit stable. Please, treat this as really urgent. I will inform the Business Committee and I will soon invite them for the meeting so that we identify the business, which is available.

Honourable members, you may have read in the press that the Member for Bubulo County West, hon. Kipoi, may have been arrested. I want to report to the House that on 20 September 2013, I received communication on behalf of hon. Kipoi requesting for 90 days leave of absence from 23 September 2013, purportedly to fly to South Africa to undergo surgery for medical conditions he had been diagnosed with.

The letter was not signed by him and had no supporting documents. Additionally, I did not think that a proxy could ask for permission on behalf of the Member. So, there being no grounds to substantiate his request, I declined the request for leave. I wrote to him and I said I wanted to see him in person if he was going to get leave. To-date, hon. Kipoi has not appeared in person to see me nor has he made any communication in reply to my letter. So, I cannot account for his absence from the sittings of the House. I, therefore, now notify the House that I have directed him to report forthwith to Parliament at the next sitting, which is tomorrow. If he fails to do that, I will proceed using the Rules of Procedure.

Honourable members, in the visitors’ gallery we have hon. Victor Kobel. He was a Member of the NRC. We are happy to see you again. 

Thank you very much. Hon. Bbosa, two minutes.

3.02
MR KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern about the on-going eviction of squatters from the Bunjako Parish, Buwama Sub-county, Mawokota Constituency in Mpigi District.

Over 120 families are believed to have already been evicted from their homes. Their houses have been closed off and some houses have been destroyed. The affected villages include Kasawo, Kyega, Kiteredde, Namala. The affected people found refuge in churches, playgrounds and neighbouring compounds, setting up camps for shelter. Some of these people are starving to death, having been restricted from accessing their plantations. This has also proved to be a security threat in the area.

I humbly seek the intervention of Parliament and that of the Government of Uganda, especially the ministry in charge, so as to rescue the situation. I thank you very much.

3.03
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance. This is in regard to the recent murder of an engineer who was a former commissioner in the Ministry of Works. 

A couple of days ago, we lost one of the most diligent sons of this country who was murdered in cold blood. I do not want to water down the investigation process but recently, in my constituency, a number of high profile persons have been murdered. One investor who formally worked with the United Nations was recently murdered in Entebbe but there are also other prominent businessmen who have been murdered. The list is quite long but I can mention a few: we have Mr Kisawuzi and Dr Kalule. All these cases are murders and attempted murders; this time not with iron bars but with guns. 

Every day you open a newspaper, you will read about murder all over the country - iron bars, gunshots and so on. Recently, – actually, the day the commissioner was murdered - there was an invasion at the home of a one Kazinda and arms and ammunitions were obtained in these attempted invasions and murders. 

Madam Speaker, recently, we heard about the Westgate terror attack that claimed over 68 lives. I think we are experiencing more loss of life in this country. We are condemning the terror attacks but our people every day, all over the country, are being killed either by guns or iron bars.

Madam Speaker, we would like to ask the minister in charge of security: Where is the security of the people of this country? We know the mandate of the institutions that are supposed to possess arms and there are mechanisms if people choose to own arms - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating. I think you want the Government to say something about what they are doing but now, you are debating. 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you your guidance, Madam Speaker. I want the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Security to account and give clarification on these continued murders in Entebbe Municipality and all over the country, and to guarantee the security of our people. I want to thank you.

3.06
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I arise on a matter of national concern. This is on the matter of the East African Community. We note with a lot of concern that Uganda, Rwanda and Kenya have been meeting invariably and to a large extent, South Sudan has also been invited. As members of the East African Community and Members of Parliament, we are concerned that at this stage, Burundi and Tanzania have been isolated. It is definitely a matter of critical concern. 

We would like to find out whether Uganda as a nation and the East African Community are still pursuing the Protocol and the Treaty. As the African saying goes, once you have been bitten by a snake and you see a rope, you get very worried and scared. We are worried because the East African Community and the authority collapsed in 1978 or there about. 

Now that we seem to be having serious challenges within the Community, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask and urge the Leader of Government Business to come and make a statement on the Floor of Parliament to align and recalibrate the mind-set of Uganda and the people of Uganda and the Community on the future of the East African Community at this stage. I thank you.  

3.09
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Bugisu has been endowed with good soil, Mt Elgon and the rains that come very often. However, when these rains come, at times they cause us a lot of problems. You know what happened in Bududa when the landslides struck. 

Of late, we have been having a lot of rains and as I speak, the people of Budadiri East cannot access Mbale at all. The bridge between Mbale and Budadiri on River Busita has been washed away and it is almost three weeks now that people cannot drive to Mbale or leave Mbale and reach Budadiri. I call upon the Minister for Works to come to the rescue of the people of Budadiri. 

The President promised one time that they were going to work on the road from Nalugugu-Mutufu-Budadiri up to Nakaloke but up to now, that road has not been done. So, my people are really in trouble. I call upon Government to come and do something and rescue the people because this is the area that grows the best coffee in the world; Arabica Bugisu AA comes from Budadiri. Now, they cannot even bring that coffee to Mbale to sell it. So, these are the difficulties we have. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any commitment from the government on the issues raised?

3.10
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to express Government’s sympathy on all the issues that have been raised here about murders and natural disasters that our people in Mbale are facing. 

Calling Government to come in is pertinent - it is in order.  However, saying that because Mbale is the best place where coffee is grown - I think those are additional facts, which do not need –(Interjections)- Yes! With or without coffee, it is our responsibility, it is Government’s responsibility, to look after these bridges so that our people communicate. On the rest of the matters, the ministers concerned will be informed and they will respond accordingly.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING NAD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow US$ 7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development, US$ 15 million from OPEC Fund for International Development and US$ 15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project. I beg to lay. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING NAD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow US$ 34,050,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing enhanced national food security through increased rice production project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are committed to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE BENARD ONYANGO, FORMER ACADEMIC REGISTRAR OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AND UGANDA MARTYRS UNIVERSITY

3.15
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County, North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, hon. Jacob Oboth has asked me to stand in for him.

This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Bernard Onyango moved under rule 47 (b) of the Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the news of the demise of Bernard Onyango, which occurred on the 14th day of October 2013;

AND WHEREAS the late Bernard Onyango was born on the 11th of January 1930 to Rev. Andereya Ochwo and Lakeri Ajwang and is survived by a widow and children; 

AND WHEREAS the late Bernard Onyango started school at Soni Primary School before moving to Kisoko Boys School and later, St Peters College Tororo; 

NOTING THAT the late Bernard Onyango had a tireless quest for education which saw him join Makerere University College where he pursued a Bachelor of Arts in History and Sociology and later a one-year Diploma in Education, launching his long career as an educator and an administrator; 

FURTHER NOTING that the late Bernard Onyango joined the teaching profession in 1956 where he worked at his former school, St Peter’s College Tororo, and also later taught at Kings’ College Buddo;
 
CONSIDERING that the late Bernard Onyango in his quest for success in the academia and in pursuance of his career as a teacher proceeded to the University College of London where he earned a Masters Degree in Education and returned to Uganda in 1961 where he resumed his teaching at Tororo College as a deputy headmaster;

FURTHER CONSIDERING that due to his positive attitude towards work, the late Bernard Onyango was in 1963 offered a job at Makerere University College of East Africa, where he worked as a deputy registrar and later became the first academic registrar when Makerere University became a fully-fledged university in 1970;

ALSO CONSIDERING that the late Bernard Onyango as a great achiever in academics later helped establish Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi serving as a pioneer academic registrar until he retired in December 2000;

COGNIZANT of the fact that the late Bernard Onyango worked throughout the country in several capacities as Chairman of the Immigration Control Board, Total (Uganda) Ltd, Bank of Uganda and the Board of Governors of Tororo College School among others;

APPRECIATING that the late Bernard Onyango was an upright, modest, hardworking and diligent Ugandan with high integrity, with a memorable teaching career exemplified by his impeccable performance at Makerere University; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1.	 That it collectively conveys its condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Bernard Onyango. 

2. 	That it takes cognizance of the service rendered and the contribution made by Bernard Onyango to the country.  

3. 	That his soul rests in eternal peace.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. You can justify, hon. Odoi.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, Bernard Onyango was born on January 11th 1930 to Rev. Andereya Ochwo and Lackeri Ajwang Abbo. He had ten brothers and one sister. He started school at Tororo, first at Soni Primary School before joining Kisoko Boys.

Money was always a challenge to the family but his parents never lost hope in the resilient but mischievous young man that Bernard Onyango was. He had dreams of becoming a famous musician like the kadongo kamu maestro, Christopher Ssebaduka, a local musician. They gave him money to pay tuition to the bursar but he decided to buy a guitar, which his mother, Lakeri, broke and took back to the shop where he bought it. 

Bernard Onyango was later enrolled at St Peters College, Tororo. In order to supplement his parents’ meagre income and help with his siblings school fees, Bernard Onyango started work in Senior 4, doing mainly manual jobs. Indeed, he contributed to the education of his siblings, who attained higher education and served Uganda in various capacities. These included the late Nathan Odoi, who was an ambassador and a permanent secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the late hon. Michael Ogola who served as an ambassador, a permanent secretary, a Member of the Constituent Assembly and a Member of Parliament, and he gave wonderful service to this House; and Mr Martin Odwedo who served as a permanent secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister until not so long ago. 

In 1951, the late Bernard Onyango enrolled for a Bachelor of Arts degree in history and sociology at Makerere University and later, a one-year diploma in education, launching his long career in academics and administration. 

In 1956, he started working as a teacher at his former school, St Peter’s College Tororo, for two and a half years. He had a dormitory named after him. He also taught at Kings College Buddo. He later met and got married to Lucy Kahambo in 1957 and according to Prof. Oloka Onyango, his son, she was their father’s biggest inspiration in life. 

In 1963, Onyango was offered a job at Makerere College as the deputy registrar. From 1965, he became the deputy registrar up to 1969. In 1970, when Makerere University became a fully-fledged university, he became its first academic registrar. Onyango retired as academic registrar of Makerere University in 1992. During his time at Makerere, he was more famous to the students for the Onyango Disco, a reference to the annual university exams. 

After retiring from Makerere University, Mr Onyango agreed to work with others at Uganda Martyrs’ University Nkozi and eventually retired from there in 2000. Unfortunately, from 2000 he was in and out of hospital battling hypertension and several other ailments attributed to old age. He eventually passed on aged 83. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Parliament finds it absolutely necessary to pay tribute to this gallant son of the country. Thank you. 

3.21
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I stand to support and second the motion moved by hon. Oboth Jacob - presented by hon. Fox Odoi of Budama North - for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Bernard Mary Ayepa Onyango. 

The person we are talking about was succeeded by Mr Hyuha. Those of you who were at Makerere in the 80s should know the person whom Hyuha succeeded. Looking at his life, specifically his behavioural pattern, I can sum it up using three words: integrity, ethical and moral uprightness. To most of us, those who were the idiosyncrasies with which we could define him as he performed his social responsibilities until the time the Lord took him away. 

If you look up the definition of some of the words I have used, they would define what the late was. The Oxford Dictionary defines integrity as “The quality of being honest and having strong moral principles”. The late Bernard Onyango was a gentleman of complete integrity. He portrayed a state of composure, internal consistency and lack of corruption; those were his hallmarks. When you look at the ethical side, he set moral principles for Makerere University and even for the students during his time. 

Today at the university we are talking about, ever since his departure, we have seen the following: admissions have become problematic and in some aspects one is not assured of his name or her being on the list even when they have qualified. Even at completion, one is not sure whether his or her name will be on the list of graduands. Yesterday, students were rioting because most of their names were not appearing on the graduation list, which was supposed to be taken to the administration, for graduation next year. This was not what Onyango wanted. 

Sex overtones for marks, results, transcripts and degrees have become the hallmark. Some students have been admitted and at the same time they are sitting for senior five and senior six. Students have been admitted for courses before they finish senior six. During Onyango’s era, this was unheard of. Some of them, of course, use money to influence the leadership. 

The person we are talking about was full of integrity and had no moral turpitude like today’s leaders in those offices. He became embedded in an institution that was undergoing a lot of changes and facing a lot of challenges, but because he had those qualities, those choice values and requisite qualifications, he braved and waded through it all. Courageously, he won, not by himself but as a team player together with those he was with at the university institution system. They raised the university banner high and made sure that quality was key in the input processing and output system of the university. 

As I end this eulogy, I thank those who came up with the idea of bringing a motion to Parliament to celebrate the life of such a fallen hero. Like the late Jimmy Katumba (RIP) once alluded, most of these heroes are remembered late when they have passed on. How do we come up with a policy to tap their wisdom and experience before they pass on? It is imperative on Government to prepare for such people as it reinforces the policies and laws that impinge on the elderly. 

A sound retirement package and a list of such people should be compiled. When there are public functions, they should be invited so that they can come and contribute. They can contribute even in the field of academia, research and politics, like is happening in India. Also, a token of appreciation can be given to their families when they are departed. 

Fare thee well our beloved mentor, BO, as he was always known. We shall always remember the Onyango disco and the September conferences. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us have a few more contributions.  

3.27
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I wish to add my voice to those who are paying tribute to Bernard Onyango. For some of us who went to Makerere during the time Bernard was the registrar, he made a mark on our character formation. During the time of exams, this is when you knew the presence of a registrar. His name would send shivers to those who were planning to cheat in exams; you could never do it or even think about it. 

Onyango epitomised a degree of integrity and hard work and a sense for detail. The guy would literary go to every exam room, he would take care to ensure that there are desks or chairs, examination materials, that marks are submitted, transcripts are written. Onyango was great. He worked up to his time of retirement. We know no time when degrees were faked during his time or there were undue delays in preparing transcripts for graduates. We miss him. 

He is one of those heroes who are unsung. I would like to believe that what you have said is not true, that people can register for degrees when they are still in high school. I would like to believe that is not true but during those times, you would not even think about it - (Interjections) - Well, it can be investigated but it is unbelievable that you can be admitted without showing the requisite qualifications. Anyway, I do not want to be diverted.

What I am saying is that during Bernard’s time, this would never happen; you would not even think about it. We miss him. He will always be remembered for exemplifying academic excellence, commitment to duty, integrity and hard work. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.30
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Karoro Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to add my voice and pay tribute to this great man. There are certain people in this world who transcend from being individuals to become institutions and they leave monuments. This is the case with the late Bernard Onyango. Whereever he stepped, he left a very positive footmark. 

In Makerere, because he was at the helm of the academic leadership, he was revered and respected. When you go to some of the universities now - not all of them - you find this very disturbing and nauseating habit; you find notices on electricity poles saying, without shame, “If you want a mercenary, call Robert, for example, on this number.” In other words, people do coursework for others. During the late Bernard Onyango’s time, that could never have happened because people respected the academia and all academic institutions. We must make sure that we stamp out this academic prostitution because it is ruining our educational background.

The late Onyango was calm and composed. He never said anything without thinking twice about it. He stepped carefully and he moved like all academics should. He did his research and did his work very diligently. Therefore, as a country, we have lost a very a great academician and we stand with the family to recognise his worth as a Ugandan who merited much more than he gave us.  May his soul rest eternal peace.

3.32
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and this Parliament for having found it fit to pay tribute to this academic giant.

Madam Speaker, on another note, I thought it would have been more befitting if this motion was moved when the entire family of Bernard Onyango was in the House. I hope next time we find ourselves in such a situation we will be able to invite the family of the deceased.

People who went Makerere during the 1960s, 1970s and mid 1980s will remember two personalities: the late Bernard Onyango and Uncle George Kihuguru. Those two gentlemen symbolised what a university should be. There was no Makerere to talk about without talking about the late Onyango and Uncle George Kihuguru. 

The integrity of an examination system is always at the centre of any university. The sort of problems that hon. Mutumba is talking about were really non-existent during the time of Bernard Onyango. Things, which hon. Kamuntu does not want to believe, that people can be awarded marks for sex, are happening today. This is something which we never heard of during Bernard Onyango’s time. So, all these academic registrars coming in have failed to fit in the big shoes that Bernard Onyango left.

Whenever you failed the Onyango disco, you had another opportunity which was called September conference. The September conference was for people who did not pass all the exams, so they had an opportunity to sit supplementary exams in September. So, we had nicknamed it the September conference. All this really guaranteed an academic system with integrity. That is the gentleman we are mourning today.

All students knew Bernard Onyango even as a person. I see him travelling in that little Volkswagen Beetle car, which he used to drive around the university especially over the weekend. During working days, the gentleman used to just walk from his residence to the office. He was such a humble man. You would not meet him on the streets at the university and think he was the academic registrar. 

Things have changed now. Academic registrars are being accused of leaking exams, vice-chancellors are accused of being thieves and deans of students are sleeping with students. It is like we never learnt from Bernard Onyango and Uncle George Kihuguru. The university we went to is not the university today.

When you wave around this so called first class degree, very few people think that is actually a first class because everything has collapsed. We used to be taught the full curriculum. You would know that this year you were going to study a, b, c, d and the lecturers would come and teach everything. Today, people are taught only what will be coming in exams. They are taught only examinable questions. At the end of the day, you have graduates who are equivalent to P.7 dropouts. This is the cry of our beloved country, like Alan Paton wrote. May the soul of Bernard Onyango rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, on the 19th of October I gave notice that we shall be paying tribute to Mr Onyango and that his family should be invited. There may have been a failure of communication but I gave notice on the 19th October and I have fulfilled my undertaking.

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am one of those who attended the burial of the late Onyango with hon. Oboth. On that day, students from Tororo College were present, especially those from Bernard Onyango House. I do not know whether in Mwiri there is a house named after Dr Rugunda or if there is one somewhere named after my sister, Okurut, but we can build one over the weekend maybe. 

Madam Speaker, I can predict why the family is not around because we talked with them a bit. In this country of ours, if there is someone who should have benefited from a state funeral it should have been Uncle Bernard Onyango. Whether you want it or not, he is a person who has contributed a lot to this country. Unfortunately, he was not brought here. 

I am aware that many of our colleagues, Members of Parliament, who came in to upgrade later when they were in Parliament may not know Uncle Bernard Onyango but those who knew him know that he was a man of integrity. He built a country. If the students who went there during his time would practice what he taught us, we would be very far.

Madam Speaker, Tororo College, where Uncle Bernard Onyango went, was a good school but if you go there now, you will cry. What has happened with this regime of the NRM? All good government schools are gone. They have been ruined and now they have built private schools to replace government schools. I was in Mwiri but if you went go to Mwiri now, you would ask, “Is this the Mwiri we talked about?” We even have a very big OB, Dr Rugunda, who cannot even say anything about his school. (Laughter) (Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: I would like to thank my respected OB for giving way. It is true that a number of well-known government secondary schools have suffered very significantly. Government is fully aware of this situation. That is why the Government of Uganda has negotiated with our development partners to embark on a special programme to rehabilitate, renovate and rebuild old secondary schools in Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you have heard the statement from my big OB - that they have gone to development partners to come and develop our own country on our behalf. Education is a key factor in this country. I am worried. Go to Nabumali, go to Kigezi College Butobere, Ntare, Boroboro, Teso College Aloet; mention them - If you want to develop a country, education is the key. Now, what happened to these schools which were good and have been destroyed? Did you come with a plan to destroy schools so that the country is destroyed? (Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker- (Interjections) – Yes, I am an OB and that is why I stood up. During our days at Mwiri, anybody who was above you was referred to as a big boy and when you were below them you were a small boy. Hon. Rugunda here was a small boy to the Obotes and I was a small boy to hon. Rugunda and hon. Nandala-Mafabi was my small boy. (Laughter) It annoys me, Madam Speaker, to find a small boy trying to antagonise a very senior old boy. Is it in order for the small boy to harass the big boy? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, although I am an associate of Mwiri, I think I cannot rule on the issues of the Mwiri jargon. However, I want to appeal to you to respect Mr Bernard Onyango. I think he had no controversies; let us speak about him really in a more polite manner.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to apologise to the big boys. I apologise. That is true; all of them are big boys. 

That said, Mr Bernard Onyango was a man of integrity and kept the university moving. During our time, to get a first class you must have got 70 per cent and for an upper second you should have got 60 per cent. Even if you got 59.99, you would not get an upper second or 69.99. Now first classes are flying out. I do now know whether these children more intelligent than us? If they are really more intelligent than us, why are they not doing a better job? They cannot even write letters and you appreciate that it is a graduate who has written. 

Madam Speaker, we shall miss Uncle Bernard Onyango. There are people who have contributed to this country and they are not Members of Parliament; I want to appeal to the Government and request that they should be respected. One of them who should have come to this House is Uncle Bernard Onyango. May his soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to Mr Bernard Onyango. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the Hansard and send it to his family together with the resolution of this House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, all of us have spoken well about Uncle Bernard Onyango; wouldn’t it be procedurally right to have something in his memory, instead of just talking and printing the document and handing it over to the family? –(Interjections)– At least something!

I request the government to put a monument in honour of Uncle Bernard Onyango, for the good acts he did for Makerere University and the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Government has heard. What is in my power is the resolution, which I think I have given you. 

3.45
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to say Government will consider these proposals by the Leader of the Opposition and the House will be informed accordingly. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SUB-SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will recall, this report was presented in April last year and we gave Members time to read it –(Interjections)–  Yes. That is why you need iPads. (Laughter) Because it was a very comprehensive report, we gave time for all the Members to read it. This was in April. So, that is the position. 

3.46
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I pray for more time because Cabinet needs to pronounce itself on this motion before it is debated by this House. I beg to pray. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened in to the Leader of Government Business pleading that we should stay debate on this motion until Cabinet has internalised it. You are aware that this report came up a long time ago. As we speak, consumers are experiencing a lot of hardships with power and electricity. 

Most importantly, I thought this was ordinarily, the business of Parliament, where the Front Bench is represented. It is not anywhere in our Rules of Procedure that before the House debates on a matter, it has to be agreed to by Cabinet. Maybe this is the strange way we have decided to do business in this House. Can we seek clarification; at what point is this Parliament stopped from proceeding with its mandate and business until allowed to do so? Two, will the country with its suffering consumers wait for Cabinet to consider this yet they had ample time to do so? 

We never set the agenda for their meetings and, therefore, we are not party to their Cabinet meetings. So, how can you stop another arm of Government from performing its duties on the assumption that the other arm, the Executive, is still considering the matter? In any case, what is strange about the report that cannot be debated and heard? If there are any other matters, the Executive should be free to make its position on the various recommendations rather than –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that government has been having this report for over a year. Also, Parliament does not have to report to Cabinet. We are a different arm of Government, so we do not have to depend on what Cabinet decides on so that they come and dictate in the House that we must wait until the government has got through this.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, before we broke off for recess, that item was on the Order Paper. At that time, the Deputy Speaker was the chair and we were alerted that it was coming. I think even Government was aware at that time. I remember even writing to the Deputy Speaker that some of us have not read the report and I asked that we be given more time. We have gone for recess and I think Government is now just delaying the debate of this issue.

MR SEKIKUUBO: Madam Speaker  -

THE SPEAKER: Hadn’t you finished?

MR SEKIKUUBO: No, I just gave way for information. Madam Speaker, I think this should be taken in good faith. Yes, we can have the separation of powers, but we need to always feed into each other. However, that should not be the bar to stop Parliament from doing its business. Short of that, we shall also be demanding a stay of their business in Cabinet, which will be very difficult. 

To that extent, Madam Speaker, I demand that we proceed with debate. After all, Government can always come up to make a response on the issues as they arise.

MR MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Given that it is really some time since we read the report, we need more time to refresh our memory and discuss this matter from a point of information and knowledge. So, I beg that we get more time to go through the report. (Interjections) 

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I recently stood on the Floor of this Parliament and raised a matter of national importance in respect to the installing of transformers in my constituency. The Minister of Energy stood up and said that she would be able to come back and notify us on the matter when we start discussing the report of the committee. I am wondering, if we continue to postpone the debate on this issue, when will we ever get the reply to the issues I raised in this question?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a lot that has happened since the final report came into being, which would affect even the content of the original report. At the time the report was made, Umeme had not even listed; Umeme is now a public company. There are many issues that are likely to progressively change. All this is coming up after Parliament has spent a lot of taxpayers’ money to conduct an inquest and the report is ready. I do not know why Government is shying away from dealing with the issue which has come up. 

Madam Speaker, the agreement we are talking about was entered into by Government and not by Parliament. In the Umeme agreement, Uganda was mortgaged by government ministers and people in corporations. These are issues that must be addressed now. In one of the meetings, the President cried about the cost of power and he called on us to join him; he said, “You, MPs, must join me to ensure that Uganda becomes a competitive country in production.” This was the President, and the ministers are here dilly dallying. I do not know what the President has to do with them. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the issue of power must be addressed by the people of Uganda urgently. If we do not do that, cheaper power is coming up in the region and when interconnectivity comes on board, Uganda is going to be less competitive as a country for investment. It is now Parliament that is delaying the intervention that should happen.

May I seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Leader of Government business; when he seeks for indulgence and more time, time until when? You just cannot come here and ask for blanket time when actually, Uganda is being more disadvantaged because of our inactivity. Can he clarify what exactly he means when he asks for more time, given that it is the ministers who signed these agreements which have subjected Uganda to this type of suffering?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is no justification for continuing to delay debate on this matter. We acknowledge that it was big, it was comprehensive, it was detailed and that is why we gave you time; but from April up to now! How can you justify a delay of up to nine months? So, we shall debate this matter on Thursday. Refresh your memories, debate will be on Thursday. (Applause)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Since we do not have the iPads as yet, I know Members have copies but some might be in their constituencies, so, Clerk, just prepare another set of copies. That will be the last time.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO BEACHSIDE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

3.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will seek for your guidance in respect of the copies. I understand that the printer broke down, so we only have a few copies. That is the situation. I would like to seek your guidance on whether we can proceed.

THE SPEAKER: How many copies do you have? 

MR MWIRU: There are four. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you mind if you listened to the report without copies? Can we receive the report, get copies and then debate tomorrow? Let us just listen to the report for today. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In view of rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure at that time, the committee was assigned to examine audited accounts showing the appropriation of sums granted by Parliament to meet public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. The Auditor-General audits accounts of Government and submits a report of its findings to Parliament. 

In the report of the Auditor-General to Parliament for the year ended 30 June 2010, it was reported that Government is incurring a lot of compensation costs to companies and individuals for loss of business arising from cancelation of contracts they entered into with Government. It was also noted that in a number of cases, trade taxes have not been assessed or collected. 

The report highlighted some of the compensation claims brought against Government. One of them was Beachside Development Services Ltd (BDS), which was awarded by court a payment of US$ 1.9 million on account of its contract with National Forestry Authority (NFA) to build an ecotourism lodge in Kyegegwa Forest Reserve which was allegedly  frustrated by National Forestry Authority. The committee is now pleased to report to the House on its findings and recommendations on the compensation that Government made to BDS.

Terms of Reference

The committee was guided by the following terms of reference: 
a) 	To establish whether the contract in question, if any, was entered into or executed according to the law. 

b) 	Establish whether the cancellation of the purported contract was done through proper procedure and in public interest.

c) 	Establish whether the compensation claim lodged by BDS was evaluated competently, transparently and rationally to arrive at an appropriate and justified compensation payment. 

d) 	Establish whether all taxes associated with the transaction between NFA and BDS were remitted to URA. 
e) 	Establish whether any public officials at the level of contract award, management, cancellation and compensation subverted public interest. 

f) 	Propose recommendations to the House on the next course of action.

Methodology

In order to obtain the relevant information and evidence, the committee adopted a multipronged approached, which entailed the following:
    • interviewing officials from NFA who were involved in handling the matter with BDS; 
    • interviewing the Solicitor-General and officials from the Attorney-General’s Chambers in light of their roles as provided under Article 119(5) of the Constitution; 
    • interviewing the directors of BDS and the directors of other companies whose interests were affected by the claim; 
    • perusing through various contract documents and court judgements on the case. 

The list of names of witnesses is attached as Appendix I. 

Introduction

The National Forestry Authority was due to enter into a contract with Beachside Development Services to develop an ecotourism site at Kyewaga Central Reserve in Entebbe. In a turn of events, the project was abandoned and BDS instituted legal proceedings against NFA seeking compensation through mediation. National Forestry Authority entered into a consent judgement to pay BDS US$ 1.9 million. 

On 26 September 2005, a one Charles Twagira applied for a 50-year management contract to plant trees on 209 hectares of Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve. According to his testimony, Mr Twagira stated that his initial interest was to replant the forest, which had been seriously degraded. After advice from NFA officials, on 19 January 2006 Mr Twagira instead submitted an application to carryout ecotourism development in Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve. Some of the officials who advised Mr Twagira included Mr Hudson Andura, Co-ordinator Natural Resources; Mr C.D. Lagoya, Co-ordinator Concessions; Mr Stephen Nsita, Co-ordinator Plantations; Mr Jones Ruhombe Kamugisha, Director of Field Operations. 

On 19 January 2006, the same day, he reapplied and NFA responded and gave Mr Twagira a no-objection to develop ecotourism business in the forest reserve. In the letter of no objection written by Mr Lagoya, Mr Twagira was advised to give information about his organisation, tourism business, profile and business plan. 

On 30 January 2006, Mr Twagira submitted the company profile of Beachside Development Services Ltd, the site plan, artistic impression of up to 100 chalets proposed to be built at the site. In response, NFA requested Mr Twagira to conduct an environmental impact assessment of the project, a topographic resurvey of the whole forest reserve and to obtain a certification of approval of the environment impact assessment. Mr Twagira was informed that NFA would negotiate the licence agreement with him after the environmental impact assessment was done. 

Mr Twagira fulfilled the above conditions. He submitted the company profile of BDS with Mr Raphael Ochan, now a Justice of the High Court, himself and Mr Fox Odoi, the then Private Secretary, Legal, Office of the President as directors of the company. National Forestry Authority used the feasibility studies submitted by Mr Twagira to assess the viability of the project and to develop the company’s minimum expected income upon which a licence fee was computed. 

On 5 June 2006, NFA gave a draft licence agreement to BDS for ecotourism development on five hectares in Kyewagga Forest Reserve. Thereafter, BDS paid a sum of US$ 6000 on 6 June 2006 as annual licence fees. However, before the licence agreement was finalised, BDS commenced work in the forest reserve at the beginning of 2007 purporting to take advantage of the CHOGM meeting in Kampala in November 2007. Beachside Development Services commenced work on the strength of a hand-written note issued by Mr Reuben Arinaitwe, NFA Range Manager Lakeshore Region, dated 8 June 2006, which reads: “Beachside Development Services, start work at the site, the licence is being prepared”. 

However, the above land was in conflict as it had earlier on been given to a number of private tree planters, one of whom was Nathan Mushesha, who gave evidence to the committee. Mr Mushesha had been granted a five-year tree planting licence on five hectares in 1998. His licence expired in 2003 and after assessment it was renewed for another term of five years. This was before NFA came into existence in 2004. According to Mr Mushesha, he was informed by his workers on 17 June 2006 that there were construction workers on the land who had cut down the trees he had planted. Mr Mushesha visited the site and reported the matter at Mpala Police Station in Entebbe on the same day. 

Mr Twagira appeared at the police station and tried to block the Police from taking Mr Mushesha’s statement. After intervention of the CID at Entebbe Central Police Station, Mpala Police were directed to take Mr Mushesha’s statement. Police asked Mr Twagira to stop the development pending investigations, but he ignored this and continued putting up the structures. 

Mr Mushesha gave evidence that Mr Twagira’s workers indeed cut down his trees and used them to put up the wooden structures. He reported the matter to NFA and together with three other tree farmers, namely, Mr Reuben Kashambuzi, the late Mr Katsigazi, Bagoba and Mr A.K Twakira agreed to meet with Mr Ruhombe, the acting Executive Director of NFA. 

While Mr Mushesha and his colleagues were waiting at NFA for the meeting with Mr Ruhombe, Mr Twagira together with Mr Fox Odoi went in to meet Mr Ruhombe separately. Mr Mushesha expected that they would be met jointly with Mr Twagira as had been earlier arranged. They were, therefore, not privy to the discussion between Mr Twagira, Mr Fox Odoi and Mr Ruhombe.

According to Mr Mushesha’s testimony, Mr Ruhombe assured them that NFA would accommodate both their interests and those of Mr Twagira. Mr Ruhombe indicated that their crops were not doing well and informed them that NFA wished to change the land use to keep an eco-tourism facility instead, since tree planting was no longer a preferred activity by NFA at this location. 

Mr Mushesha recalled that both Mr Ruhombe and the Minister of Environment, hon. Maria Mutagamba, had been officially visiting the area with Mr Twagira at awkward hours. He did not therefore expect NFA to handle his matter transparently. Mr Mushesha and others therefore reported the matter to the IGG on 23 June 2006. 

On 17 July 2006, Mr Ruhombe, the then director of field operations, wrote on behalf of NFA responding to the IGG’s concerns, citing illegal activities promoted by some of the private tree farmers. The letter stated that BDS’s ecotourism project offered an environmentally sound and profitable option for managing the forest reserve. 

On 27 July 2006, NEMA approved the EIA and validated it for three years from 27 July 2006 to 20 July 2009. The IGG intervened, however, on 6 August 2006 and wrote to NFA raising alleged lack of transparency in awarding the forest development licence at Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve arising from the complaints raised. 

The IGG ordered NFA to halt Mr Twagira’s operations within the disputed area until he acquires a licence allowing him to operate. According to BDS, however, a tree farming licence performance audit was carried out by NFA on 20th and 21 June 2006 targeting licences on the land proposed for allocation to White Sands Eco-Lodge, the business name for BDS. A team of seven NFA officers made observations and conclusions as to what actions were to be taken to avail BDS with a licence free of squatters. Meanwhile, the farmers resisted BDS’ continuation with the development and even filed a case at Police for criminal trespass. An arrest warrant was issued by court against Mr Twagira but this has never been executed and the case is still in court.

Mr Twagira abandoned the development, which by this time consisted of three incomplete wooden structures and only one of them was roofed. However, BDS claimed that they had completed the restoration of the degraded area, landscaped the project site and constructed 10 chalets while the administration block and 40 other chalets were under construction.

On 9 August 2006, BDS wrote to NFA seeking for protection against the private tree farmers. On 22 August 2006, Kwesigabo Bamwine & Walubiri Advocates wrote on behalf of BDS to NFA complaining about the delay in issue of the eco-tourism licence and demanded a refund for the US$ 6,000 paid and reimbursement of the investment costs and general damages. On 8 September 2006, NFA refunded the US$ 6,000 to BDS via Stanbic Bank, cheque No. 000652. The refund was acknowledged by BDS’ lawyers, Kwesigabo Bamwine & Walubiri Advocates on 11 September 2006.

On 21 March 2007, BDS issued a notice of intention to sue NFA for breach of contract and demanded over Shs 200 million for loss of business. On 8 January 2009, BDS filed a suit against NFA in the High Court at Nakawa and it claimed the following: Special damages of US$ 187,500; refund of the environment impact assessment and NEMA fees of Shs 16,674,800; general damages for loss of prospective business and profits; costs of the suit; interest at a rate of 25 per cent per annum from the time of filing until payment in full.

National Forestry Authority filed its defence denying that any contract relations existed between BDS and itself. It further averred that it refunded the US$ 6,000 which BDS had paid as annual licence fees, thereby putting an end to any dealings with BDS in the project. National Forestry Authority and BDS were summoned by court to appear for a joint scheduling conference on 25 of March 2009. The NFA legal counsel did not attend court on this day and the case was adjourned to 22 April 2009.

The Judge asked each party to submit on whether there was a cause of action. The NFA legal counsel made and filed a written submission of defence. He submitted that there was no cause of action for the plaintiff because of the following reasons: The plaintiff, BDS, enjoyed no rights on the forest reserve since there was no letter of offer allowing them to utilise the land. Since there was no contract between the plaintiff and the defendant, NFA, the defendant violated no rights and therefore was not liable. There was no contract between the plaintiff and defendant as the plaintiff wrote to the defendant demanding US$ 6,000 which was refunded and there was no consideration offered.

The Judge, Justice Murangira, made no ruling on the cause of action and adjourned the case to 28 May 2009. When the suit came up for hearing before Justice Murangira on 5 June 2009, court records indicated that counsel for the plaintiff, Mr Barata Enoch, and counsel for the defendant, Ms Molly Kyepaka Karuhanga, agreed to have the matter settled as follows:
    • The defendant, NFA, to issue a licence in Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve for land measuring 2.6 hectares in accordance with NFA eco-tourism guidelines, with access to Lake Victoria shoreline within two months. 
    • NFA to handover vacant possession of the said land to the plaintiff as soon as the licence is issued. 
    • Damages to be awarded to the plaintiff and to be assessed by court.
    • The plaintiff drops its claims of proposed prospective profits and loss of business which was stated at US$ 8,559,250. 
    • Each party to bear its own costs.

The above terms were reduced into a consent judgement, which was duly entered into by Justice Murangira on 12 June 2009 in open court. The troubling issue at this point was whether the counsel for the NFA had instructions to agree with counsel for BDS on the terms of the consent judgement and whether the consent was duly entered into.

Ms Karuhanga had drafted a consent that had been agreed to by NFA Executive Director, Mr Damian Akankwasa, on 5 June 2009, which was rejected by counsel for the plaintiff. There is no evidence of other consent being agreed on by the parties and filed in court. In the draft consent, NFA was offering the following: 
    • To issue a licence to the plaintiff for development of an eco-tourism lodge and tourist camp at Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve measuring 2.6 hectares, in accordance with NFA eco-tourism guidelines as soon as the presidential directive on allocating land in central forest reserves to private tree farmers is lifted. 
    • To handover vacant possession of the said land to the plaintiff. 
    • The plaintiff to drop its claims for loss of business and prospective profit of a sum of US$ 8,559,250. 
    • For court to assess other damages that may accrue to the parties and to assess the quantum thereof. 

Note that NFA was claiming damages from BDS for trees cut by the plaintiff in carrying out unauthorised development on the land and each party to bear its own costs.

When the draft consent was tendered to the plaintiff’s lawyer, they objected to the following: 
    • the offer of 2.6 hectares of land, as they were demanding for more land with access to the lakeshore; 
    • the land being availed as soon as the presidential directive was lifted; BDS wanted the land allocated to them immediately; 
    • each party meeting its own costs.

Ms Karuhanga, the NFA legal counsel, denies that she agreed to the consent, especially item No.3 on the assessment of damages. Ms Karuhanga gave evidence to the committee that there was no consent and that the consent alluded to by the trial judge does not exist. 

Ms Karuhanga disagreed with the court record as not reflecting the submission she made to court on 5 June 2009. She stated to court, clearly, that she did not consent, but the Judge proceeded to hear the matter stating that he would enter judgement on agreed facts. Ms Karuhanga asked the Judge for the agreed facts to be edited, agreed and signed by both parties but this was not done. She added that Justice Murangira made the judgement without a signed consent before the court commenced. Counsel for the plaintiff, Enoch Barata, presented Ms Karuhanga with a draft judgement dated 12 June 2009, which she brought to the attention of the Judge as being irregular and clearly not agreeable to NFA. She testified to the committee that the trial judge had the draft judgement photocopied and availed to all in court. 

The committee was unable to obtain a signed consent agreed between the parties that would have formed the basis of the judgement made by Justice Murangira on 16 September 2009. In this regard, the committee is inclined to agree with the testimony of Ms Karuhanga. The committee invited the Judge, Justice Murangira, to clarify on this matter in accordance with the rules of natural justice and the invitation was turned down.

Following the court hearing on 5 June 2009, NFA engaged the services of private lawyers, Byarugaba and Company Advocates, in August 2009 prior to the judgement being written to launch an application in court, miscellaneous application cause No. 297 of 2009, to have the consent judgement set aside. However, BDS challenged the locus standi of the new NFA lawyers. The lawyer, Mr Byarugaba, conceded that he did not have the locus yet he had instructions from NFA. Consequently, the application was dismissed by Justice Murangira with costs.

Ms Karuhanga made the application to court for review of the judgement and for the judgement to be set aside. She availed herself as a witness and therefore, withdrew from representing NFA in the matter. The matter was taken up by the new NFA legal manager, Mr Peter Muloba, together with the appointed law firm, Byarugaba and Company Advocates. Meanwhile, Mr Byarugaba, who had conceded that he did not have the locus standi to represent NFA in court, signed together with the counsel for the plaintiff a decree dated 27 August 2009 in which Ms Karuhanga is mentioned as having consented with the plaintiff before Justice Murangira on 5 June 2009.

Ms Karuhanga gave evidence to the committee that this decree is illegal and had not been brought to her attention, yet it mentioned her consent and had purportedly been drawn by the NFA legal unit. She denied any knowledge of the decree. After the purported consent judgement had been entered into, what remained for court was to assess the damages to be awarded to BDS as alleged to have been agreed to by the two parties.

After pleadings and evidence adduced by both parties, NFA defence counsel, Mr Peter Muloba, opted to close his case without calling any witness, claiming that he did not have instructions from NFA to call witnesses. Justice Murangira awarded assessed damages of US$ 1,612,171 to be paid to BDS with costs and interest at a court rate from the date of judgement of 16 September 2009 until payment in full. The details of the assessed damages were as follows: 

    • US$ 40,000 expended on landscaping and design. 
    • US$ 551,985 expended on construction of the chalets.
    • US$ 1,020,186 for loss of user rights for three years from 2007 to 2009.

Following the assessment of damages of the sum of US$ 1,612,171, a second decree was extracted by counsel for the plaintiff and signed by NFA legal counsel, Mr Peter Muloba, and endorsed by the registrar. The decree was dated and stamped by the NFA legal counsel on 16 September 2009 as confirmation of judgement for the award made against NFA. At this point, NFA would be obliged to comply with the terms of the purported consent judgement and in addition pay BDS US$ 1,612,171 plus interest at a court rate of 6 per cent until full payment. 

After waiting for a week without payment from NFA, BDS applied and obtained, on 24 September 2009, a garnishee order to attach the accounts of NFA. Consequently, seven accounts of NFA at the Bank of Uganda and Stanbic Bank were frozen. The frozen accounts included donor funds.

On 21 September 2009, NFA made an application to court - vide civil application No. 143 of 2009 - for an interim stay of execution and to prevent the garnishee decree from becoming absolute, stopping the money on the frozen accounts from being credited to BDS. The application was granted by court on the same day. 

On the same day, 21 October 2009, the Minister for Water and Environment wrote to the President about the freezing of NFA accounts requesting for intervention of Government. Meanwhile, NFA lodged Civil Appeal No.80 of 2009 to the Court of Appeal challenging the award by Justice Murangira in his judgement of 16 September 2009.

Furthermore, on 9 December 2009 NFA made another application, vide Civil Application No. 142 of 2009, for court to stay execution and to unfreeze the accounts. Court granted the application on the same day but on caution that NFA executes a bank guarantee in the sum of US$ 1,612,171 before the accounts could be effectively unfrozen and relieved from the garnishee. They were given 45 days to comply but NFA did not have the money. 

On 7 January 2010, His Excellency the President wrote to the Attorney-General citing an attempt by BDS to defraud NFA of more than Shs 3 billion. The President directed the Attorney-General to do all it takes to ensure that the fraudsters do not succeed in their scheme. The President also expressed optimism that the higher courts cannot accept NFA to be condemned to pay more than Shs 3 billion for no legal breach on its part. The President also directed that the NFA board investigate the officials who dealt with the case and unjustifiably allowed an out-of-court settlement against their employer and in favour of the claimants.  The President further directed the Attorney-General to refer the matter to the Judicial Service Commission to investigate the two judicial officers who had mishandled the case, one of whom was Justice Joseph Murangira. 

However, nearly one year after the President’s letter, the Attorney-General wrote to the Solicitor-General by a memo dated 23 December 2010, seeking to distance himself from the matter that he considered as fait accompli. The honourable Dr Khiddu Makubuya took the view that the involvement of the Solicitor-General in the negotiation should not have been viewed as endorsing the manner in which the counsel hired by NFA handled the case. He indicated that the Attorney-General’s chambers could not accept responsibility for prior handling of the case and its consequences. 

Meanwhile, NFA had appealed the consent judgement to the Court of Appeal. Contrary to the President’s optimism, on 12 October 2010, the Court of Appeal consisting of Justice Twinomujuni, Justice Engwau and Justice Kavuma dismissed the appeal with costs to be borne by the appellant, NFA. They upheld the award by the High Court of US$ 1,612,171 to BDS as damages and substituted the court rate interest of 6 per cent with an award of 20 per cent from the time of the judgement in the High Court till payment in full. Thus, the award to BDS was enhanced by the Court of Appeal, which was not an issue in the appeal. 

The Minister for Water and Environment had invited the directors of BDS for a dialogue and negotiations with NFA as donors were concerned that their funds had been frozen and were about to be credited to a private company. However, both the NFA board and the Attorney-General’s chambers did not pursue this matter seriously, leading to the increase in the award by the Court of Appeal. This is evidenced by the letter from the minister to the chairman of the NFA Board of Directors dated 24 December 2010. The chairman of the NFA board subsequently wrote to the Solicitor-General on 12 January 2011 requesting the Solicitor-General to nominate a second senior representative from the Solicitor-General’s office to strengthen the legal team in the negotiations.

Following the Court of Appeal ruling, the NFA filed an appeal in the Supreme Court. However, the NFA board later withdrew the appeal at the intervention of the then Minister for Water and Environment, hon. Maria Mutagamba. National Forestry Authority thereafter entered into a second consent judgement dated 28 January 2011, which increased the settlement from US$ 1,612,171 to US$ 1,900,000 to be paid as follows:

    • US$ 650,000 to be paid immediately on execution of the consent judgment.
    • US$ 550,000 to be paid on or before 31 December 2011.
    • US$ 500,000 to be paid on or before 30 September 2012.
    • US$ 200,000 to be offset by the appellant, NFA, from the decretal sum and applied towards the licence fee for the 2.6 hectares of land at Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve for the 25 years.

The Minister, hon. Maria Mutagamba, forwarded a copy of the consent judgement to the Attorney-General with a letter dated 19 January 2011. Prior to its being signed, hon. Maria Mutagamba indicated in her letter that she was satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations that had been reduced into the consent judgement. The committee has not seen any response from the Attorney-General but NFA has since made payments to BDS in line with the consent judgement.

Observations of the committee 

National Forestry Authority did not solicit for any investor to develop an eco-tourism facility at Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve. Beachside Development Services did not come to NFA through a competitive and transparent process. It would appear that there were unseen hands in NFA who were guiding BDS and putting pressure on the staff to process the licence. This diverted Mr Twagira’s initial intention from tree planting to eco-tourism. 

The NFA officials deliberately flaunted procurement regulations and caused a financial loss that resulted into a consent judgement.

The land that had been purportedly allocated to BDS for ecotourism had, in fact, earlier on been allocated to tree planters under the former Forestry Department prior to the commencement of the NFA. The NFA had validated these licences issued by the Forestry Department. The purported change in land use was not communicated to the tree planters neither was any compensation proposed for the trees that had been planted.

The range manager, Mr Reuben Arinaitwe, did not have authority to give BDS the go ahead to commence construction before a licence was issued. This was in contravention of the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003. It is apparent that Mr Arinaitwe was acting under instructions from Mr Ruhombe, the then NFA Director of Field Operations.

Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi engaged in influence peddling and used senior officials at NFA and in Government to secure the land and licence irregularly and to put up an illegal structure in a central forest reserve. As a result, BDS was allowed to commence construction at the site prior to the issuance of the licence and the environmental impact assessment report by NEMA as required under the NEMA Statute, now an Act.

The Attorney-General was not involved in handling the said transactions as provided for under Article 119(5) of the Constitution. On the other hand, there was no licence issued by NFA to BDS although the former accepted payment of the annual licence fee from the latter. 

Later, BDS demanded the refund of the fee it had paid after NFA had delayed to issue the licence. The fee was refunded and receipt was acknowledged by BDS. This should have been taken as the formal termination of any intended relationship between the parties under the proposed licence. 

Was there any breach of contract? This question was not settled by court as the counsel for BDS and NFA purportedly entered into a consent judgement and agreed that NFA had breached the contract and had to pay damages. The board of NFA did not authorise NFA counsel, Mr Byarugaba, to enter into a consent judgement. Why then did he concede? Who was he representing? What motivated his actions? Why did he sign the decree dated 27 August 2009?

Following the refund of the US$ 6,000 that had been paid by BDS and considering that no licence had been issued, it is inconceivable that the NFA board would have authorised Ms Karuhanga to enter into the purported consent judgement. This question is further buttressed by the initial defence of NFA in January 2009 that there was no valid contract between itself and BDS. The committee observed that it did not make sense for NFA to consent to punitive damages against itself and still restore the interests of the plaintiff in land by accepting to grant a licence for 2.6 hectares for 25 years as purported in the consent judgment. The consent was erroneous on the part of NFA, which in addition to making financial settlement had to also issue the licence. 

The committee observed that there was no consent judgment signed by all parties as alleged, save for the judgment by Justice Murangira, which set the terms of the alleged consent. The above judgment clearly shows that the defendant, NFA, was not represented at the hearing. This corroborates the testimony of NFA counsel, Ms Karuhanga, who says she did not agree to the alleged consent and indeed, walked out of court in protest.

Justice Murangira made the awards for damages against NFA without visiting the site and verifying the claim to establish the quantum of the damages as claimed by BDS, neither was the claim valued by the Chief Government Valuer. 

Beachside Development Services did not have a licence for which they could have been awarded loss of user rights for three years amounting to US$ 1,020,186. One is, therefore, left wondering how the plaint, detailed below, translates into an award of US$ 1.6 million. We have tabulated it below. They had claimed for US$ 6,000; fees for the environmental impact assessment was Shs 15,174,800; fees for a NEMA permit was Shs 1,500,000; 30 per cent deposit paid for construction, which translated into US$ 169,500; cost of the forest restoration was US$ 12,000; and general damages for the loss of user rights was not specified.

What we are saying in this table is that the Judge was so generous and awarded them even for what was not pleaded and requested for. The committee notes that the above judgment was not in line with the plaint. The judgment made was not based on the specific performance issue of the licence by NFA to BDS and also monetary compensation to BDS. Indeed, in the judgment, the Judge ruled that the claimant dropped its claim for prospective profits and loss of business, which had been slated at US$ 8,559,250, and that each party meets its own costs. One therefore, wonders how the same judge would award US$ 1,020,186 with costs for this very purpose. 

The committee observed that whereas BDS had put up three incomplete chalets, the consent judgment awarded the amount US$ 551,850 as compensation for the ten chalets that allegedly had been constructed. The committee visited the site on 19 August 2012 and found no evidence of construction of the purported chalets. Instead, the committee found one fish pond at the site. However, the committee had earlier been shown photos of three incomplete chalets. 

The directors of BDS gave evidence that they had indeed been paid US$ 500,000 dollars that they had used to build the ten chalets that were destroyed. The committee did not receive any evidence that BDS had reported or availed the details of destruction of the 10 chalets to the Police or NFA. 

National Forestry Authority decided to represent itself in court and to use private lawyers without seeking legal advice from the Attorney-General. The committee observed that the legal representatives of the NFA, M/S Byarugaba and Company, together with the in-house counsel, Mr Peter Muloba, were either incompetent and/or had been compromised.

The committee observed that the Attorney-General did not implement the directive of the President to do all it takes to stop NFA from losing money to fraudsters and refer the responsible judicial officers to the Judicial Service Commission for investigation. The Attorney-General instead sought to distance himself and his office from the matter he considered as a fait accompli.

The committee noted that the signature of the chairman of the NFA Board of Directors on the second consent judgment differs from his signature on other correspondences on this matter. The committee further noted that whereas the appeal had been filed in the Supreme Court, the second consent judgment is still with the Court of Appeal, which had already disposed of the matter. This was irregular and suspicious since the Supreme Court may still proceed to dismiss the appeal with further costs to BDS.

The Court of Appeal took it upon itself to revise the interest rates for delayed settlement. The court increased the rate from 6 per cent to 20 per cent, reasoning that the aborted NFA/BDS transaction was a commercial transaction which should attract 20 per cent interest. Moreover, there was no prayer to that effect in the appeal as per the committee’s findings.

The committee notes that since the second consent judgment agreed to by the parties, there has been no development of the ecotourism facility by BDS at the site. This goes against the letter and spirit of the consent and is possibly to the detriment of NFA, which is losing potential revenue from the project.

Recommendations

1. 	The committee recommends that Mr Rueben Arinaitwe, the range manager, and Mr Ruhombe, the field operations director, be held liable for causing financial loss by authorising Beachside Development Services to carry out the purported ecotourism activities without a licence. 

2. 	Mr Peter Muloba, the NFA in-house legal counsel, be held liable for causing financial loss. He overrode his junior’s opinion, bypassed the board of management, agreed and entered into a non-existent consent judgment on behalf of NFA.

3. 	Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi be held liable for influence peddling and BDS be asked to refund the US$ 1.9 million unjustifiably paid to it.

4. 	Counsel Byarugaba of Byarugaba and Company Advocates be held liable and referred to the Law Council for disciplinary action for signing a decree on a matter which he did not have instructions to handle, purporting to be Molly Kyepaka Karuhanga.

5. 	Justice Murangira be referred to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action based on his role in awarding damages not pleaded in the plaint filed in court, alluding to a consent which was never executed in the award of the said damages, not having visited the locus but awarding damages for 10 chalets which were not built, awarding US$ 1,020,186 for loss of user rights yet there was no licence, letting his draft judgment find its way to counsel for the plaintiff and later ordering it to be photocopied and passed on to other parties.

6. 	Police should investigate the validity of the second consent judgment in the Supreme Court withdrawing the appeal contrary to the directive of H.E the President.

7. 	The NFA administration, and executive director in particular, be held liable for not exercising due diligence when the matter went to court, bearing in mind that the mandate of signing the licence rested with him.

In conclusion, I beg to report and move that this report be adopted. I beg to lay the annexures of the report and the minutes of the committee meetings for this investigation on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. Honourable members, the report is signed by more than the necessary minimum of one-third. It is eligible for debate but I think we agreed that we shall receive it today and Members will get copies and then we can debate tomorrow. The Clerk will distribute the remaining copies to the Members of Parliament. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON GENDER IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

4.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Anifa Bangirana Kawooya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to present a report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities on issues of gender equity and equal opportunities in local government. This is a correction of what was presented on the Order Paper. On the Order Paper it says, “report on equal opportunities and gender” but this is a report of the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities on issues of gender equity and equal opportunities in the local government.

Madam Speaker, I will try to work within the given time of 45 minutes. I beg that I only highlight observations and recommendations in this report and I hope the whole report will be captured in our Hansard. Before I continue, I wish to beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee. 

Under rule 171 of the Rules of Procedure, the committee is mandated to evaluate activities of Government and other bodies in determining the extent to which they contribute to the realisation of the constitutional provisions, that is, articles 31, 32 and 33. Mindful that the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities cuts across all sectors, you will see in this report that the committee tried to look at all sectors in the local government. 

To ensure that the state and every individual in society complied with and adhered to the above constitutional provisions, the Equal Opportunities Commission was established under Article 32(3) of the Constitution. Its major objective is elimination of discrimination of inequalities against any individual or group of persons on the grounds of sex, age, race, colour, ethnic origin or creed as laid down in this report. 

The committee wishes to point out that over the past decades, Government has instituted various affirmative action measures to redress imbalances created by history and traditions among the disadvantaged groups. This affirmative action has had significant results and benefits; for example, increasing the number of women, people with disabilities and the youth, among other disadvantaged groups, in leadership and decision making structures. 

The committee appreciates that the physical presence of this hitherto excluded groups has improved transparency and equity in decision-making on the national and local government agenda. However, beyond numbers, these measures have not been sufficiently translated into requisite resource allocation and support programmes for the unique and specific needs and priorities of the various categories of the marginalised groups especially in the local government. The committee observed that numbers are essential but not a sufficient enough condition to address gender inequality and the rights of the marginalised groups in both national and local development programmes. 

Background

While the committee appreciates Government’s efforts towards sustainable growth, that is, reduction of income poverty from 56 per cent in 1986 to 24 per cent by 2012, income inequality has been on a rising trend. Fair and equitable distribution of service delivery and wealth for all Ugandans has remained the biggest Government challenge. Beyond income inequality, Government policy has been focused directly on improving access to social services for the poor rather than reducing the disparities between the rich and the rural poor, and spending more on production rather than consumption. 

Madam Speaker, the committee notes that in understanding and assessing the implications of both income inequality and other forms of inequality, the problem remains that there is limited knowledge and information about the practical way to address the various forms of inequality in the context of a strong economic growth and a rapidly growing population. 

Addressing inequality specifically in service delivery and wealth distribution is akin to enabling the poor, mostly the under-privileged, to actively participate and benefit from economic activities. This can only take place if growth occurs in the sectors that are beneficial to under-privileged groups; for example, if the gains from economic growth are redistributed towards social service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, at the district level, local governments are empowered through budgeting to address the specific needs of the individual districts. In most cases, district budget allocations do not always reflect gender mainstreaming. 

It is from the above background that by its mandate, the committee found it necessary to examine how local governments are addressing issues of gender equity and inequality by conducting a number of field visits to the local governments in the following new and old mother districts: Bulambuli, Sironko, Manafwa, Bududa, Luuka, Kaliro, Namayingo, Mbale and Iganga in the eastern region; and Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo and Kasese in the western region. 

Objectives 

Madam Speaker, the objectives were mainly: 
    • To examine any progress made by the local governments in the promotion of gender equity and equal opportunities; 

    • To monitor and assess the sector performance in the local governments with emphasis on establishing the extent to which issues of equal opportunities and gender equity were being complied with at all levels of participation, as provided for by the Constitution in the outlined laws and articles;

    • To have an overview of new districts versus old districts in service delivery and other social outcomes in terms of availability, accessibility and quality; 

    • To establish how assets and liabilities were shared and the status of physical infrastructure and employment opportunities. 

    • To examine the extent to which issues of gender and equity responsive budgeting were being realised in the local government policies and social and equal opportunities posts. 

    • To establish whether issues of the girl child and children with disabilities were being addressed under the Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme and in the health sector. 

The methodology is as outlined here below in the report. I request that we move to page 8. I do not need to go through the mandate of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. It is as outlined in our Rules of Procedure, rule 171. 

In executing its work, the committee is mindful of the constitutional provision and other laws that relate to the promotion of gender equity and equal opportunities. The committee wishes to refer honourable members to articles 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and other articles of the Constitution. For ease of reference, the committee has clearly spelt them out and I request honourable members to read them. However, Article 32 particularly commands Parliament to enact laws to facilitate the realisation of affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. 

I have heard in the media that hon. Katuntu is moving otherwise, but this is a constitutional requirement and we shall look at that in court. The establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission to give full effect to implementation –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I am reading a report on equal opportunities for all. 

Article 33 of the Constitution deals with the rights of women and the state’s obligation in providing facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women and enable them to realise their full potential and advancement. The state is equally mandated to protect women and their rights, taking into account the unique status and natural material functions in society emphasising women’s rights to equal treatment with men, which rights shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities. 

Article 34 deals with fundamental rights and freedoms of the children. It stipulates that children under the age of 16 should not be exploited socially, economically or otherwise. This also protects them from performing work that is likely to be hazardous to them. 

I request that we move to the last paragraph on page 9; the rest is on Article 35, which defines the rights of persons with disabilities, and Article 36 protects the rights of the minorities. The national objectives and directive principles of state policy are clearly spelt out in the report for ease of reference. Honourable members, we can read them because they are as outlined in our Constitution. 

Taking into consideration the above constitutional provisions, the Committee of Equal Opportunities found it necessary to carry out its oversight function to examine the extent to which issues of gender and equal opportunities were being promoted and complied with by the district local governments. To do that, we had to look at the district local government structure.

Uganda has over the past decade created a large number of administrative units; analytically the number of districts has steadily risen from 33 in 1990 to 44 in 1997; 78 in 2006, 80 in 2009, 111 by the end of 2010 and currently stands at 118. In 2014 the total may come to 147 districts and above.

A variety of reasons have been given for the creation mainly to improve service delivery and development of equal opportunities in line with Article 179 of the Constitution on effective administration and bringing services closer to the people.

The committee however noted that by creation of these districts, there has been substantial progress in the area of women in leadership and decision making both at national and local government levels which largely contributes to the constitutional provisions that guarantee affirmative action to ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on constitutional and other bodies.

The Local Government Act further reinforces the Constitution stance on women representation in leadership and decision making by requiring that at least 33 percent of the seats on all local government councils be reserved for women. On the other hand, the committee also noted that there were mounting concerns about the rate at which the new districts are being created and also challenges in service delivery and local government. For example: 
1. 	Services not necessarily getting to people but rather benefitting a few.
2. 	The question of service availability, accessibility and quality especially in the social sector is still a far dream especially on harmonisation of government programmes.
3. 	Weaknesses in planning, resource allocation and utilisation.
4. 	Corruption in the local government, inadequate requisite skills and human resource management.
5. 	Poor infrastructure.
6. 	Overwhelming community expectations which breed tribal and ethnic conflict.
7. 	Power struggle between executives and the technical persons.
8. 	Political will. The list is endless.

Observations

Management and support services

The committee observed that in all districts visited, issues of inadequate human resource recruitment and understaffing, skills development, salary enhancement, absenteeism among others cut across. 

In recruitment and employment, gender equity and equal opportunities were not being considered in line with the constitutional provisions. The committee observed that there were a few women in management positions, for instance, in Namayingo and Luuka districts. 

Councils often do not scrutinise district plans and programmes to ensure gender mainstreaming, for instance, monitoring and evaluation of government programmes is not from a gender perspective.

In Sironko, Manafwa, Namayingo, Kyegegwa and Iganga, most civil servants were in acting capacity beyond the statutory time which affected their morale and service delivery.Some districts had failed to form district service commissions due to failure to appoint women and people with disabilities as required by the law while others lacked substantive human resource capacities, for example, in Bududa District. 

Considering the major issues affecting persons with disabilities, the legal requirements for their appointment to district service commissions having served in the public sector for 10 years is unattainable.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Local Government should develop a gender responsive recruitment system by instituting gender inclusive ways and practices in job descriptions.

Gender and equity concerns should be considered at all levels by strengthening the gender aspect in the existing local government policy and human resource management systems.

Districts that have not operationalised district service commissions should constitute them immediately in order to fast track the issues of restructuring local governments so that civil servants in acting capacity are regularised in their positions.

Government should comply with the constitutional provisions, which guarantee equal opportunities to all persons and affirmative action in favour of the marginalised and disadvantaged groups.

The health sector

The committee established that demand for health care remains relatively high as health services in both new and old districts were being hampered by the same challenges, for example, inadequate supply of drugs, drug stock-outs and limited funds.

Shortage of health workers and poor remuneration

In Luuka, for example, the former health centre IV in charge was acting as a director of services and the health centre operated with clinics without a doctor at the time we visited.

Service delivery in the health sector is still a big challenge in many districts as facilities are far away from people especially the disadvantaged groups: the elderly, people with disabilities, children and pregnant mothers. There were no provisions for people with disabilities in most of the traditional buildings.

Health systems and infrastructure have less or no consideration for the special gender related needs, for example, humps and signs for people with disabilities are not considered.

In most cases, packaging of the reproductive health programmes and practical methods favour women and girls and yet boys and men are critical decision makers when it comes to birth control.

There are no sign language interpreters to translate for the deaf, for example, when giving health education to women in antenatal clinics. There are no interpreters to assist the pregnant women with hearing defects.

A number of districts do not have referral hospitals such as Luuka, Bulambuli, Sironko, Kaliro, to mention but a few.

Equipment/structures for operationalisation of health service delivery is still wanting. For instance, reproductive health outreaches are not gender sensitive, either in design, practices or in reporting.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that despite signs of improved health services delivery and infrastructure, government should increase budget funding in the health sector in maternal healthcare.

Health services should be extended to lower levels as is the policy to have health centres II at every sub-county and parish levels.

Government should improve user facilities and supplies through rehabilitation and equipment of existing health centres.

Government should ensure timely delivery of drugs in all health centres. It should also implement its policy and put in place equitable district and referral hospitals.

Government should review salaries for the health service providers with a view to enable them meet the economic changing trends. 

Government should structure salary remunerations especially in hard to reach areas.

Government should enforce the provisions of the People with Disabilities Act to have ramps on all public institutions for easy access to all facilities if they have not done so.

Government should promote positive attitude amongst health service providers.

The committee observed that while improvements such UPE have been instrumental especially in educating the girl child and children with disabilities, there is a lot of concern about the quality of primary education and the high dropout rate especially for girls in higher primary levels and the unfavourable school environment for children with disabilities.

Lack of privacy and adequate sanitation facilities discourage pupils especially the girl child and children with disabilities from attending school. In the health service sector, the quality of education service delivery is very poor whereby in some instances its accessibility was wanting.

The UPE predisposes pupils to rape, defilement and early pregnancies as well as HIV/AIDS and as a result, a big number drops out. This is what was reported in the districts of Manafwa, Kyegegwa, Sironko and Namayingo which are highly affected.

Special needs education was observed as lacking in many districts. There was limited and inadequate gender sensitive counselling and career guidance. For example, children with disabilities are not given adequate support and attention in their education both by parents, teachers and their communities.

Many schools were constructed without consideration to gender and disability needs, for example, the universal latrines in Bulambuli, Luuka and Kaliro.

Pupils with special education needs shared classes with ordinary pupils although in districts like Sironko and Kyegegwa, this is what was noticed; one primary school was allocated to cater for children with special needs. However, these schools face a problem of lack of teachers and scholastic materials.

Although there was progress in classroom construction, the teacher-pupil ratio was still high in most visited districts. For example, in Bulambuli, Luuka, Kaliro, Bududa and Manafwa, the teacher-pupil ratio stood at 1:60. 

The committee observed that there was un-proportional establishment of government-aided schools in the districts.

Most districts visited, Sironko and Kyegegwa, for example, do not have youth vocational training schools to equip youths with vocational skills for self-employment and job creation.

Some districts lack secondary schools at sub-county level. This was evident in the new districts where new sub-counties were created. Those existing are far away, contributing to the high dropout rate and lack of secondary education to disadvantaged children especially those with disabilities.

Recommendations

    (a) Government should address the institutional and resource capacity gaps in the education sector, and strive to promote gender sensitivity in the education system.
    (b) Government should improve accessibility, equity and quality of education under UPE and USE.

    (c) Government should seriously address the teachers’ concerns over their salary enhancement in order to match their economic demand and meet the national student ratio of 1:55.

    (d) Ministry of Education should put in place mechanisms that support development and retention of the girl child and students with disabilities in schools.
    (e) Parents and teachers should be reoriented to value the girl child and children with disabilities to attain their basic right to education.

    (f) Local governments should put in place bylaws and punishments for defilers, parents who marry off their daughters early and those who do not take their children to schools.
 
    (g) Health and sanitary facilities for the girl child and children with disabilities should be given priority.

    (h) Special needs education units that exist in some of the districts visited should be equipped and facilitated, for example, Kinyinya in Kyegegwa and Budadiri Girls in Sironko District.

    (i) Government expedites the policy of establishing youth vocational skills development in every district if it has not yet done so.

    (j) Government should implement its policy of having a secondary school at every sub-county.

Equalisation Grant and the Local Revenue Performance
The committee looked at the equalisation grant and the local revenue performance and the committee established that many districts, for example, Sironko, Bulambuli, Manafwa, Luuka, Kaliro and Namayingo, to mention but a few, do not receive the equalisation grant and even those that receive it like Mbale District receive it late and as a result, service delivery is greatly affected. 

District local governments are faced with a challenge of inadequate local revenue to co-finance government projects and ensure long term sustainability of infrastructure.

Many districts have failed to deliver services or co-fund development programmes. The gap created from the suspension of the graduated tax continues to be felt, which has stagnated service delivery in the local government fiscal planning, the concept of decentralisation and equitable budgeting.

Recommendations

Government should address the issues of inadequate funding to local councils and should give equalisation grants to all new districts and if possible affirmative action for the hard-to-reach districts.

Government should put in place a support policy and legal regime that encourages local governments to invest in the development, and enhancement of alternative local revenue sources for improved service delivery.

Government should desist from sending conditional grants to the districts late, the reason as to why the unutilised funds end up being misappropriated. 

Agriculture Sector

The committee observed that increased participation has been achieved through purposive targeting of women in programmes such as NAADS and FAL by ensuring that more than 50 percent of them are either participants or beneficiaries.

Farm inputs such as fertilisers and tractors are beyond farmers’ reach. This is because they are either too expensive or of poor quality.

Traditional agricultural officers and the NAADS extension officers were duplicating roles and there was conflict of interest because of parities in their remuneration.

Yields were low because the farmers stuck to the traditional farming methods and this caused food insecurity, which affected the disadvantaged groups most as they are the ones who are slow in adopting the new technology.

There is lack of information and awareness in the areas of agricultural input production, value addition and marketing.

Equal opportunities, gender and equity issues are not well reflected in the administration and implementation of NAADS and most of the government programmes. For example, the vote for women and persons with disabilities and the youth is not used in mobilisation. According to the NAADS guidelines, 20 percent is supposed to benefit special interest groups but the committee observed that there was no mobilisation of such groups to benefit from these resources. 

Recommendations 

Government should restructure the NAADS programme to ensure deliberate efforts to create awareness about equal opportunities in the programme.

Government should harmonise traditional agricultural officers and the NAADS extension workers into an extension unit of the production sector at the districts in order to avoid conflict and duplication.

The district agriculture sector should make use of the farm field training to assist the farmers to slowly adopt the new technology.

Government should provide for improved technology and the mechanisation for hire and tractors to farmers.

SACCOS should be financially strengthened, interest rates regulated and lowered so that they can be accessed by those they seek to serve especially the disadvantaged.

Water and Sanitation Sector in the Local Governments 

The committee noted an improvement in safe water coverage and sanitation in local governments although not evenly distributed across the country.

Lack of alternative safe water sources for use mostly affects the disadvantaged groups, that is, women, children, people with disabilities and the elderly.

Some districts visited were naturally water stressed, like Kyegegwa, which calls for affirmative consideration. Sembabule too falls under this category. 

The committee observed that issues of gender equity in the water sector should be thoroughly examined, and the ministry comes up with a comprehensive report on water equity and distribution.

Recommendations 
Increase on safe water and sanitation coverage to at least 70 percent of the population; ensure equitable water and sanitation distribution to communities and affirmative action for hard-to-reach areas especially the districts under the cattle corridor.

Put in place alternative water sources such as valley dams, rain water harvesting as well as water catchments.

Promoting awareness and effective participation of the disadvantaged groups in the management of community water supply systems.

Irrigation scheme programmes to be spread out among the drought areas.

Gender and community based service sectors

The committee observed that there was inadequate support and commitment from all district stakeholders in addressing gender mainstreaming issues. 

Incidents of child labour cut across all districts. For example, in Luuka, children are employed in rice gardens to scare off birds; in Namayingo and Sigulu Islands, they are employed in fishing; in Sironko, children are employed in stone quarries. The list is endless. 

A large number of children run to streets due to domestic violence and food insecurity in the rural community.

Where women are denied opportunities to go for Functional Adult Literacy (FAL) classes because their spouses view these classes negatively, men on the other hand shy away from FAL classes especially in Bugisu sub-region. This is what was reported.

In Mt Elgon districts, cultural events like Imbalu have an impact on retention of children in schools. This is what was reported as the committee visited these districts.

Issues of ethnic conflicts in local governments call for urgent government attention as they seem to form the basis for the current agitation for new districts. For example, Kibaale and Kagadi; Tororo and Mukiyu, among others. The list is endless.

Stigmatisation of people with disabilities especially women and the girl child in some incidences, where many mothers with disabilities end up as single mothers.

Recommendations

There is need for Government to address the societal disparities that put the marginalised or disadvantaged groups at risk.

Government should address the negative gender cultural attitudes and practices that hamper economic development for the marginalised groups.

Government should promote gender responsiveness in the delivery of community-based social services and in other developmental sectors. 

Prioritisation of the technical support and gender mainstreaming in all district plans and programmes.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development with other stakeholders should champion the cause to revive and strengthen the family system so as to address the ills that lead to cases of child labour.

Government should enhance effective participation of the interest groups in matters that affect them and local leaders should ensure that children’s rights to education are not violated.

Government should put in place mechanisms to address issues of ethnic conflicts and tension in the local government set-ups.

Promotion of gender rights

On page 22, the delay to enact gender sensitive regulations that protect the vulnerable groups, that is, the Sexual Offences Bill, the Bill on Child Sacrifice and Women Trafficking for Sexual Exploitation is the breeding centre for social injustice in our society. 

Apart from Mbale District, other districts visited did not have remand homes thus the vulnerable and destitute were being remanded together with other core criminals.

Confinement of students together with adult offenders is against their constitutional rights which demands for fair treatment and protection.

Women did not have special prisons hence lacked the necessary items for sanitation and custody for their children.

Some prisoners walk long distances to courts of law.

The Judiciary lacked adequate manpower to expedite justice and is highly underfunded.

Recommendations

Government should establish sub-regional alternative homes for the destitute and vulnerable children.

Facilities at every police station should cater for the rights of the children.

Women in detention should be deliberately provided with sanitary facilitation.

Works and transport sector

The committee noted that many roads in the eastern region are washed away by rain and coincidentally, the road fund comes during the rainy season rendering it difficult for any work to be done. This is what was reported.

The amount of funding given to construct and maintain roads in mountainous areas should be more than that given to those in flat areas. The cost of ferrying materials to the top of the hills is twice the cost when it is ferried on flat land.

The roads which were taken by UNRA were in a sorry state, for example, Mbale-Manafwa-Bududa road. I hope they have worked on it. 

Hazards affecting men at work are often overlooked unlike those affecting women. More often than not, you hear advocacy for suitable working environment for women and not for men. Even when it comes to sexual harassment at work, what comes to one’s mind is the gender female factor. It was reported that in some cases, men are harassed.

Recommendations

When allocating funds for roads, Government should consider affirmative action on hilly and mountainous areas as well as islands.

The guidelines as given by the Ministry of Finance that districts should form supervision committees to monitor the road works should be operationalised.

There should be promotion of safety at work for both men and women. Road funding should be increased.

General observations

The committee observed that there were socio-economic as well political gains as a result of having services nearer to the people due to the demarcations and creation of new districts especially in areas that were hard to reach, for example, administrative services and physical access to basic services infrastructure. 

The committee observed that in spite of the above progress and gains, districts find themselves ultimately hampered by institutional and resource challenges which undermine their progress in service delivery in terms of availability, accessibility and quality.

Financial obligations in terms of high administrative costs, for example, equalisation grants that have remained stagnant at around Shs 3.5 billion despite the increasing number of districts. In some instances, creation of new districts on the basis of ethnicity, tribal conflicts and recognition tend to arouse pre-existing tension. For example, in Nakasongola, Baruli versus Baganda, Bakonjo versus ethnic minorities in Kasese, Banyala versus Baganda, Japadhola versus Ateso, Bagungu versus Bararo, Banyoro versus Bakiga in Buliisa and Kibaale respectively. This is what the committee received.

The committee observed that the remuneration of district local councillors compared to what is expected of them in execution of their work is very low. New districts created were in a sorry state as many do not have infrastructure, such as, headquarters, equipment, vehicles and office space and the current law is silent about the sharing of liabilities between the old and the new districts. Mother districts are bearing the costs of all the liabilities including pension for staff in the newly created district.

General observations

The committee recommends immediate amendment of the Finance Bill to reflect a provision for gender equity certificates to accompany all government policies. The Committee on Gender and Equal Opportunities has been requesting for some time that the government gives provision for gender equity certificates to accompany all government policies if we are to achieve gender equity and equal opportunities.

Equity and equal opportunities should be mainstreamed in all local governments, ministries, departments and agencies.

The Ministry of Local Government should develop a gender responsive recruitment system by instituting gender inclusive practices in job descriptions.

Gender and equity concerns should be considered at all levels by strengthening the gender aspect in the existing local government policies, and human resource management systems.

Districts that have not operationalised district service commissions should constitute them immediately in order to fast-track the issues of structuring local governments so that civil servants in acting capacity are regularised in their positions.

Government should put in place structural mechanisms, which guarantee equal opportunities to all persons and affirmative action in favour of the marginalised and disadvantaged groups.

Maternal health care should be given a fair budget as women continue to die in labour. Adequate budgetary provisions should be made to address the challenges faced. The health sector should be given an appropriate budget to address issues of maternal and reproductive health. Referral classes should be given funds and facilities to promote the programme.

The flexibility principle of the conditional grant of 10 percent to local governments that was reversed by the Cabinet should be reinstated, and equalisation grants be increased and evenly distributed if it has not been done yet.

Government should consider remuneration of district councillors to motivate them in exercising their functions. Government should provide structures at local government administrative units and at district and sub-county levels. Government workers in hard to reach areas should be considered for special remuneration.

Government should encourage equitable sharing of movable assets between the new and the mother districts. The Local Government Act should consider the sharing of liabilities between the new and mother districts.

Government should re-consider the recruitment ceiling in the district service commissions if it has not done so.

Construction of access ways for persons with disabilities should be a must for contracts to be awarded. In order to achieve the expected service delivery and social transformation, government should ensure gender equity and budget gender mainstreaming in all its programmes.

Conclusion

From the above overview, the starting point for this august House is to understand and appreciate the concepts of equity and equal opportunities and their implications on human development and economic growth. It is imperative that government thinks of a new approach to address inequality in service delivery, wealth creation and distribution. Equally, it is the responsibility of this House to ensure that issues of gender, equity and equal opportunities are well addressed in line with the constitutional provisions.

Much as the equal opportunities commission was established to give full effect to the provisions on affirmative action, routinely monitor the effects and outcomes of the action and advise government on the appropriation to ensure conformity with the constitutional provision, with the meagre funding of the commission, not much can be achieved. 

Whereas creation of new districts is in line with the provisions of the Constitution; aware that it brings services nearer to the people; realising that there have been some negative concerns of the unproductive administrative costs which strain the already overstretched national budget; the committee believes that if creation of further smaller units within units is not followed with strong mechanisms of government improving on financing for service delivery and addressing ethnic conflicts, the results in the near future may be counter-productive. 

Lastly, as Government pushes for its policy of creating new districts, it should guarantee that it is able to adequately fund service delivery in the existing ones by endeavouring to ensure equitable resource distribution. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for listening and I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chairperson. The report has been signed by more than the necessary one-third of the Members. I must warn Members that anyone who is a member of this committee should not attempt to stand, otherwise, I will deal with you. 

5.23
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Equal Opportunities for the elaborate report. In general terms, I would like to say the committee is not gender sensitive and does not provide for equal opportunities. When you look at the study they have done, they ignore the whole of Northern Uganda, they left out the whole of Central Uganda and this report reflects only Eastern and Western Uganda. If you want to provide equal opportunities, you should have picked at least two from each region. Even the composition is defective; there are more women than men. 

Madam Speaker, the report is very good, but I would like to talk about affirmative action in general. Affirmative action as stipulated in the Constitution is to provide opportunities for the marginalised groups to participate so that they can be seen as able to participate although under normal circumstances, they would not have the opportunity. 

Secondly, they have to express the views of their own members who are marginalised. It also talks of revising the affirmative action every ten years and then thereafter, every five years. People have misunderstood affirmative action to mean that when you are elected for affirmative action, you must stand for only two terms; that is very wrong. Actually you are providing marginalisation of the women and people with disability in so doing. If men can stand as many times as possible, why limit the terms for women, people with disability, the youth and other marginalised groups?

When it comes to local government councillors in the districts, when one dies, there is no replacement. For example, for people with disability, we have only two and women have a third of the population there. And when they die, there is no replacement and that means the place remains vacant until the term ends. Yet in Parliament, as soon as a Member of Parliament dies, they are replaced immediately. Why don’t we give equal treatment to the local governments so that they can also elect in time like Members of Parliament? 

Then on the issue of remuneration, councillors are also politicians; they have to go to their constituencies to make consultation. But if they are not given allowances like Members of Parliament, how do you expect them to collect the views of the people they represent? That is inequality in itself. 

When it comes to representation of people with disability in bodies like land boards and district service commissions, women and people with disabilities may not qualify to be there because they had been left out in education and employment, yet you want to give the same standards for recruitment in this case. Why don’t you provide equal opportunity for them? When a person with disability or a woman has worked for five years and retired, why not give them that opportunity?

When it comes to education, it is true, inaccessibility is everywhere; children with disabilities can benefit in any school, but when the blind and deaf go to school, nobody attends to them – (Member timed out.)

5.27
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. My contribution is in support of the establishment of special places for the children at police stations. In this case, I would suggest that the government considers putting up remand homes for these children. We have Kampiringisa, which is in the central region, but elsewhere, I do not know of any. I propose that the government considers putting up more of such homes because when children are detained in the same cells with hard core criminals, they come out when they are worse off than when they were put in. 

Secondly, on the allowances of the councilors, I support paying them at district level and even LC III, but when we were amending the PAYE threshold, we said the threshold should be at Shs 230,000 and those who earn below that are not charged. 

When we were amending the law of PAYE and income tax, all of us agreed with the minister that they have been charging PAYE from the councillors’ allowances – from the Shs 100,000 they get, they were cutting off Shs 30,000. So we agreed that it was wrong. They assured this Parliament that they were going to write to correct that; but they have not yet written. 

Madam Speaker, I request that Parliament demands that the minister tables the letter to URA directing them not to take away that money from our councillors as we agreed –(Member timed out.)

5.30
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like thank the committee for their report and more so for their objective recommendations. 

On page 17, the committee recommends that the government should implement its policy of having a secondary school at every sub- county. There are some districts with only one secondary school. A case in point is Amudat. We are talking about equity; I call upon the government to do something about the districts with only one secondary school to help these children stop walking very long distances going to school. 

There is also the problem of coding schools. Time and again, we have requested the government to code the schools and the response is very slow. Ministry of Education, please come to our aid and code the schools. 

The committee also talks of delay to enact gender sensitive legislations that protect vulnerable groups. It is true we already have some legislation to that effect. For example, we have the law of FGM, human trafficking law – in August, I was with a team of UWOPA that was going around following up on these legislations. We discovered that people in some areas were not even aware of the laws. When we asked people on this trafficking in persons law, they did not even know the forms that it takes.

So, Madam Speaker, as we think of legislating on these other laws, there is need to make follow up on the already existing ones so as to help our people become law abiding citizens.

On district service commissions, there are districts which have not raised them because of the conditions.I do not know whether the Ministry of Public Service cannot adjust because in my district, it is now that people are getting into - the few are still serving and yet they want retired civil servants. Can’t there be some affirmative action for such districts so that they can form their own district service commissions without the categories that are needed?

5.33
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I join my colleagues to thank the chair and the committee for the good report. There are a few things I think they need to put right in their report. 

First, you have clearly shown the districts where you carried out the study and then you go ahead to include in your report districts, which were not in the study such as Sembabule, Kibaale, Bululi. I think we should approve your report but these should be expunged. Look out for those sections and put your report right.

Secondly, the issue of figures; there are certain areas where your report could have been beefed up with figures, for example, the question of the dropout rate - these make the report more informative. You need to give us these figures if you have them and they are kept somewhere.

There is a figure on the teacher-pupil ratio on page 16 which you are giving as a figure for five districts and I wondered if all the five districts have the same teacher-pupil ratio. So you need to put some of these figures properly.

Thirdly, the number of districts today, they are not 118; they are 111 plus one city. These are factual things which you should put right. 

The question of the equalisation grant; you are recommending that this should be given to all the new districts, but the Constitution does not provide and define the equalisation grant that way. You need to look at districts which qualify but I am glad that you make the point that this grant has been stagnant at Shs 3.4 billion since its inception and I think we should recommend that it should be increased.

The issue of staff recruitment and job description in local governments; you are telling the Minister of Local Government to review it but it is in the docket of the minister of public service.

For me, the critical question in local governments today is the issue of the budgets, their financing; a few years back like 10 or eight, the budget of local governments compared to that of the central government was as far as 34 percent. This has progressively declined to 16 percent now. Yet when you look at the expanse of responsibilities that they have this really does not match it.

Parliament should come out with a recommendation that with effect from the budget of the next financial year, we need to look at the IPFs which are being given by Ministry of Finance.

There should not be less than 30 percent –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report produced but I want to make two comments on two points: One is about recommendation (C), regarding government considering teachers’ concerns over their salaries’ enhancement and other issues that affect them economically.

During this recess, I managed to go to some districts and the complaints that I have got from there regarding teachers include long term probation where teachers are recruited; they serve for over ten years on probation without being confirmed, they are not put on the government payroll and they are not considered for any promotion of any nature despite the fact that some of them even go for further studies and when they come back, they are not promoted.

The other issue is this recommendation (f) where the committee is recommending that local governments should put in place bylaws and punishments for defilers and parents who marry off their children at an early age. I think it is not only the local governments; let it be the entire government. This is a crucial matter; today as I was driving, I heard over the radio that Mityana is ranking the highest in defilement. They gave a statistic from June to September, the report from Mityana had up to 300 cases and some pupils have failed to sit their PLE exams because they are pregnant. So, if we do not become serious, we are going to be in trouble and therefore USE and UPE will not materialize –(Member timed out).

5.38
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report and for the research they made. 

I learnt that when the administration of a sub-county is shifting from its old home and it is being replaced by maybe a town council, it goes without being given any start-up capital. It is something that really pinched my mind to bring up on the Floor of the House and I thank the committee for having brought it out in this report.

In the local governments, in case an employee dies, the DSC is not given any single authority to replace this person so you find that indeed they are handicapped and they are not given anything in replacement. I lost the inspector of schools but the place is vacant and I do not know up to when.

On the same note, the budget of the public service commission of the local governments does not have enough funds; I did not hear the committee talk about this. My district has been having a budget of Shs 77 million per year but it has reduced to Shs 32 million. They are even afraid of setting up anything like an advert for replacing the vacant posts or acting jobs.

Point (C) on page 12 reminds me of the centralised programmes whereby MPs and even district councilors do not have authority and capacity to follow up. Members are not informed - (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, for the information of the Prime Minister, the point raised by hon. Timbigamba on assets is serious. The old districts share the assets with the new ones but they remain with all the liabilities. Actually, you are punished for giving away some of your area. They are supposed to share the liabilities but the old one remains with all the liabilities.

5.41
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the elaborate report that they have presented. Thank you so much for your good report.

I want to give information on the agricultural extension and traditional agricultural officers. On the Floor of this Parliament, the Committee on Agriculture recommended that the ministry should adopt a single spine agricultural extension approach, which I think it is now a matter of them to implement what the Parliament has resolved.

I want also to comment on the money that has not been spent and the districts return it to the Consolidated Fund. Even the money that has been committed, they are directed to return it and if the districts request that the money be returned, you find the Treasury does not respond and yet many projects that the districts have already committed themselves by even offering the contract to the contractor are standing still without any work being done. I think it is high time Parliament also made sure that a resolution is passed in relation to this.

I want to tell the committee - when they talk about the roads, of course we know our weather system has changed; the climate has changed to a point that many roads in our districts are eroded. But unfortunately, most of the roads which UNRA is supposed to take care of and to work on - some of the roads go for even three years without being maintained –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to clarify. There is a matter hon. Okot has raised, which we resolved during the budget debate. I think the minister made a commitment here that the districts retain the funds up to October. So this business of June is no longer there. You inform the districts that they can use the funds up to October. They do not have to return them - (Member timed out.)

5.43
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in thanking the committee for a comprehensive report. And I have the following observations: 

On page 17, the committee is emphasising that government expedites the policy of establishing youth vocational skills development in every district. This is a very good policy which government should be able to take up as quickly as possible so that our youths who are redundant in our districts can be ably employed and not become a problem to us.

Secondly, various colleagues have hinted on the budget and the money that we send to the districts. Even the little that is budgeted and appropriated to be sent to districts is usually sent late. We would like to urge the Minister for Finance that if money has been appropriated for the districts, let it be sent early so that services can be extended to our people.

The committee also hinted on the establishment of SACCOs in various districts - actually in all the districts. Government initiated this project to establish SACCOs at various Gombololas but after some time, it looks as if it has abandoned this project and yet the government put a lot of money in establishing these SACCOs. If these SACCOs can be enhanced and assisted, they can go a long way in providing small loans to our farmers at low interest rates that can encourage people to do farming. 

The committee also hinted on the establishment of health centres. Health centres, mostly health centres IV, have been established in various constituencies and in various districts but they are up to now lacking facilities. I was recently at a health centre IV in Kyabujimbi in my constituency, in which only four beds have been provided with no mattresses and with small rooms which are generally shared by – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I will have to move this side. 

5.46
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also appreciate the committee’s report. I would like to begin with a clarification. On page 15, the committee has made a statement that Universal Primary Education “predisposes pupils to rape, defilement and early pregnancies”. I think this statement needs clarification from the chairperson. Under normal circumstances, keeping the girl child in school is supposed to help protect them from defilement and rape and so on but here you are saying the opposite. Please clarify that.

On page 16, on the issue of providing equalisation grants to districts, many districts are having a low local revenue base and therefore when it comes to taking 20 percent of that in order to pay councillors’ allowances and deal with such issues, there is very little and you find that the districts are hardly holding council meetings because they do not have money to pay councillors’ allowances. I would therefore call upon the government to look at these districts with very low revenue bases and try to provide a higher amount of equalisation grant. 

On the issue of roads taken over by UNRA, on page 23, it is true that many of these roads are in a poor state. In the district of Kiboga, where I represent Kiboga East Constituency, we have a road, Kiboga town via Kambugu up to Mubende District. This road is in such a poor state that the district has decided to use some of its funds which it should have used on district roads to repair this road which is supposed to be handled by UNRA. And to make things worse –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I want to agree with the recommendations that they have given us and give my appreciation for some of them. 

I would first of all want to commend the committee on the issue that they raised on road funding; that really the funds that we give the local governments for these community roads, are low. And I think that Members know now because we are committee members at the district levels. We realise that the funds are really minimal and when they go ahead to recommend that in these mountainous areas, we should give added funding because of the nature of the roads that we have - We want to agree with them and we want to inform the Members that in Kween District, where I come from, we even do not have murram up there. So if you have to improve our roads, have murram the other side, then we have to come down to Sironko-Karamoja region which is very expensive. And you will find that our roads are in a very bad condition. So, I call upon Government to act. 

On the issue of equalisation grants, we have these new districts; when you move around the country, you will realise that some of the districts are in a sorry state. Kween is one of them. When you reach my headquarters, you may think that maybe it is still ahead. We want to call upon Government to come in and look at –(Member timed out.)

5.50
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to thank the committee for the good work done. My district has been mentioned almost on every page and I want to agree with the chair and the committee members on the findings and the recommendations that they have given.

I want to comment on the remuneration of councillors. All our programmes and services are supposed to be implemented at sub-counties and parishes. And who are the political supervisors of these programmes? They are supposed to be the councillors who are not remunerated at all. Some of our councillors have turned into contractors. So when they go to do this work, they do very shoddy work. They have worked together with the District Service Commission that when they advertise for jobs, they share these positions amongst themselves and say, “You will bring two, I will bring three, and he will bring four.”

They solicit money from candidates who are coming to do interviews; if you do not pay money, you are not considered. And this is all done because the people have nothing to go with at the end of the day to their homes. If the government looks into remunerating these councilors, maybe we shall try to curb this problem.

In these areas, education during rainy seasons is a nightmare. Actually, children either do not go to school at all or when they go and rains find them there, they do not return home. Bridges are washed away daily and the roads are totally impassable. Maybe that is why the committee said that UPE has led to raping of the girls and defiling them and running away from school. If it rains and it finds them across the river, they will not come back home. They will sleep in any of the homes nearby until the waters will go down and then they will cross back.

With the Imbalu as a culture, I want to thank the Umukuka that we have today; initially, after circumcision, our boys used to be given a hoe, a panga and a spear and they used to be told, “You are now a man, you can go and marry” at whatever age they get circumcised. Today, our cultural leader, Umukuka Wilson Wamimbi, has introduced a pen and a book. So after circumcision, they tell you to go back to school. (Applause) And with this, and the help of our cultural leader, we believe that we are going to change a lot and our children are going to consider education not circumcision as a priority in that region. I thank you.

5.53
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this practical and pragmatic report. On page 22, works and transport sector, (a) talks about many roads in the eastern region. I would have preferred the committee to report about many roads in hilly areas so as to avoid the discriminative nomenclature of the regions. 

Wherever there is a highland and there are hills, roads are washed away within a period of two months from the dates of construction and repair. Moreover, most of these roads are done without gravel. I am of the view that instead of naming the eastern region only, we name the hilly areas.

On page 23, on recommendations, when allocating funds for roads, government should consider affirmative action for hilly and mountainous areas as well as islands. These should be emphasised and Parliament should follow it up seriously because areas like Bukwo, Bundibugyo, Manafwa and my Buhweju, suffer a lot. Many of us have been there – Madam Speaker, you have been to an area like Buhweju. 

The problem we have in most of these hilly areas is that they are deprived of the population because people are not allowed to stay there because of the poor social amenities. Any government allocation formula that considers the population factor already hits on these areas. I am of the view that these areas get affirmative action not only in roads but in several development projects and funding where population is considered as a factor.

On page 25, the government should consider remuneration of councilors as many Members have said. We have talked about this before; in my area, there is a councillor whom I did not agree with at first because his song at every function was and still is the Shs 70,000 he gets. He goes for a fundraising, he laments about the Shs 70,000. He goes for a burial and laments about the same thing. But I think, finally, I agree with him. We should not only motivate councilors but even enable them to work. Imagine Shs 70,000 in a month and you are giving it to a person called a leader. What does it do and where does it go? Even a single day on a boda-boda and lunch costs almost that. I think that should be addressed.

Lastly, government workers in hard-to-reach areas should be considered for special remuneration. I suggest that the government comes up with those areas we hear are hard to reach. For example, if I hear there are places hard to reach and Buhweju is not on the list, which place is harder to reach than Buhweju? Government should come up with the list of those areas; it is verified by Parliament and then we agree on the hard-to-reach areas. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.56
COL.FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhuura): Madam Speaker, I also rise to support and appreciate the work of the committee. The revelations in this report are disturbing yet the Constitution is very clear and Uganda is a signatory to the Millennium Development Goals and they are all touched here. 

But I will address the observations on page 12 on the recruitment and deployment; that the gender equality and equal opportunities were not being considered. At this material time in the history of Uganda, it is disturbing to hear such an observation from the members of Parliament. That means that either government agents in these districts are not very serious or they are consciously or unconsciously sabotaging government programmes. Otherwise, from the recent reports on the experience of the millennium goals, there is some indication of some progress.

Having listened to this report, I think I will call upon members of Parliament to intensify our struggles to scrutinise government work as part of our work and try to iron out all these evils by civil servants. I support and appreciate the revelation of the committee and I wish we had more time to cover the entire country so that we know the exact picture in the whole country. I call upon our colleagues that we should intensify the struggle to rid out these evils by these civil servants who are sabotaging government’s otherwise good programmes.

5.59
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I appreciate this report but I would like to also say that the concentration was in new districts leaving out some regions completely and especially war affected areas. The war affected areas have their specific problems. When we do not take concern, then we leave them out.

Let me just highlight something small on page 14. You said health services should be extended to lower levels as is in the policy to have health centre IIs in every sub-county and parish. Health centre IIs are supposed to be in parishes not sub-counties but at sub-counties, it should be health centre IIIs. So we need to correct that.

I wish to say that there is a group that has been left out. You have included people with disabilities, the older persons who are not taken care of but there is drug addicts and alcoholics. We have these people in place and I want to give an example of what happened in Gulu just two days ago. 

In Gulu, the youths have started knifing people in crowds. You do not know the person who has knifed you but you find yourself bleeding. Yesterday, I visited the mortuary of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital where found bodies of two young people one was shot by police, which was very unfortunate because police is not supposed to kill but to protect life. But they just decided to shoot at random and another was killed by knifing. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you know this report is about gender and equity issues in local governments. (Laughter)

MS AOL: Yes, but I thought I was also raising – 

THE SPEAKER: No, but you are diverting. Address how local governments address gender issues; how are they budgeting and making the bylaws?

MS AOL: Maybe then on health, there is need to add on the budget to include other classes of people. I am now bringing on board these specific people; the people who are drug addicts – (Member timed out.)

6.02
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the members of the committee and I have the following to say. I agree with you in almost all your findings as far as equal opportunities are being implemented in the local governments. It is true that our laws state very clearly issues of men and women and need for equal opportunities for positions of leadership, recruitment, but it is not being considered well when it comes to local governments and even the private sector. For instance, Kole District has its district service commission in place but we do not have a woman as a representative on the commission. We do not even have the representation of persons with disability. How can a woman who has finished their schooling be recruited when she is facing a panel of only men? The committee should have pointed out that Kole District doesn’t have women and PWDs representation on the district service commission.

However, we also have to address certain issues in school to ensure that our girls finish their education so that when they are recruiting men, we also have women who are educated. Last time, I talked about classroom construction under the facilitation grants asking that if we can include facilities for the girl child when they need to clean up themselves. The female teachers should be encouraged to finish their studies. We should also look at career masters and mistresses in secondary schools to encourage our girls and boys on which subjects to study. For instance, we need to encourage our girls to pursue science subjects –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report and commend the good job done by the committee for traversing the districts they went to. Particularly, I want to talk about our islands and far areas to reach. Some areas in my constituency, that is, Zinga, Bussi, Kavenyanja, have a number of problems. We have talked about remuneration of the councilors and I am not delving into that.

I want to look at cases to do with girls – we are having a very big problem in that area. Whereas the committee has clearly put it across that we have drug related problems, I want to look at an issue where just two weeks ago, as I was coming from the islands, we had a pregnant woman there and none of us on the boat could do anything to help this woman. I own a mobile boat on the lake but it was crushed recently by the fishermen. 

I would like the government and Parliament to ensure that the hard-to-reach areas have got enough supplies. We do not have hospitals in Bussi Island. People have to traverse a distance of about 43 kilometres from Busito to Kisubi or Entebbe. We need to ensure that through the local government, we educate the girl or boy from that very area; give them enough facilities to make sure that we have trained nurses, doctors, and other professionals from the islands who will be able to serve their people. 

In the education sector, in the islands called Kavenyanja, there is a UPE programme that dates from 2001, but money that comes from the district reaches almost six months after it was released. The district pays teachers twice in a year. We call upon the local leaders to harmonise the system to have services reach those areas. Thank you.

6.07
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, KAlungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee and particularly the chairperson. You see, I have enjoyed this report and most especially read by my common yellow girl. I see that now you have become a green girl. We should not even waste time going to other districts – the situation is the same everywhere. I wish this report was read before the passing of the budget; we were here struggling for teachers – this is a fact we cannot run away from! 

When you talk about local councilors, I want to give you evidence from Kalungu. Councilors do not take on their responsibilities and most especially those from NRM because they are expecting money. The DP councillors who are used to poverty are there working – (Interjections) – this is a fact you cannot run away from. 

When you talk about social services – this is an evaluation coming from a government after 26 years in power. I am happy it is coming from the ruling side. You cannot come here and give such a report of a government which has been in power for the last 26 years! People are in agony and crying with a lot of pain in their heart – everywhere in Uganda, even in Kampala, the situation is the same – (Interjections) - I am not ready to take that information; we shall be meeting outside there – (Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to misinform the country that this government has stayed in power for more than 26 years and is not in control, without telling his hearers the conditions under which this government has stayed in power? We have been fighting all these years with rebels; people who think upside down. If somebody has been fighting, you should take into account those many years of fighting. So, is it in order for the honourable member to speak as if he has just fallen from heaven? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is well known that the country has had to undergo rehabilitation and reconstruction – not everything has been smooth. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am happy he is not a student of history. One day, I will tell the General the history of this country in terms of leadership and performance, basing on the government he led before he joined this one. 

When we talk about education, there is no human resource this country can create other than using its people. There is a situation in Kalungu – I bought a lithograph - a machine which prints exams for the children, but the district cannot even afford to buy paper to run exams for their children because there is no money. 

When we talk about lack of money in districts, we mainly refer to money for administration and salaries, but on service delivery, there is totally nothing. I am happy Gen. Moses Ali has said it here that, “we have been in Government doing other things”. This is the evaluation of Parliament; we must work hard to transform the country. You cannot come here and start talking about murram roads. This committee did not even talk about buildings; children are studying in condemned classrooms. Once a class of UPE loses a window, it can never be replaced because –(Member timed out.) 

6.13
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. On page 14, they talk about promoting positive attitude among health workers and teachers. The only medicine is recommendation (e), reviewing their salaries. That is the only way the health workers and teachers can meet the economic demand. Otherwise, there is nothing else you can do to promote their attitude; it will always be bad unless their salaries are improved. 

The committee also talked about vocational training institute for the youth. In our district of Sironko, we have Buwalasi Teacher Training College, which was closed. Now, our youths have nowhere to get those skills. They are roaming everywhere and at the end of the day, we call them thugs. 

This country is in a sorry state and something has to be done. As I speak now, all the roads in Sironko are impassable. If you are to come to Sironko District, you would have to use a vehicle up to Mbale Town, and once you step on Sironko soils, you have to walk for 30 miles; the roads are impassable, the bridges are gone! Everybody there is crying. Children no longer go to school. When they go to school, they reach late because the rains fall every day. We do not know what we should do, but I think by now, as hon. Ssewungu said, the roads would be okay. I do not think it takes three decades to construct a small road of 30 kilometres. 

So those who are in charge, especially the minister for transport, should improve on the road network so that the people in the villages can transport their commodities to the market and be able to take their children to schools that are not UPE. We have heard here that UPE is promoting child rape, defilement and early marriages – (Member timed out.)

6.16
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. On the issue of gender equity certificates, gender is a human development factor. However, many people do not appreciate it. That is why the committee found out that gender mainstreaming is not anywhere in those local councils. No wonder, when I was speaking to my councilors and district technical people, they were wondering whether there was a separate budget for gender mainstreaming. 

So, if we are going to help this country on issues of gender mainstreaming, this Ninth Parliament should not finish its term without passing a law on gender equity certificate. If we do so, we shall have helped this country. 

People have talked about roads; I want to add that roads are going to kill us. Actually, the mortality rate of members of Parliament is high as a result of UNRA roads. District local governments have been awarded roads. Using the graders they were given, they have worked on their roads with the meagre budget that they get. One wonders what is happening to the roads that were taken up by UNRA. A road takes two or three years without being repaired yet they have a budget. They have a division – for instance, in Western Uganda, they have a division base in Mbarara, but they wait until members of Parliament make a lot of noise; yet they have a lot of money. 

I think Parliament needs to review this matter; if UNRA cannot work on these roads, let this money go the local governments and they maintain their own roads. Apart from rural electrification, people urgently want roads that can enable them to transport their goods and services. 

Good enough, the chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure is here. There is need to review that aspect of UNRA; let that money go to the districts and then the districts can use their own contractors to work on our roads. Members of Parliament are going to be sacrificed because of the bad roads in our districts. 

I also want to talk about the issue of affirmative action, particularly the debate that has come up. I wish that debate was coming from women. I am wondering, what do these men want? They have been in Parliament for several years and I think they are trying to sabotage the women that have come up to contribute to national development – (Member timed out.)

6.19
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for the report. I am going to talk about local government. I was once a councilor and during that time, we were talking about the qualifications of local councilors. 

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that Parliament doesn’t do much in implementation of government programmes. When we talk of equal opportunities, some of those councilors do not understand what it is. Have we gone there to sensitise them about equity and equal opportunities? Do councilors know how to read and write? We are talking about building designs; these councilors cannot understand these things.

Madam Speaker, with UPE and USE, why don’t we teach our councilors how to read and write because when I was in the local government, councilors were just putting up their hands to vote and they would ask what did they vote for. As long as we still have councilors who cannot read, who cannot write, who cannot understand these concepts of equal opportunity, we are not going anywhere. 

I propose that we go back and revise the Local Government Act, see how we can empower our councils even if we pay them much but as long as they do not understand the budget they are passing, as long as they do not understand the projects they are implementing, they will still achieve nothing. They should be paid because they are already working for government; they should be remunerated and they should be able to afford transport to come to district council meetings.
I want to talk about education on page 15; the committee has noted that UPE is transferring our children from school to getting married and being raped. There is something that I was grappling with; what are the learning hours for our pupils? When I was growing up, I would go to school at 8.00a.m. or 8.30a.m. but nowadays, deep in the villages, there where there is no electricity, children are already walking on the road by 5.30a.m. or 6.00 a.m. with huge bags of books and the time to return home is normally 7.00p.m. or 7.30 p.m. No wonder there are failures in UPE because when do the children ever rest?

For Kampala at least - (Member timed out.)

6.22
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (NRM, Luuka County, Luuka): I would like to thank the committee for the work well done and the time they sacrificed to traverse this country while carrying out the oversight function. A lot has been said and I will not repeat what my colleagues have been saying. But I will only go to page 13.

The committee did a very commendable job of trying to reach out to the people of Luuka. Observation (b) talks of shortage of health workers and poor remuneration and in Luuka District, for example, the former health centre IV in charge was acting as a director of health services and the health centre is operating with clinical officers without a doctor.

As we speak now, if we sacrifice time to go to Luuka and look at what they are calling the health centre, whether your tears are miles away from your head, you would start crying. The situation is bad and traumatising. Last year in November, the Minister of Health came to Luuka; we had a function but the day she came, that is the day our maternity ward caught fire but up to today, the situation is still as it was even when the minister promised that within a short period of time, somebody would come from the ministry of health to take out the measurements and do something for the people of Luuka. As I speak now, nothing has been done.

It is bad that the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances is not here but I think he should have handled this kind of case with some seriousness -(Member timed out.)

6.24 
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for this elaborate report. I would like to thank the committee for the observations that they have made and the issues they have raised. For sure, they really apply to most districts in this country and particularly, Ntoroko District. Much as you did not visit it, you do not even need to go there because the issues and observations you have raised from the districts visited are the ones equally shared in my district.

I have heard the chairperson present the report on the health sector, on the education sector, equalisation grant and local revenue performance, works and transport sector and those are the issues that I would wish to comment on briefly.

Ntoroko is a district which is always faced with disasters and whenever there is disaster, we have floods, we have landslides and at times we have long spells of drought. When we have landslides, roads are all cut off and some of these roads are community roads maintained by the districts and some of them are maintained by UNRA. Unfortunately, because of these disasters, sometimes the district cannot afford to maintain these roads and as a result, accessibility is not possible. Children stop going to school, pregnant mothers cannot access health facilities and of course transport and communication are completely cut off. As a result, Ntoroko District throughout the whole year is ever facing these problems.

The chairperson mentioned the health facilities being far away. It is true because when you look at my district, we only have one health centre in the whole district which is even under facilitated. These sub-counties are miles apart, when you are talking about a pregnant mother who is going to deliver and has to come from the top of the mountain, she is carried on a stretcher to reach the nearest health centre, which is understaffed and has no drugs. From all the miles this pregnant mother has travelled down the valley, she will not even get the services. The health facilities in my district are really disappointing. There are no wards, people share; men, children and everyone are in one ward and that is the best health centre a district can afford.

On the issue of education, in my district, pupils still study under trees. I visited one school of recent; I really had to tell the children to vacate because any time the building was going to collapse and kill the pupils. So I had to tell them to vacate. Some of them still sit under trees and you find that much as there is UPE and USE, they are not getting the best –(Member timed out.)

6.24
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report presented to this House. I am going to speak about two issues: one, arising from page 14, observation (f) which talks about a number of districts not having referral hospitals.

I am not being jealous but sometimes I wonder how things are done by this government. Bududa District has got 170,000 people, it has got one hospital, it has five health centre IVs, it has got about seven health centre IIIs but that is 170,000 people!

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. Are you saying that Bududa has four counties and has seven health centre IVs?

MR LUBOGO: I said that it has one hospital and four health centre IVs. 

THE SPEAKER: It is not possible because Bududa is one county.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, you can find out about that. The contention is coming from the fact that health centre IV is at a county level but I am saying what I know and it can be verified.

But, Madam Speaker, you find that in the whole of northern Busoga, that is Kaliro, Namutumba, Luuka and Buyende, there is not even a single hospital in those four districts. And somebody wonders how things are done. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I think this matter must be considered seriously. The President stood and promised the people of Kaliro a hospital at Bumanya Health Centre IV. We are waiting for that. We have seen many people die as they travel very long distances to go to Iganga Hospital. We cannot wait to have a hospital in Kaliro.

On the last page, the last sentence, the report talks about the policy of government to create more districts. I am glad that the President withdrew the districts we had passed here but I think as a parliament, we need to come out very clearly and rephrase this sentence here in the last paragraph and say that Government should stop creation of new districts until it guarantees that it is able to adequately fund the delivery of services in the existing districts –(Member timed out.)

6.31
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Lubogo stopped exactly where I wanted to start so let me do that. The recommendation here in your conclusion on page 27 should be emphatic about the status of creation of new administrative blocks. It has to be clear and hon. Lubogo has put it very well. 

I want to thank you for your report. And to buttress that point, the report mentioned somewhere that there is more spending on consumption rather than on production and you also mentioned on page 5, the rapid growing population and you did not tell us in your recommendations what you think about this explosive population growth. I needed to know that. You needed to say that government should revise its policy because I know the President has a very clear stand on population and growth because he thinks it is synonymous with the growth of countries like China, and I certainly disagree with him.

I want to comment on what hon. Nalubega said. It could not be said any better. Of course this report is about gender mainstreaming and I sympathise with the fact that gender mainstreaming in the case of discrimination against the gender female is a matter which is a challenge for us but it is orchestrated by the fact that education is a challenge and especially for the female gender and this is very clear in the report.  But it is also the nostalgia of our people thinking the gender female cannot do this and that. That is something we need to continue advocating and promoting that the gender female is actually a stronger sect in many aspects.

Let me comment on the issue of graduated tax. You said that the government is grappling with filling the gap that was created by graduated tax removal. I wanted it to be clear in the report that graduated tax was scrapped because government had found money by increasing one percent on VAT. VAT was 17 percent and now we are talking of VAT on 18 percent and the one percent was meant to cater for the gap that was going to come because of the scrapping of the graduated tax. 

Finally, the issue of agriculture; I will be faulting on my responsibility if I do not remind this House that at a continental level, where I represent you in the Pan-African Parliament, the Maputo Protocol on Agriculture is very emphatic. I think that as a member state and a national parliament, this should never escape our debate. I am happy with the fact that the NRM caucus one time sat, I am told, in Kyankwanzi and recommended that seven percent of our national budget should go to agriculture – (Member timed out.)

6.34
MR GILBERT OLANYA: (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the committee for the good work done. I will also appreciate the committee on your observations where you say district councilors could not afford to scrutinise the issues of development. You are very correct on this point. In most districts in Uganda, many councilors are not educated and worse still, we do not have the minimum education level for district councilors yet the law says in a district council hall, they have to speak in English.

There is a contradiction there – the district councilors are supposed to speak in English and when it comes to the minimum level of education –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you for giving way. The law says the councilors can debate in their local language but the minutes will be written in English – just for correction on that.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Much as the law says they can use the local language, in most districts, the clerks to councils emphasise that councilors should speak in English.

I would like to propose that Parliament sets the minimum level of education especially for the district councilors – at least someone who has completed O’level so that we improve the quality of service in the districts.

Looking at affirmative action, I thought the idea behind this was to empower our ladies politically and economically. If you look at other people who are voted on affirmative action – (Member timed out.)

6.37
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. I just have a few observations to make. In this report, it is stated that safe water access has increased in the country and indeed it is true. But my problem is with the schools where our children go to study. 

You are aware that our communities and councilors do not give priority to have water sources in the schools. Instead they look at the community in general where they are getting votes and therefore they leave the schools where the children are under-age and are not voters. At the end, our children go to neighbouring villages to look for safe water for drinking and their life is threatened because you cannot trust everybody nearby the school. (Applause) Our children can drink water which is unsafe.

I am proposing that if the Ministry of Education can change the funding they are giving for these schools so that when you are putting classroom blocks and the teachers, you must also include a borehole in the schools to save our children.

The committee has also recommended irrigation. It is very important that we should start with water harvesting. Right now, we are having a lot of rain water but because our people do not have the technology of harvesting water, we are losing the water which would be used during the dry season. We are aware these days we only have one season of the rain and most of our months are dry. During those months, our people suffer to get drinking water and water for their animals. The government should take it as its responsibility to train our people and provide the facilities so that we harvest this water. I know irrigation is very expensive and right now the government is only looking for big irrigation schemes like Mubuku and not these small people - (Member timed out.)

6.39
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Allow me also thank the committee for the good report and basically, the report emphasises promoting gender equity and equal opportunities. In my opinion, I look at what has been debated as hinging around attitude. The Minister of Gender holds the mandate to address the people’s attitude but you find the marginalisation starts with the ministries and then goes down.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is always considered last. When you go the districts, the line department of community services also comes last to the extent that sometimes, it is given zero budget –(Interruption)

MS LUKIA NAKADAMA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. I want to give this information that the Ministry of Gender – it is true it is considered last or given little money but in that little budget that we have, we have trainings of gender mainstreaming at the district level. I think the problem is culture and the mindset that we need to emphasise on. Otherwise, we have been carrying on trainings of gender mainstreaming at the district level within that small budget.

MR MANDERA: I am not blaming the Ministry of Gender but as a former staff who worked for 15 years as a community development officer, I am supporting the opinion of the minister.

As regards gender mainstreaming, you realise local governments just tackle this issue to pass the assessment and get increased budget or bonus in the next financial year. They even allocate money to vulnerable groups but they do not release the money –(Member timed out.)

6.42
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for a wonderful report presented to this House. Whereas I commend the report, I would also like to commend the role the government has played in trying to deliver services to the people. But of course I want to highlight some shortcomings especially on the government side in regard to service delivery.

On the health sector, this government is a signatory to the Abuja Declaration which talks about 15 percent budgetary allocation on health annually. But today as we speak, if I counted to you with data, we have less than 70 districts in Uganda out of 111 districts that even have ambulances; not even ordinary vehicles that can be used by the mothers. This area is very wanting and I think we need to find a solution. We ratified these protocols; if we approve them and we do not domesticate them, they lose meaning.

Today, in this House, I sit on the committee on health and when you go to the health centres of this country – we have gone to Butaleja - you will find that instead of someone going to the health centre to get treatment and come back home cured, one goes there and gets diarrhoea because the sanitation situation in health centres is very wanting.

Many of my colleagues have talked about the agricultural sector. But I want us to note that whereas in this report, government prioritises funding to the local governments, when you look at the agriculture sector, only seven percent women in this country own the land and yet when it comes to deciding on the  -(Member timed out.)

6.45
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I wish to also appreciate the work done by the committee. I concur with the findings that have been reported on page 22 and 23 under the works and transport sector.

The committee stresses the point that the roads in the eastern region are in a sorry state. I wish to mention that it is not just a sorry state but these roads have become a total menace to the people they are intended to serve. These roads which were taken over by the central government are increasing the rate at which our people are getting accidents; the cost of doing business has gone high and surely our people are at the moment being done a big disservice. 

In my constituency, in Jinja District, I have roads that were taken over by the central government – the first road is that one from Kayitabawala-Matumu-Mbulamu-Kamuli and it is in a very bad state. I also have another road Buwenge-Kitanaba-Luzinga-Kaliro road and another one, Buwenge-Muguluka-Namagala road. I suggest that since this is a national problem, we should come up with a policy where each district has its road equipment. 

When you look at the issue of maintaining these roads, the biggest cost goes to the equipment but if these districts have the equipment - I think we need to come up with a collaborative effort between government and the districts such that UNRA raises the fuel and murram – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before we conclude, I want for the record to make the following clarifications. I do not believe that Bududa has four health centre IVs. Bududa District is actually Manjiya County – it is a one county district; it has one hospital, 16 sub-counties and seven health centre IIIs and not IV.

I also wanted to answer hon. Kabajo who wanted to know the relationship between defilement and UPE. When children have to walk 15 miles to reach a school in darkness; they walk for miles to line up for water in the night before reporting home – that is how boda boda cyclists lift them.

6.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Anifa Bangirana Kawooya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Members for their comments and observations. I thank you too for having clarified on the issue of defilement because other Members had brought it out. The point is that the distance walked to the schools, the security for the children, the sharing of facilities – these are all embodied in this report but we did not expound on them. 

Construction without consideration of gender, whereby there is lack of facilitation and even fetching water. You find kids of about four years fetching water – and these are observations. 

This brings me to what hon. Ssewungu said that the report is very objective on government’s effort in service delivery and on where the government needs to put in more effort. 

On the creation of districts, Members’ observations and comments are welcome. But the Constitution is very clear in Article 179(4) about any measures for alteration of borders and bringing services closer to the people. This is in line with the Constitution and the committee couldn’t do much on it. But Government has heard our recommendation. 

On the issue of the committee not being gender sensitive; first of all, I have been the chairperson of this committee for five years. My heart has been for equal opportunities in all fairness. And the districts in the central region were covered under the Eighth Parliament but the reports were shelved. If possible, I would request you, Madam Speaker, that we retrieve that report. I couldn’t bring it out because the Committee on Equal Opportunities has four reports which were shelved and that is where the central region was covered. 

On the northern region, the committee has had its activities approved and we are going to embark on the northern region, God willing, before we close this session. On the highlanders, I agree that we need to work together. But there is nowhere the committee is not gender sensitive. 

Lastly, it is our call that this august House supports the efforts of the committee, of UWOPA, the efforts by and the Rt hon. Speaker, that the government immediately considers having gender equity certificates as a requirement. Short of that, I put Government on notice that we shall move a private members bill on that. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I do not know why you are giving that work to the government; bring the bill and we do it. We have been talking about it for a very long time.

MS BANGIRANA: Madam Speaker, when we were moving together with the chairperson of UWOPA, we were told four times that it is going to come under the Finance Bill. We had started drafting something to that effect but our hands were tied up through that diversion. I spoke to you about it, Madam Speaker, and you told me that if they are dragging on, then we should not wait for them to continue that way. So this is our last notice; it is the only solution that will help us make progress. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should bring the motion and if they have an amendment, they will make it. It has been on since the Eighth Parliament; we are talking of a loss of seven years over this matter – yet there is continued inequality in facilities; they build schools and build one toilet for the girls and six for the boys; is that equity? They have to be guided; they will not think about it. 

MS BANGIRANA: I am much obliged, Madam Speaker. I also want to seize this opportunity to note that the committee also has a report, which will reflect the central region, where we had been in a different capacity looking at issues of gender and equity. If you can have it lined up on the Order Paper, we are ready with it. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for their effort. But I want Members to remember, when they are debating, that development and provision of services depend on availability of funds. 

Now, note also that districts are created on demand; the rate at which these districts are created – there is no government in this world which can create such districts and at the same time provide services to match with the number of districts. It is on demand that the districts are created – people ask for the districts and we give them, but it takes time to build the hospitals and schools. So I want you people to consider that as districts are being created, it takes time to provide the services –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, we know that creation of districts is on demand. But also to follow up the guidelines in the Constitution, it is about the population, the revenue and sometimes we do not even follow that guidance. So is it in order for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to say that it is through demand that the districts are being created and yet there are many people who need district status and cannot get them? Is it in order for him to say that it is in fulfilment of all the demands of the people without following the guidance by the Constitution of Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Uganda is not homogenous. I do remember that – I think in Karamoja region, a district had to be created because in part of that community, the language spoken in the district council was not accessible to some of the members of this council – they could not understand one another even when they spoke in their language. So they had a justification for creating that district so that they could speak in a language they understood although they were all Karimojong. So we cannot be homogenous; sometimes it is population, sometimes it is size – I think we need to take into account all those small factors. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. I now put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 6 November 2013 at 2.00p.m.) 

