   

  Tuesday, 20 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have been approached by a number of Members wishing to raise issues on the Bududa landslides. 

You may recall that last week, 15 November 2018, hon. Watenga of Lutseshe County raised a related matter upon which this House reminded the Government Chief Whip that the minister responsible for relief and disaster preparedness was scheduled to make a statement to Parliament on this matter by Thursday, 22nd November and that is the day after tomorrow.

During the same sitting, the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs informed the House that the report of the committee on the land in Bulambuli District to which land slide victims had to be relocated awaits completion of a related report on the Bududa landslides to enable concurrent  presentations. 

Subsequently, I ruled that debate on this matter be deferred until the two reports have been presented to the House to ensure the matter is handled comprehensively and conclusively. I am informed that the Committee on Presidential Affairs sat this morning to consider this matter and relatedly, hon. Nambeshe has also brought a motion to discuss the same issue. 

I think if we allow the committee to handle and complete this report, it will preempt our work. I would like to ask you, Members, to just hold on and let the reports be presented and we debate them together. I know there is anxiety but I think we shall not do something worthy if we have many motions on the same issue and yet there are reports to be debated. I, therefore, appeal to Members to hold on a bit. The Presidential Affairs committee is about to conclude their report and we shall debate them together, probably next week. 
 
Honourable members, we read from the press last week that Makerere University is appointing two Deputy Vice Chancellors and we have realised that they are both men. The entire leadership of Makerere University is skewed. Male and female candidates applied and the results show that the men have taken up all the positions and this is perpetuating an imbalance. 

There are very many structural and institutional imperfections within Makerere University that make it difficult for highly qualified women serving the university to compete and take up these leadership positions. There are 27 top positions from the Vice Chancellor to the principals of the colleges. All the 27 are occupied by men. Can this be a fair society? It is not.

This contradicts the Constitution and Principle 11 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State which requires the State to recognise the significant role that women play in society in relation to other laws. Therefore, this is a matter that I would like the Committee on Education to take an interest in so that we progressively see better participation and equity. 

I have also been notified by hon. Atkins Katusabe that he is proposing to move a Private Member’s Bill in relation to gender representation in Government institutions. Please take an interest in that matter as we wait for action from the Government.

I have also received a request from the conveners of the Uganda National Dialogue. They would like to interact with the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of committees, tomorrow Wednesday, 21 November 2018 at 11.00 a.m. in the South Committee room. As you may already be aware, the conveners have met the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and many other leaders in the country and they would be happy to share notes with you, the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons for now, as we await other programmes for the same dialogue.

Honourable members, I shall be adjusting the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to speak to us briefly on an issue that was raised - the killing of a young boy in Kole. I will also allow the Leader of the Opposition to make a statement on something important. In the meantime, let me invite the few Members who have issues of national concern.

2.35
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues of national importance. The first one is about the damming of River Nile at Isimba Dam, which has caused over flooding beyond the levels that were envisaged. 

It is destroying important infrastructure in that area and we wonder why when designing this dam, the ministry did not request for more land. We have lost a lot of infrastructure and the alternative roads that are being used today were not designed for the amount of traffic that is now being diverted onto them. As a result, that infrastructure is also equally being destroyed.

We seek to find out from the Ministry of Energy what can be done about that problem because they are about to commission Isimba dam yet we are experiencing this problem. We also appeal to the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to come to our rescue because it is a problem affecting our population. 

In addition, the Ministry of Works and Transport should see that they handle this alternative infrastructure because the existing road infrastructure has been destroyed and we can only use canoes to move. Those three ministries need to weigh in to help alleviate this problem.

The second matter relates to the problem of Hepatitis B. This is a serious problem in Kayunga District; people are dying of Hepatitis B. I understand the Ministry of Health has a plan of about five years to vaccinate the country yet Kayunga District is not anywhere nearby.

As a leader in that district, I am faced with a serious problem of how to handle this - to vaccinate those who have not been infected and to actually treat those who have been affected. I appeal to the Ministry of Health to help alleviate this problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will invite hon. Sseggona but before I do that, Honourable members, on Friday as I proceeded to my constituency - of course I used the ferry - I found the District Police Commander of Kayunga waiting for me on the Buganda side to tell me that because of the water which has been released from Isimba Dam, our ferry had been dragged to an island the night before; so it is risky.

I told the people from the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL); it is not a small thing. 

2.39
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is also related to water. On Monday evening - without rain - a storm with a flood destroyed the road from River Mayanja and the road joining Mende Sub-County to Gombe Sub-County. The entire road was washed away.

What used to be a swamp is now an artificial lake. People from Gombe Sub-County across in Kyadondo North who were accessing education and health services from Mende Sub-County, which is my constituency, can no longer cross. It comes at a time when children are doing exams from schools this side of the district in Wakiso. 

I had an inspection yesterday with the authorities in Wakiso District and they confirmed that as a district, they do not have the capacity to put up a bridge because it can no longer be a road, the place having now turned into a lake.

With your permission, I would like to use this opportunity to bring this to the attention of Government, in particular the Ministry of Works and Transport, so that they can come in urgently to deal with the situation which is turning worse. The floods carried away four people, who by luck survived because they created an island on which they hung up to morning. This happened around –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, one of the things I was told on Friday was that they think this will go on for three weeks. Are you going to create more lakes in three weeks? Please assure us that the situation can be managed because it is quite grave. 

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That should not have happened because the height of the dam normally determines the amount of water and the height of the dam normally determines the amount of power that is going to be generated. We are usually careful. We determine the height and therefore the contours of the lake to be created. 

Inevitably, there will always be a pond where there is a dam and some islands of course swallow that. However, because I have just heard of this and it is a bit technical, I would like to request that you give me up to Thursday so that I go back and study the design and everything else and then I will report back on Thursday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of Health, did you want to say something?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. On the matter of Hepatitis B; as you are aware, the screening, vaccination and treatment programme started with high prevalence districts from the north. It moved to the east and is now in selected districts in the central region.

The issue of Kayunga District came to our attention last week. I discussed it with the area Member of Parliament and he wrote a letter and as I speak, we have been in discussions. I would like to pledge that we already received the letter and we are in discussions to see how best Kayunga can be safe because it was not among the selected districts in the central region to get that study. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, perhaps you may want to actually declare the country an operation area because I went to Luuka and I was told it is prevalent. I went to Iganga and I was told the same thing. I think we no longer have to categorise areas as high and low risk because it is everywhere and they are looking to us for answers.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I have seen that concern. I will get back to the ministry so we can discuss it and see how we can act on it. Certainly, the prevalence from the previous –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the minister, Hepatitis B is a national emergency. I have written to the minister before and brought to her attention – and I mean the senior minister – the plight of people in just one parish in Mende where we receive three cases of Hepatitis B per week.

When the minister says we are in discussions and yet an emergency has been brought to her attention and they have not taken steps yet Hepatitis B is irreversible; is the minister in order, instead of giving us steps taken, to tell us they are in discussions? With who? You are not even supposed to hear from the MP; you are supposed to hear from your staff in the districts. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: No; I think she was giving you the information that she has; so, she is in order. (Laughter)

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, we act on what is called evidence-based science. There is usually a study to determine the prevalence and burden of a specific disease and it is upon that evidence that we act. I, therefore, would like to inform this House that prior, there was a study that was conducted giving us the prevalence rates across the country. That is how we started from the north and moved to the east and to the central regions. 

However, as I said –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. You raised very important issues about Hepatitis B. There are people who were vaccinated for the first and second time but for the third time, wherever they go, they are told that the drugs are over.

I would like to find out if the impact may not be grave in the future because we were told that we must get all the three doses. However, many people, especially in my district Amuru, got the first and second doses but at the third time, the drugs are finished. Thank you.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to tell my colleague that the first, second and third vaccinations are given within a specific period of time. As I speak, the vaccines for the northern region have been withdrawn for some time, including Amuru District where vaccines were left unused for some time. That is how I think it was reported on this Floor and thereafter, vaccines were removed and taken to the Eastern part of the country.

Compliance, most especially from the side of the community, has been a problem and we have been and are still appealing to our colleagues to sensitise our people to get the vaccine within the recommended period. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister will bring a statement and we debate it formerly because everybody wants to raise issues. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Eswatini, formerly Swaziland; Madam Mary Lindiwe Mabuza and Sheila Nonlandla, both transcribers. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome.  

We also have a delegation of mayors from Kiboga District represented by hon. Nankabirwa Sentamu and hon. Keefa Kiwanuka. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. 

Honourable members, I would like to amend the Order Paper so that we can have a few other things. There is a mix up about matters of national concern; I will handle them tomorrow. Let us go to item No. 3 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

2.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the Office of the Clerk was aware that I was the one laying the papers and I have no intention of laying them from the other side. (Laughter)

I have reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements -

THE SPEAKER: Please start with the Education Service Commission, Equal Opportunities Commission and Public Service before we go to the Auditor-General. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Education Service Commission Annual Report for the Financial Year 2017/2018;

I beg to lay the annual report on the state of equal opportunities in Uganda for the Financial Year 2017/2018;

I beg to lay the report of the Public Service Commission for the Financial Year 2017/2018; 

I beg to lay the financial report on the Kabale Regional Referral Hospital.
Can I continue?

THE SPEAKER: Let us first finish with the annual report. Honourable members, the reports are committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. You are aware that the Second Meeting of the Third Session is dedicated to these reports; I appeal to the committees to consider them.

The report about equal opportunities says that there are certain parts of the country which are consistently under performing in the economy, in education and in welfare. They are; Bukedi, Karamoja and Busoga and I would like Members to note that. We can expound on others when the committee reports back to the House but those sub regions were glaring.

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF THE FOLLOWING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2017

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, these documents are too many and if you do not mind, I could just mention them; we have evidence for anybody who would like to inspect.

I beg to lay the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the following local Governments for the year ended 30th June 2017 – 

1. 	Kiruhura Town Council 
2. 	Kanungu Town Council
3. 	Wobulenzi Town Council 
4. 	Mukono Municipal Council
5. 	Kakiri Town Council 
6. 	Entebbe Division B Council 
7. 	Nkokonjeru Town Council 
8. 	Bugongi Town Council 
9. 	Nakaseke District Local Government
10. 	Nakasongola Town Council
11. 	Kira Municipal Council 
12. 	Buikwe Town Council 
13. 	Kabale District Local Government
14. 	Kitwe Town Council 
15. 	Kanungu District Local Government
16. 	Buvuma District Local Government
17. 	Mpigi District Local Government
18. 	Kakindo Town Council 
19. 	Kambuga Town Council
20. 	Butambala District Local Government
21. 	Wakiso District Local Government
22. 	Mitooma Town Council 
23. 	Ryakarimira Town Council 
24. 	Buvuma Town Council 
25. 	Kira Division Council
26. 	Semuto Town Council 
27. 	Rwashamaire Town Council
28. 	Endiinzi Town Council 
29. 	Gombe Town Council 
30. 	Kanoni Town Council 
31. 	Busukuma Division Council 
32. 	Nansana Municipal Council 
33. 	Nansana Division Council 
34. 	Mukono District Local Government
35. 	Mbarara District Local Government
36. 	Shuuku Town Council 
37. 	Isingiro Town Council 
38. 	Rubanda District Local Government
39. 	Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council 
40. 	Wakiso Town Council 
41. 	Nabweru Division Council
42. 	Ngoma Town Council 
43. 	Luwero District Local Government
44. 	Namugongo Division Council 
45. 	Kiwoko Town Council 
46. 	Kyengera Town Council
47. 	Kashenshero Town Council 
48. 	Ntungamo Municipal Council 
49. 	Ibanda Municipal Council 
50. 	Entebbe Municipal Council 
51. 	Kihihi Town Council 
52. 	Migyeera Town Council 
53. 	Kajjansi Town Council 
54. 	Bweyogerere Division Council 
55. 	Gomba District 
56. 	Nakasongola District Local Government
57. 	Ndejje Division Council 
58. 	Buikwe District Local Government
59. 	Kyamukube Town Council 
60. 	Bombo Town Council 
61. 	Sironko District Local Government
62. 	Busolwe Town Council 
63. 	Nakaloke Town Council 
64. 	Nakapiripirit District Local Government
65. 	Kaberamaido District Local Government
66. 	Bukwo District Local Government
67. 	Nabumali Town Council 
68. 	Patongo Town – Agago District 
69. 	Alebtong District Local Government
70. 	Ngora Town Council 
71. 	Kumi Municipal Council 
72. 	Ngora District Local Government
73. 	Alebtong District Local Government
74. 	Gulu District Local Government
75. 	Sembabule Town Council 
76. 	Ntandi Town Council 
77. 	Bukedea District Local Government
78. 	Nyahuka Town Council 
79. 	Muhororo Town Council 
80. 	Oyam Town Council 
81. 	Omoro District Local Government
82. 	Bukedea Town Council 
83. 	Kitgum Municipal Council 
84. 	Kyarusozi Town Council 
85. 	Hima Town Council 
86. 	Rwebisengo Town Council 
87. 	Malaba Town Council 
88. 	Sironko Town Council 
89. 	Bududa District Local Government
90. 	Amuria Town Council

Madam speaker, I beg to lay the above listed local governments’ and town councils’ audited reports for the financial year mentioned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for perusal and report back.  

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE FOLLOWING REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITALS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2017

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the following Regional Referral Hospitals for the year ended 30 June 2017.

    i) Kabale Regional Referral Hospital
    ii) Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital
    iii) Masaka Regional Referral Hospital 
    iv) Hoima Regional Referral Hospital 
    v) Soroti Regional Referral Hospital 
    vi) Moroto Regional Referral Hospital 
    vii) Mbale Regional Referral Hospital
    viii) Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital 
    ix) Mubende Regional Referral Hospital 
    x) Arua Regional Referral Hospital 
    xi) Gulu Regional Referral Hospital 
    xii) Lira Regional Referral Hospital 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for perusal and report back.

VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Value for Money Audit Reports on the following:

    i) The reliability of the Government Annual Performance Report produced by the Office of the Prime Minister (Focus on the Health and Agriculture Sectors)
    ii) The Government’s Preparedness to Implement Public Private Partnership (PPPs)
    iii) Regulation of Labor Externalization by Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 
    iv) The Management of Municipal Solid Waste by Municipalities
    v) Follow Up Report on VFM Audit Report on Solid Waste Management by Kampala Capital City Authority
    vi) The Implementation of Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Projects by National Water and Sewerage Corporation 
    vii) The impact of the promotion of rice development project implemented by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
    viii) Implementation of promotion of rice development project by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry And Fisheries Regulation of the Construction Sector by Ministry of Works and Transport 
    ix) Follow-Up Audit Report on the Utilization of External Public Debt
    x) Regulation of the Abstraction and Discharge Water by Ministry of Water and Environment
    xi) Renovation and construction of selected health facilities under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project, Ministry of Health. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for perusal and report back.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT TO THE QUESTION ASKED BY HON. CATHELINE NDAMIRA ATWAKIIRE ON THE RAMPANT CASES OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND THE NEED TO STEM THEM

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): I make this statement in response to the concern raised by hon. Catheline Ndamira Atwakiire, MP Kabale District, on the matter of trafficking on persons.

Let me start by putting it on record that the mandate of anti-human trafficking lies with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, given the strong linkage between labour migration and human trafficking, I welcome the opportunity to address Parliament and the entire nation on this subject.

Madam Speaker, migration is as old as humanity itself and this fact is not about to change. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda also facilitates migration by according every Ugandan the right to free exit and entry into the country. Besides, the improvement in information technology has opened up Ugandans to potential economic opportunities that they would never have known about over 20 years ago.

Consequently, we have witnessed an increased number of Ugandans seeking employment opportunities abroad especially in the Gulf cooperating countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman. Other destination countries are Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. 

As we speak, close to 100,000 Ugandan workers have accessed employment in the Gulf countries since 2010 and there have been benefits associated with their employment abroad. According to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the Bank of Uganda, remittances by Uganda migrant workers in the Middle East alone were $224 million in 2016. 

However, despite the positive benefits of migrant workers, we have a number of challenges that we, in Uganda, are working around -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, hold a bit.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I need guidance. I do not see the statement on our iPads. It may be difficult for us to follow.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, do you have this statement?

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, I submitted the statement to the Clerk to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We wanted answers to this issue. Proceed.

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, despite the positive benefits of migration, we have a number of challenges that we, in Uganda, are working around the clock to address. These include: 

    1. Trafficking in persons. 
    2. Contract substitution. 
    3. Non-payment or underpayment of wages. 
    4. Physical abuse especially of young women.
    5. Cultural and environmental shock to the migrants. 
    6. Inability to trace and offer consular services to workers deployed by illegal recruiters. 
    7. Few missions especially in areas where most of the migrant workers are deployed. The big numbers and vastness of areas of coverage makes traceability and ability to offer quick consular services complicated. 
    8. Understaffing of Uganda's foreign missions and embassies.

Given these challenges, there have been calls even in this Parliament, that the externalisation of the labour programme should be suspended. In fact in December 2014, there was a resolution to totally ban labour externalisation. Following this decision, on 22 January 2016, the ministry imposed a ban on domestic workers travelling abroad for job opportunities. 

However, a remedial measure, which was supposed to address the matter at hand, turned out to be the fuel in the fire as illegal avenues become more lucrative for traffickers. As we speak, there are over 30,000 Ugandans working in Oman despite the fact that we have a ban on labour externalisation to the country because we have not concluded a bilateral labour agreement. 

Therefore, a ban on externalisation of labour, which cannot be enforced, is not the answer to human trafficking or mistreatment of our Ugandans abroad. The answer lies in establishing a safe window for deployment of migrant workers abroad.

Madam Speaker, I would like to put it on record that even workers deployed through formal channels face challenges. However, the advantage they have over those illegally deployed is that they have access to redress, they are traceable and the local and foreign recruitment companies are jointly and severally liable for the performance of their deployment contracts. 

Indeed, the ministry has offered support to hundreds of migrant workers who have found themselves in need of our intervention. Let me assure you all that these challenges are big but are not insurmountable. Therefore, these challenges should not be a cause for despair but rather a call to action. 

To this end, permit me, Madam Speaker, to address you on the steps we are taking to address human trafficking. Our aim is to promote safe labour migration and protection of rights of migrant workers.

Allow me highlight the various steps;

    1. We have put in place a regulatory framework which protects the rights of workers; 
    2. Through licensing of companies, we have opened up formal channels of deployment. To date, these number 109 licensed companies;
    3. We have undertaken awareness and advocacy campaigns against trafficking in persons across the country but also targeted the border communities. Only last month, we held a highly successful symposium and expo on promoting safe and productive migration. 

The symposium and expo were an opportunity to engage and dialogue on labour externalisation with a focus on disseminating the right information on legal and safe labour migration procedures that protect Ugandans. 

    4. Only companies accredited by Ugandan Missions abroad can recruit domestic workers;
    5. Only duly registered companies can recruit migrants workers and place them abroad;
    6. Contracts of domestic workers are reviewed by Uganda foreign Missions.
    7. A four-part employment contract which meets recruitment companies in Uganda and recipient countries jointly are severally liable in this place.
    8. Mandatory free departure orientations and training programmes have been introduced for all female domestic workers and are being extended gradually to all workers.
    9. All job processes, licensing of recruitment companies, renewal of licenses, job order approval, vetting of migrant workers and monitoring those deployed abroad are on line.
    10. For national coherence-(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: What is the matter, hon. Ongom?

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the honourable minister is raising is very important and as Parliament we have discussed it several times. From the measures that the minister is bringing, I thought today she would talk of the border points; if she could tell us how many -

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow her to finish? Hon. Ongom, don’t smuggle - let her finish then you can -

MS JOY ONGOM: Madam Speaker, it’s not smuggling but can she give us the list of the companies that are pre-registered? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please allow her finish first. You do not know what she is going to say.

MS MUTUUZO: Thank you for the protection, Madam Speaker.
For national coherence, my ministry works jointly with other line ministries like Internal Affairs including the police, immigration, foreign affairs, workers and transporters, local governments, public service, East African Community Affairs and the security agencies.

    11. Two bilateral labour agreements between Uganda on one party and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan were signed. We are also at various stages of negotiating and signing agreements with the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, Omani, Lebanon and the State of Qatar.  

Madam Speaker, let me speak briefly about the recent reports in print, social and electronic media on the subject matter of externalisation of labour, especially with regard to the 62 female workers found in a residential house belonging to International Employment Linkages Uganda Limited. Much as I regret the overcrowding at this residence, I take these press reports in positive light.

From these reports, it is clear that Ugandans have responded well to our awareness campaigns and have become more vigilant against trafficking. Ugandans were the ones who alerted the authorities when they noticed that there were unknown people being housed in the residential building; moreover, it shows that people care about the fate of fellow Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, allow me thank the police, the local councils, the neighbours and everyone who alerted us about what was happening. International Employment Linkages Uganda Limited is a licensed recruiting company and we have since carried out inspection on the premises. Our findings are that people were there and they were in transit to various working destinations in the Middle East. We have also established that save for the big numbers on that fateful night, the facility met the basic health and safety standards.

As you are aware, most of these potential migration workers have come from far off locations and are not in a good financial situation yet job processing interviews, Visas, medical check-ups and security clearances take a bit of time. This means that it would be financially constraining for these young people to travel forth and back. Therefore, for the convenience of both the potential migrants and the recruitment companies, appropriate accommodation is secured in Kampala. This is not unique to International Employment Linkages Uganda Limited.

Honourable members, on combating trafficking as well as ensuring safe and productive migration calls for inter-agency cooperation, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development shares inter-ministerial dialogue of externalisation of labour, which meets quarterly.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the honourable colleagues for the support we are receiving because of your vigilance in giving us information on issues that are arising due to externalisation of labour.

The Directorate of Citizenship and Migration Control, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Embassy in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, the Internal Security Organisation, the External Security Organisation, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence and the Civil Aviation Authority to mention but a few, have all been vigilant. We have been working together to ensure that we provide safety of our children wherever they are. 

From these discussions, we have arrived at a conclusion that a number of additional measures are required, which include the following:

    1. Expansion of structures of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to allow for the deployment of labour liaison officers at border points of Busia, Chyanika, Gatuna, Kagitumba, Malaba and Lwakhakha; and increasing the number of labour liaison officers at Entebbe International Airport from one to at least four.

    2. There is need to enhance the capacity of security officers like the police and migration officers on the proper identification, interception and assistance to victims of trafficking in persons.

    3. There is need to conclude bilateral labour agreements with friendly countries especially from the friendly countries of the East African Community.

As I conclude my submission, allow me state that the Externalisation of Labour Programme is a temporary measure to cushion the unemployment situation in the country as well as offer hope to our unemployed population. In the long run, we would like to ensure that economic opportunities are available for our people to work here in Uganda.

As you are aware, a number of opportunities are available in the ministry and these include; 

i) 	The Youth Livelihood Programme
ii) 	The Uganda women Entrepreneurship Programme
iii) 	The Youth Venture Capital Fund
iv) 	The Green Jobs Programme
v) 	The Songhai Model and many others.
All these continue to give hope and support to our youth who would otherwise have been without jobs.

Furthermore, we commissioned the Employment Diagnostics Analysis (EDA). This was meant to understand the nature of the deficiency of productive employment and identify the constraints and opportunities for enhancing inclusive job-rich growth. We are now at the level of sectoral studies so as to identify high job growth sectors and strategies.

In conclusion, I reiterate Government’s commitment for promoting safe and productive migration. We shall also continue to create awareness with the public against trafficking. We are also in the process of reviewing the regulations so as to strengthen the sanctions against the traffickers.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this was supposed to be a short answer. Hon. Ndamira, do you have a supplementary question or are you satisfied? If you are satisfied, let us move to the next item.

3.24
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister.

The information that the minister has given is more or less what we had. What we raised was that there are some illegal companies and they have not been listed. We need more elaborate answers from the minister.
  
Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that there are companies that we are aware are smuggling out our girls. I implore you to ask the minister to give us further information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was supposed to be a short answer to tell us what you are doing about the trafficking but it went to youth livelihood and so forth. We wanted to hear which companies you have deregistered? Has anybody been arrested and tried? 

MS NDAMIRA: Madam Speaker, we also need to be availed with the copy she has been reading.

THE SPEAKER: That is what we wanted to hear. What have you done about the traffickers?

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, we de-licensed about seven companies just two weeks ago; those that were not able to adhere to the regulations and conditions of externalisation of labour. 

If I had been asked to bring a list of the companies, I would have it with me. The question that was brought to my attention was clear and that is what I have addressed. If there is a new question, I will come ready for it.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable minister. The question was about the rampant cases of human trafficking and the need to stem them. Your statement is promoting safe and productive migration; that is not what we wanted. Have you identified the traffickers and de-registered them? Are you trying anybody in Court over that issue? That is what we would like to hear.

We would also like to know the list of the seven companies which you have de-registered.

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, the statement I have made was in response to the question that was raised. If you can permit me to submit the list of companies, I have it with me and I can submit it right now. 
THE SPEAKER: She is going to lay the list that we are talking about- the deregistered companies. Give her time to organise her papers. 

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, the list is here and I wish to lay it on Table. They are 109 companies and the list will be uploaded on your iPads. These are the licensed companies.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to lay the list. Is that the list of the companies which are registered? What about the seven you have deregistered, are they part of that?

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, I will update you on the seven that we have delicensed because we just did that last week and some of them are trying to discuss with. I will bring the list of the seven that were delicensed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, she will produce the list tomorrow. Let us go to the next question. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; on the issue of fuel, I hope it is not as long as the other one.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, at the Sixth Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, 16 November 2018, hon. Kafuuzi Jackson Karugaba, MP Kyaka South raised concern over the escalating fuel prices and the need for Parliament to be informed about the justification for the increase.

I wish to make this statement on the matter:

Uganda is still a net importer of petroleum products in a liberalised downstream petroleum market where the prices are purely determined by the forces of demand and supply in accordance with the provisions of the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003.

On the demand side, Uganda's consumption of petroleum products has grown by 9.6 per cent within the last two years whereby the country now consumes a monthly average of 174 million liters of fuel compared to last year's 168 million liters. Of these, 91 per cent is imported through Mombasa Port and 9 per cent through Dar es Salaam Port.

To meet this demand, the strategies developed to keep the country well supplied hinge on the effectiveness of the import routes and the in-country storage facilities. In this case, Mombasa and Dar es Salaam ports together with other smaller terminals in Kenya are all being utilised by Oil Marketing Companies to import products into Uganda.

On the supply side, we have had stable import of petroleum products in the country. With the fair competition that has been built over the years in the liberalised downstream petroleum sub-sector and the measures put in place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products, the pump prices will continue to respond to the forces of demand and supply in a free market economy.

Being landlocked and a net importer of refined petroleum products, pump prices are a function of international prices of crude, refinery gate prices for products and the United States Dollar exchange rate against the Ugandan Shilling plus logistical costs which include port handling fees, transit handling charges, storage fees, transportation, taxes, clearing and marking fees. 

The combination of the logistical costs, together with the cost of the imported products which increased as a result of increased refinery premiums in the Open Tender System since July 2018, has resulted in the increased pump prices.

It should also be noted that the United States Dollar exchange rate against the Ugandan shilling has been rising for the last three months and reached this year's highest at Shs 3,800 in September and Shs 3,777 for October 2018. This greatly negates the realisation of would-be benefits of a reduction in international prices at the local pump in Uganda.

On the international scene, the monthly average of crude prices per barrel was at its highest last month at $83.28 from OPEC and has only started dropping this month. Holding other factors constant, therefore, the effect of the drop in the international crude price is expected to reflect on the Ugandan market as well.

In view of the above, the pump prices have increased in the region as shown in Annex 1 which is a summary of regional prices as of 01 November 2018. Madam Speaker, may I request that we look at Annex 1, which is attached to this report. There, we have compared prices of fuel in the major cities of East Africa. We have the cost of petrol and diesel in the various currencies of the countries but the last two rows have the prices converted to Uganda Shillings. Here, we can see that Dar es Salaam naturally is at the port and is at Shs 4,025 per liter of petrol and Shs 3,916 for diesel. 

Mombasa is close - Shs 4,184 for petrol and Shs 3,962 for diesel. As we move inland, Nairobi is at Shs 4,282 for petrol and diesel Shs 4,059. Eldoret is slightly higher; Madera northern part of Kenya is much higher. Kampala is Shs 4,300 for petrol and Shs 4,050 for diesel and Kigali Shs 4,751 for petrol and Shs 4,687 for diesel.

In conclusion, the interplay of the crude prices and refinery premiums as well as the exchange rate are major causes of the rise in pump prices since the rest of the parameters like taxes, transport and handling costs have been constant.

With the measures put in place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products and fair competition in the Downstream Petroleum Sub-Sector, my ministry will continue to monitor the sub-sector and engage the oil marketing companies to ensure that the citizens continue to get value for money from the consumption of petroleum products. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind attention.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafuuzi, do you have a supplementary question?

3.38
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the response of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. However, with all due respect to my senior colleague, I did not find it satisfactory. I appreciate because he has taken the effort to respond, although unsatisfactorily. 

From the statement, the honourable minister is only saying that the Government is creating an enabling environment for market forces and there is nothing we can do to protect the consumer. 

When I brought this matter to the Floor of this House, I was asking about our oversight role as members of Parliament vis-à-vis protecting the consumer. This whole year, our people have been grappling with maize, which they have not been able to sell. Even when we brought the matter on the Floor of Parliament and we were told that they had allocated Shs 100 billion for the purchase of maize, I can assure you that no maize was bought in my constituency of Kyegegwa. 

We are moving towards the end of the year. Many people failed to pay fees for third term but you are telling us, “We are only providing an enabling environment for market forces.” What are you doing for the local person? People have not sold their produce, fuel prices are going up and yet the responsibilities remain. What is our role and obligation as Parliament? What is the obligation of Government in this? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE STATE OF SECURITY IN THE DISTRICTS OF KOLE AND LIRA

3.40 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I have got information from my colleagues that they have not seen this statement that I am going to make but it is on the iPads. 

Last Tuesday, 13 November 2018, you directed that the ministry should make a statement on the death of one of our sons in Kole District, as raised by hon. Judith Alyek. Since then, other events have occurred so the statement that I am going to make serves as both an answer to the question that the honourable member raised and a brief to Members on the other events that have occurred.
 
Madam Speaker, on Saturday, 17 November and Sunday, 18 November 2018, there were confrontations between the local population and the security forces in some areas in the two districts of Kole and Lira. This came as a result of the death of 11 year old Dickens Okello on 9 November 2018, under circumstances that are being investigated. 

The late Dickens Okello was a pupil at Alito Primary school. He was buried on Saturday, 17 November 2018 at Ddoggudu Village, Alito Parish, Alito Sub-County, Kole District. His death and the way it was perceived by the local community sparked off a series of attacks directed towards the Indian community in Kole and Lira Districts, leading to a situation that I would like to explain to the House.

Information was received from the field that there were two Indians that possibly had a hand in the death of this little boy. The police in Lira expeditiously apprehended the two Indians namely, Pranau Uyas, 27 years old and Madahav Daga, 22 years old for investigations.

The body of the deceased was taken to Lira Regional Referral Hospital for medical examination, as it is required to establish the probable cause of death. Post mortem results were given but the family and some members of the local community were not satisfied with the investigations, particularly the post-mortem report. Further medical examinations were carried out from Mulago National Referral Hospital and results obtained. These were done in the presence of the relatives and friends and they were under the police medical doctor.  

The medical team at Mulago opted to have a toxicology examination done in addition to the ordinary post mortem. Toxicology is about testing whether somebody has some poison in the body. When these two medical examination reports were secured, it was considered proper that the deceased be buried and he was accordingly buried in Alito, Kole District on Saturday, 17 November 2018.

Meanwhile, the local community, as I said earlier because of the perception they had, were being incited by some actors to attack the Indian community in general, accusing them of having a hand in the unfortunate death of the boy. These xenophobic attacks continued despite the security involvement with the public to calm them down, explaining how even the suspects had been arrested pending prosecution in Courts of law.

It is worth noting that one particular radio station - Unity FM Lira - continued broadcasting irresponsible messages that were intended to incite members of the public against the Indian community and security forces. In the process, the community was charged, as it was being incited into violence and hate talk.

The police, working with sister agencies, continued to engage and mobilise members of the community against violence and explaining the legal and technical processes that were being undertaken to address the challenges related to the death of Dickens Okello.

Unfortunately, at the time of the burial, this irresponsible talk reached its peak and broke into violence. Police officers and some members of the public were attacked and injured. Some irresponsible members of that community also attacked the police station at Alito, with a view of burning it down and possibly seizing arms. 

The police responded and stopped the attack. In the process of protecting the facility, the police station and the people that were under attack, seven police officers were injured. They are currently undergoing medical attention in Lira Regional Referral Hospital.

In the same incident, five members among those that had attacked the officers and the police station were injured and sustained bullet wounds. They were taken to Lira Regional Referral Hospital for medical attention and later airlifted to Mulago National Referral Hospital by Government for further medical care.

Unfortunately, Unity FM Lira continued with its irresponsible broadcast of hate and incitement of violence against the Indian community and the police. The police apprehended the staff of this radio station and the radio station was ordered to stop the irresponsible broadcast. Later, the district security committee took a decision to temporarily halt the radio station from airing its broadcasts, given the volatile security situation in Lira and Kole districts.

Sporadic attacks towards the Indian community commenced in Lira District in the evening of Saturday, 17 November 2018, as I have mentioned. Security intervened and saved the situation and I would like to commend them.

Eight suspects were arrested from Unity FM Lira. Three suspects were released immediately as they were not workers but had visited the scene. Five workers of the radio station were detained and they are being investigated for inciting violence. The security situation continues to be monitored and patrols by the police are maintained to avert any further violence. To date, 42 suspects have been apprehended for investigations.

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend the inter-agency efforts in stabilising the situation as well as the local leaders in Lira and Kole districts for their interventions.  

Yesterday, 19 November 2018, the two suspects - the Indians that were being investigated for the death of Dickens Okello - were taken to Lira Chief Magistrate’s Court and they have been remanded to prison. Further, all the five suspects that were arrested from Unity FM Lira were released yesterday on police bond as investigations continue but I would like to add that as I speak, they have been re-arrested. 

We must have a common strong voice to condemn violence and leaders at all levels must show this level of maturity and understanding. We must cultivate a culture of respect for life and human dignity. Equally, we must respect the rule of law at all times, in all situations and desist from mob justice. We must avoid generalising and condemning whole communities for alleged criminal acts committed by individuals.

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity once again to thank you. Allow me to request that leaders, at all times, should exercise restraint and responsibility in situations like this where those mandated to investigate cases are doing their work responsibly. However, in case of doubt whatsoever, it is absolutely right for leaders and the general population to demand for accountability from duty bearers rather than take the law into their hands.

I appeal to colleagues to voice these concerns in the spirit of building and strengthening our national values. Let us have a common voice that condemns violence and criminality of all sorts from all people, whether nationals or foreigners, because we want harmonious living here in Uganda and elsewhere.

National security agencies will continue to execute their duties constitutionally to ensure justice and peace across the country. I appeal to members of the public to respect security agencies in the process of carrying out their legitimate constitutional duties. 

In the same way, I call upon the population to remain calm and not take the law into their own hands but use appropriate offices to resolve matters over which they may want to complain. Furthermore, we would like to reassure all investors and friends of Uganda about the protection of the law.

On trade relations, which is not in the media, I would like to assure the House that there is an inter-ministerial committee, which will come to this House and give a comprehensive statement over issues concerning trade.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we demanded for action and it has been taken.

3.55
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for the statement that you have just concluded. I raised this issue last Wednesday and the honourable minister’s statement covers the entire incident, including the rioting that took place at the burial place. 

On that day, I did not mention that the burial would take place on 17 November 2018 nor did I mention the closure of the radio station and the police attack. Five people were shot by the police and injured. Yes, this was thereafter.

Madam Speaker, what the honourable minister has included as new things could have come as another issue because I did not raise them. The honourable minister is answering certain things that I did not raise on the Floor on 14 November 2018.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you wanted action to be taken and the people arrested. They have been arrested and charged. That is what you wanted.

MS ALYEK: It is okay, Madam Speaker. I support the honourable minister regarding issues like respect for human dignity and rule of law. However, on that day, there were certain things that I recommended including the assessment of the status of stay of the Indians and other foreigners in this country as investors, their work permits to be checked and their scope of investment in this country. I have not heard anything concerning that. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister will come back to us on those residual issues. Let us go to the next item. The Leader of the Opposition has a brief statement to make. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, we have a delegation of sugarcane growers from Busoga, Masindi and Lugazi. They are represented by the Member for Kamuli, hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Loy Katali, hon. Rehema Watongola, hon. Monday Kiiza, hon. Moses Balyeku, hon. Nelson Lufafa, hon. Mulindwa Ssozi and hon. Patrick Kasumba. They are here to witness the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, pursuant to Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I would like to address Parliament as follows: 

In total violation of Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, as amended, the Public Order Management Act, 2013 and other laws of Uganda, the Uganda Police and other security agencies have made it difficult almost impossible, for Members of Parliament, especially the Opposition to interact with their constituents. Opposition political parties have also suffered the same fate. 

Madam Speaker, on 16 November 2018, the Chief Opposition Whip and Member of Parliament, Kira Municipality, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda was placed under house arrest for a whole day because police could not allow him to address a public rally in his constituency. 

I personally visited hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda after learning that the police had besieged his house. My vehicles were blocked from accessing his house. After a lot of pleading, I was only allowed to cover the remaining distance on foot. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssemujju presented to me a letter he had written to police informing them of the rally on 16 November 2018. The police had duly received and acknowledged receipt of this letter. Unfortunately, the same police wrote to him on the day of the rally claiming that they had received his letter on 15 November 2018, which is a total lie. 

I would like to lay on the Table a photocopy of the letter written to police and duly received on 12 November 2018. I beg to lay.

I drove to police headquarters to seek for answers from the IGP but he was not there. He sent me a message informing me that he was on his way to the United Arab Emirates and asked me to speak to his deputy. I went to the office of his deputy but he refused to attend to me. I was told that the boss of the deputy IGP was the right person to handle the matter.

I sat in the office of the deputy IGP for an hour - first in the office of his political assistant for an hour then in his office for an hour. However, the powerful man could not give me even a single minute to speak to him. 

Madam Speaker, it is such a heart breaking matter that the state continues trampling on the rights of the people that it claims to be her citizens. It is worse when it comes to leaders, most especially the Opposition. 

I would like, at this moment, to draw our attention to the continued and persistent violation, with impunity, of the constitutional rights of the leaders and citizens. Our security officers continue to violate the laws of the land. This continued violation is a bad precedent, whose consequences may remain long after we are gone.

This is a breach of trust that is detrimental to generations to come for whom we are holding this country in trust. I would like to highlight the following scenarios as the state and security operatives continue to trample upon citizens’ rights and curtail our freedoms and rights. 

Madam Speaker, the Public Order Management Act, 2013 is a law meant to regulate public gatherings but the same has suffered the greatest abuse of our time. Under section 5 of the said law, an organiser is supposed to inform the police of the event intended to be held.

Leaders in the Opposition have consistently, though painfully, complied with this but the law enforcers; the police continue to sabotage the leaders, even after the legal requirements have been met. This level of dishonesty is the least we expect from Uganda Police Force. It is, with great disappointment, that the force that is meant to serve and protect citizens as well as keep law and order, can act to frustrate citizens with impunity without any regard to the law. 

Madam Speaker, it has been happening all over and we have been patiently and silently at pain. It is not that we condone the illegal acts and violations but we thought that, at an appropriate time, those in charge would do some self-reflection, which has not come to pass. We are fully convinced that today is the most appropriate time for us to seek for action in the continued violation of constitutional rights and freedoms. 

We all know what happened to hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu when he wanted to hold his musical concert in Namboole. All of a sudden, he was barred from accessing the venue even after he had followed the law and incurred costs in advertising and organisation. The same tricks of giving lame excuses were used against him.

The same occurred when FDC party president, hon. Amuriat visited Soroti recently where the police wanted to block the rally without any reason. It took the party back and forth engagements and concessions to have the function cleared. 

On several occasions like in Kasese and Mbarara, the police have refused to acknowledge receipt of our notices and stopped our engagements unlawfully. 

Madam Speaker, it may seem farfetched to some of our colleagues since it is targeting Opposition members at the moment. However, history will bear us witness. The regime of implementing laws selectively no longer has any space on our agenda. The regime of passing legislation for individual interests is long gone. Today it is me but who knows what tomorrow will bring? 

The human rights violations orchestrated by the Uganda Police will have dire consequences, as part of its obligations under the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights and the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights.

The Uganda Government should protect the right to life and the right to security for everyone, as well as the right to freedom of association so that organisations can conduct their work in a safe and secure environment.

Madam Speaker, I implore this august House to pronounce itself and bring the Uganda Police to order. I would also like to say that in Acholi, we have a saying that one frog spoils all the water. There are some individuals in the police force who are good. When we were cleared for the Soroti function, it was by one police officer. I do not want to even mention his rank but this very person – because we went with hon. Ekanya – told us that the Deputy Inspector General of Police (IGP) was there but did not want us to know he was there.

For the two hours that we sat in his waiting room waiting for him, we made him a prisoner in his room. That officer could not clear us because he was junior to the Deputy IGP. This is what happens; the pain we get. We have to not only kneel but crawl before the police.

Madam Speaker, we really beg that we pronounce ourselves on whether we should go begging them to clear us and give us letters of no objection or we just notify them. If we notify them a week in advance and this is bad, how many days or weeks should we give notice for our functions to move on?

This is really uncalled for and infringes on our freedom. Push us to the wall but there will come a day when we will come back with force. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs has something to say about this complaint. Hon. Ssemujju, you have three minutes.

4.11
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I went through has partly been addressed by the Leader of the Opposition. However, my concern is the mistreatment of other family members. If hon. Obiga Kania wants to arrest Ssemujju, you can wait.

On 16th November, military men in war fatigues descended on my house. These photographs were all over because we were sending them. My children went to school at gunpoint, some of them as young as three years and this is what you are making them go through. I am used to mistreatment but why do you mistreat other family members?

My home is not a prison. First of all, I have not understood, to date, why the military has taken over police work. This is because it is the military who were inside my house, chasing the maid who was peeling bananas. They took away the saucepan and knives – (Laughter) – and took position within the compound. We sent these photos for everybody to see.

I would like Government to explain what crime they have committed because my wife and children are not part of politics. What crime have they committed to be subjected to this treatment? In addition, there is fabrication by people who are in these offices. That is how you said that hon. Kyagulanyi had a gun when you knew actually that he did not have it.

I remember hon. Sseggona and hon. Nambooze were arrested and taken to Bundibugyo that they were recruiting rebels from an area whose language they do not even know. (Laughter) The way Government people tell lies with a straight face -

I wrote to Police on 12th November and they duly acknowledged receipt of the letter. They later showed up and told me that my letter was received on 15th November. I showed them a copy but they said that regardless, the order is that I cannot have a rally. We should be told today whether Article 269 of the Constitution, which was outlawed by court, has been re-enacted. 

On the same day that I was stopped from holding a rally, there were NRM people holding another rally in Kampala. Police was there giving them protection and enjoying. We should be told if we will no longer do politics - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am just hearing the details of this incident, as described here. Nobody has reported it to us but we will find out. The document has been laid here, the dates are there and we shall look at them and see whether – (Interjections) – Yes, those were statements by the other side. They may be right or wrong but we will check with the police leadership.

However, I would like to say that the Public Order Management Act, which you made in Parliament here, was made for exactly that; to help in public order management during meetings. There are procedures and nobody has denied anybody their rights under that.

I am surprised that it is generalised that it is the Opposition. That is not correct because in the last one or two months, I am aware that members of the Opposition have even informed me of meetings, which they have held –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, when I was giving my statement here, I talked about those parties in the Opposition and I gave examples of, especially FDC where I am a member, when they were stopped from going to Kasese, Mbarara and Rukungiri. Even then, that Friday when we went, we took letters to be received in Mbarara and Kasese but we were denied. 

I even talked of individual members of Parliament. Are they in the ruling party or in the Opposition for you to say that we should not generalise the matter? Are you in order to think that even those in the ruling party are affected by what I have presented to you here? Are you in order, when it was clearly articulated that while hon. Ssemujju was being stopped, some NRM members were holding rallies? Are you really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please respond and we conclude this matter.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition has stated herself, hon. Ssemujju was not stopped at the rally. The security people sealed off his bungalow and that is the first time I saw the bungalow in the newspaper. They sealed it off at his home. Why did they seal it off? That is the point I am making. We need to find out why they sealed it off at his home. It is not necessarily that they might have sealed off his home because of the rally.

Secondly, the police have given permission where information has been given in time to many members of the Opposition to have these meetings. Recently in Butambala, the entire leadership of the Opposition was there. You have just given an example yourself that in Soroti, after proper consultations, you were able to have a meeting. There are many others, which I could have stated if you gave me time.

Therefore, generalising a single incident against the Opposition is what we disagree with. The police are there to implement the laws that you made. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, item five. A report was given here last week and they would like to know whether members have comments. If there are no comments, the report is adopted. 

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECOND UGANDA-NETHERLANDS BUSINESS CONVENTION IN AMSTERDAM

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are there comments on item six? If there are none, the report is adopted.

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUGAR BILL

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time we had a lengthy debate on the Sugar Bill and the minister was due to respond to issues raised in the debate. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Frederick Gume): Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister who attended Parliament at that time to go ahead and present what was requested by this House. Thank you.

MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, Rule 51(2) states, “Statements made by ministers may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.” Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there was no statement made by a minister; he just responded to the Leader of the Opposition. There was no statement. The minister has said he wants to bring some more answers on that issue. I have guided you that the minister has said that there is information he wants to bring, which is related to that issue and which we do not have. 

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, last week we debated the Sugar Bill and a number of issues were raised by colleagues. They included (i) zoning, (ii) the Board, (iii) the pricing and (iv), the formation of cooperative societies in the sugar industry. 

We indicated that this Bill is premised on the National Sugar Policy, 2010, which aims at regulating, developing, promoting and creating harmony in the sugar industry. Indeed, this is the object of the Bill that we debated. Another issue related to this was, why the Sugar Bill and not the Cane Bill?

The sugar industry is a value chain, beginning from the raw material that is cane grown by out growers, millers and growers. It is out of this that we move on to the production of sugar and thereafter to the by-products that come out of sugar.

Therefore, the Sugar Bill is a representative of the value chain. When we talk about the Sugar Bill or sugar, we are talking of the cane, the sugar itself and the by-products; molasses, ethanol and others.

When I looked at the issues raised last week by honourable colleagues - I will begin with the Board and come to the zoning later. We have said that the objective is to regulate, develop and harmonise. Therefore, in so doing, we need an institution to regulate the sector and we believe that the Board will do the job, as we will consider in detail when we come to the Committee Stage. The Board will regulate, develop or guide the industry for purposes of having it expanded and harmonised and so we have to give the Board powers.

The Board will be responsible for looking at who is to be licensed, how he or she is going to be licensed and how the industry should move. All issues of the Board, apart from the few amendments that we will make, were in tandem with the committee. 
	
Regarding pricing, we looked at a formula that is enshrined in the Bill and indeed, this is the international practice whereby the sugar industry is guided. We are not saying that, that is the price that will be determined by the Board or whatever institution that we are going to agree on but it will at least provide guidance at a minimum level whereby a farmer should not be cheated by going below that price. 

This formula does this and indeed, it has taken into account the issues that were raised by colleagues here; the by-products and the percentage, which had been proposed by the committee of having 50 per cent enshrined in that formula. We believe that, that is actually going to help the farmer so that he is not cheated.

Regarding cooperatives, we completely agree with proposals by colleagues that in order to help farmers, out growers, growers and even millers, we need to have cooperative societies set up in the sugar industry.

Now I will come back to the policy. The policy made several proposals but I would like to allay fears because when I was sitting here, I heard some colleagues saying that some mills were established after the policy. Yes, it is true that there are those mills that were established before the policy came into being. Therefore, we cannot legislate retrospectively. There are those that were found there - We have about five or six mills that were set up before the policy came into being, like I said – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not following the clarifications and responses, which the minister is giving. He is talking of retrospective application of policy and that it cannot work. Yes, we agree but what the minister should be explaining is, who gives the license? Who licensed those millers who came after the policy? Isn’t it you, the Government? 

Therefore, regarding the millers who were there before and those who came after the policy and given that you are the same entity, which licensed them, you should be the ones to blame.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I wish my colleague had listened and been a bit patient. I was moving in that direction and indeed, that is what I am coming to explain. The reason why I am saying that we cannot apply the law retrospectively is because some colleagues thought that there were some mills that exist right now and I can name them: Mayuge and GM. Those are mills, which were established before the policy came. Kakira, Kinyara, Lugazi are plants, which were established before the policy. Therefore, you cannot say that those should be affected by the new law. 

Of course this will be applicable later on but you cannot say - There is fear that we are going to legislate and say that they should be relocated. That is not what we are saying and it is even in the Bill here. We concur with the committee that we are not going to apply the law retrospectively. I think that is what most colleagues were thinking. We did not license those mills after the policy; they were licensed before the policy came into being. I wanted this to be clear. 

In the process, when we come to the Committee Stage, once the Board is set up and it is in place, we will let the Board do its work. We cannot put some of those functions or rather legislate in the law, that let there be zoning or no zoning. Let us have the Board – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the other thing should come during the Committee Stage. You know we had a long debate here. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You mentioned that we have visitors in the House and their main purpose may be part of this. Honourable minister, this Parliament discussed the issue of zoning extensively. The clarification I seek is, do you want to say that the committee or the Board of around five people will divert the decisions or proposals, which members of Parliament brought unanimously and overwhelmingly that there should not be zoning?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us go to the Committee Stage. We shall understand better when we go clause by clause.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has used very many words yet the message we wanted from him was brief. He is meandering. One, we are making a law that has to stand the test of time. I know that the Board you are talking of is going to depend on the law we are making.

There is a statement you made when you were saying that the law will not to work retrospectively unless otherwise but maybe some may apply later. We just want you to say that when the law comes into place, whatever exists will not be affected; we shall begin from there and begin applying the law. However when you say maybe those that happened before 2010, then those that were there - Do you want to tell us that there are some companies that were established after 2010 and this law is going to affect them?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there anything in this Bill, which talks about that issue? There is none. Do not speculate.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I think the honourable minister is not very clear in his presentation. I listened to him and he said the law will not apply retrospectively. He went ahead to name the companies that we established before and said they will not be affected. However, he did not go a long way to explain; what about those that were established after the policy? He has not mentioned anything about them. 

Your policy was very clear and I think it is your office or those who are responsible for licensing that did not follow the policy when they were licensing. That is where the problem came from. What are you going to do for your officers who have caused us this confusion? You are promising us now that the Board will deal with it. Won’t this same Board go and behave the same way like those; disregard the policy, disregard the law, go ahead and license, and license only in one place as if there are no other places, which they could have licensed the companies to go and be established? That is where the confusion is coming from. If your office had done what the policy stipulated, we would not be in this confusion.

THE SPEAKER: Are you finished? Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUGAR BILL, 2016

4.32
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 1 is the publication.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Chairperson, I do not see anything.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask the minister - if the minister can listen - whether the creation of this Board does not go against the new policy of Government of reducing the number of boards and parastatals.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Chairperson, as Government we are going through the process of looking at which boards to retain and which ones to remove. I think this is one of the boards we are going to have in place. Depending on the merits and demerits, we will decide because we have not actually decided that yet.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to. 

Clause 3 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed that we delete part of the representative of the Board; that is the (d) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  As we sat with the minister, I think the minister has something to say about the representation in as far as finance is concerned.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have something on the composition? 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I move that (d) remains part of the Bill because we would like to have the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be part of the Board for various reasons. Uganda Investment Authority is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so you cannot actually remove it from this Board, for purposes of investment.

Indeed when you talk of taxation, exports and imports with regard to various tariffs, I think Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is important. We move that it remains part of the Board.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we agree that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is important in this Bill because when we walked with the minister, he said there is so much that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to do with this and I concede, as a committee.

Madam Chairperson, there are other amendments. The committee proposes that we substitute “five”, appearing in the beginning of the paragraph to “four”, to ensure that there is equal representation between millers and out-growers. 

In clause 3(1)(f), we substitute for the word “two” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph, the word “four”. 

The justification is to ensure equal representation of millers and out-growers.

In 3(4), substitute the words “in consultation with”, appearing in the second line, for the provision of the words “on the recommendation of”. 

The justification is to ensure the participation of millers and out-growers in the selection of their representatives on the Board. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose that the out-growers number be more than the millers by two because they are more concerned, especially on this Board. That is my proposal. 

MR NZOGHU: I would like to propose that the number is increased to four because it concerns them and so that they can have meaningful representation. However, we have to compare the four with what the minister had talked about, especially the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which we said may not necessarily be there because they have been assigned to so many Boards and have become incompetent as a result.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we thought that even the seat which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would occupy could be taken up by the people that hon. Waluswaka talked about and we raise it to five.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the chairperson has already conceded to the retention of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support the increase of the number of out-growers. However, when it comes to the millers, I propose that having five representatives is too many.

I propose that we need to reduce the number of the representatives of the millers to three and then increase the number of the out-growers to at least five. Let out-growers be five and representatives of the millers two. We cannot have more than five. I beg to propose.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the object of this Bill is to create harmony in the industry and not commotion. The justification is, have equal representation, create harmony in the industry, talk to each other at level footing. We do not want one group to be ahead of the other because that will create disharmony in the industry.

Secondly, we are saying that since there are many regions –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is, the millers also have their own association in which they will all sit and agree on what to deal with, either with Government or with the out-growers.

However, the out-growers are the weakest and they have no resources like the millers. If the man has invested $ 50 million, he will have the best tax consultant and the best feasibility study. The out-grower is at the mercy of the miller and he can only voice something if he gets someone to assist him.

I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. I thought the millers would discuss their issues in the association, have a common position and then bring it to the Board for endorsement. Why would you want five yet even one or two would be more than enough?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we are saying that we want a harmonised industry so let us have an equal number of both millers and out-growers.

Secondly, even out-growers have an association; they have cooperatives and they will have representation. They will vote amongst themselves and find the best to represent them on this Board, just as millers are going to be many but they will choose a few to represent them on the Board.

We also have a chairperson who is not for the millers or for the out-growers. We also have the technical input. Therefore, this is just a decision making body to harmonise the industry. We do not want people to get to the Board as if they are competitors. 

In addition, there is another insertion we would like to make: insert the following new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (8) to read, “Notwithstanding subsection (8), the minister shall, in appointing members of the Board under subsection 1(e) and (f), ensure that there is equitable representation of sugarcane growing regions.”

Therefore, the out-growers shall be coming from the different regions; Busoga, Bunyoro, the north to this Board. What we are saying is that we would like to have a harmonised board, which does not represent the out-growers and millers only.

MS AMULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern starts from clause 3 (a) where we have a chairperson. I can give reference to the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) Act that this Parliament passed. I do not know whether this chairperson is to be elected from among all these members. If it is so, I do not know whether we shall tag a qualification to that. As a committee of the whole House, we need to look into this.

Secondly, we always pass laws that at times make the work of these agencies very difficult. When I look at the permanent secretaries for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development, with the experience that I have as Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, this is just a replication of what was passed in the NIRA Act where we have faced a lot of difficulties. 

The permanent secretaries, in the real sense, do not nominate anybody under them to represent them on these boards and yet they are very busy persons that cannot even make these boards function. This being trade that will affect the out-growers, I would think that this august House comes up with a better look into this issue of permanent secretaries.

They are very busy people and actually, it hinders the functionality of this Board. I can assure you that when we went to look into the NIRA functionalities, you would hardly find two or three Board members. We could only find those that are appointed and are not holding some of these offices. 

Lastly, my suggestion would be, if we could add another clause that would give this ministry the right to appoint one other independent member of this Board who is not a beneficiary or an interested party, whether in the ministry, among the millers or out-growers. I think this would serve as a neutral point for this Board to function efficiently. Thank you.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I participated in scrutinising this Bill and we interacted with the millers and the out-growers. The concern of the latter was their small representation, according to the Bill because the Bill had two representatives of out-growers whereas the millers were five. They told us that they wanted equal representation. We thought that since equal representation was okay for them, we said, fine, we can come up with that. Therefore, I do not see any problem in us having equal representation since the out-growers agreed to that.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. To begin with, the provision for a chairperson is vague, even when the Bill attempts to qualify it as, “The chairperson shall be appointed from the private sector and shall be a person with knowledge and experience of the sugar industry.”

It remains vague and should be qualified to ensure that the chairperson does not owe any allegiance to any of the parties: the sugar industry or the out-growers. He should be a neutral person and as it is, it should be qualified.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can you look at clause 3(3)? It states, “The chairperson shall be appointed from the private sector, shall be a person with knowledge and experience of the sugar industry.”
 
It has been qualified here.

MR AKAMBA: Not working with either the sugar industries or the out-growers. If we bring a chairperson who has a relationship with the out-growers, he will be biased. If he owes allegiance to the sugar industries, it will bias the chairperson as well and I believe it will be detrimental to the other side.

My other concern is on representation from the permanent secretaries. It is evident that even in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, there was a permanent secretary who saw licenses being issued, contrary to the existing policy. 

That aside, getting quorum for this Board will always be a problem. As such, we should anticipate that and devise means of appointing Board members other than permanent secretaries.

Lastly, the out-growers are the weaker parties in this. It is fair that the out-growers have five members and the sugar industries at least two. The reason is that the out-growers are a weaker party. When taking decisions, they must have a number that caters for their interests. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As hon. Amule stated, I am not very comfortable with the way we have drafted clause 3(b), (c) and (d). Let me read one for clarity and the chairperson will help us.
 
“The permanent secretary of the ministry responsible for finance or his or her representative ….” We have been on a number of committees and this kind of responsibility given to permanent secretaries causes problems. We met it in NSSF and I would request that we become very specific. If it is “Permanent Secretary” let it be Permanent Secretary other than saying “his representative”. What if he sends the sweeper from the ministry to represent him or her –(Interjection)– I am on the Floor and saying “what if”? I have not said that he would do that.

Madam Chairperson, they have talked about -(Interjection)- You know English is very difficult, I said “what if”; I am not saying he will do the same.

Madam Chairperson, the five representatives of millers and the two representative of out-growers - we need to know; what did you have in mind when you were considering this? Secondly, the chairperson of the committee - you have just stated but you are not very specific - would you support that when we talk about five out-growers, you are going to select from the regions that grow sugarcane because you might end up getting five members from one region - like in Kalungu there is no sugarcane. It is not stated here.

MR KASULE: Hon. Ssewungu has said that in the proposed amendments, there is a clause that says we insert a new sub-clause (8) that states that he minister shall, in appointing the members of the board under subsection 1(e) and (f), ensure that there is equitable representation of the sugarcane growing regions such that out-growers and millers are not only chosen from one region. Both millers and out-growers must be chosen according to the regions we have. At least put that in perspective and that is the proposed amendment.  

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think hon. Ssewungu had picked out my key concern and actually I was not planning to stand but when the chair came up to say that the minister will appoint in his amendment, then I felt uncomfortable. These out-growers have their own associations just like the millers. The responsibility should be upon them to appoint a person to represent them on the Board. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I listened attentively to the chairperson following other members’ contributions regarding the representation on the Board. I think there is a point. If the chairperson is supposed to be neutral - I know this is our Bill; this is a Government Bill. If the chairperson is supposed to be neutral then we cannot say that the chairperson shall be a person with knowledge and experience of the sugar industry. 

I, therefore, propose that if we are to have someone neutral chairing this Board - I have discussed with my colleague the honourable minister that let us state that “The chairperson shall be appointed from the private sector and shall be a person with knowledge in management, law and business,” and we stop there because when you put “with experience”, then you either bring in a miller or an out-grower and that will complicate the issue. That is what I wanted to move, Madam Chairperson.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Still on the Board, I think the number of the Board matters a lot especially where issues may need a vote. If the out-growers remain as two members, the others are four. So if they are voting, they will always vote the out-growers out. 

Therefore, since all of them are participants and we know that the millers may have more power because they are at the finishing stage, I feel each region must be represented. Let us get a representative from the east, north, west and central from all those sugarcane farmers so that if they are raising issues on the board, they will ask; “What about the west; what is happening there?” If it is in the east, “What do the people of the east say?” so that it is balanced. If they are not satisfied, they vote without oppression.

We have looked at other boards, usually if the board chairperson is manipulated, the majority who are powerful can take him up. And here if you are not careful, the millers may even manipulate the chairperson of the board and the farmers will be oppressed. Therefore, I feel the board number should be increased for the out-growers so that we balance where there is voting. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This House has been having concern on the size of the board and here we are grappling with an issue that is likely to bring the number of board members to 11. What does this mean? First, it is largely comprised of people who are busy both ways because when you look at the PSs, they are busy people, the same for the miller and the chairperson who is from the private sector is busy world over.

Therefore, raising quorum for the board will become a problem. We have an issue of equity, Madam Chairperson, whereby (e) is proposing five and (f) is proposing two and the feeling of this House is that we should have equal representation.

My view would be -(Interjection)- this is my proposal. Honourable colleagues, please listen to my proposal; since these people come from associations, what if we said that each association chooses one representative on this board? This would mean that the size of the board would reduce from 11 to seven and in my own opinion, this would be a more effective board than what we are trying to create.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I am just building on the point raised by hon. Ssewungu so that the House does not forget it. That in terms of representation on the board, when we say a “Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for this and that or his or her representative,” I think Hon. Ssewungu is making a point that we should be clear in the law - and we have done it before, Madam Chairperson. We can restrict it and say “her representative” for avoidance of doubt; a representative shall be at a level of the commissioner or principal. This would be better so that we are very clear of what we are doing.

The Permanent Secretary can say “an economist go and attend the meeting” and we have done it before, Madam Chairperson, in different laws where the representative of the PS should be at a certain level.

MS AMULE: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I am seeking from hon. Bahati is; regardless of us giving the cut-off point of who to represent the PS, how are we going to guard against the vice of these PSs appointing only and only themselves into these boards? Our interest here is to see the functionality of the board, not the circumstance where you always have one or two members out of eleven or nine. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister clarify what he does in his ministry. 

MR BAHATI: At the beginning of the board, the Permanent Secretary straightaway nominates a representative. Hence, he will choose whether he is the one going to attend or his representative who is nominated at the beginning of the board. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern has actually been covered by the minister; that the Permanent Secretary has overall responsibility but simply nominates a responsible officer. Nevertheless, we can put it in the law that; “That officer should not be below the level of commissioner”. I support the idea of having equal numbers of millers and out-growers because it is very important. 

Then, as to the minister appointing the out-growers and millers; the minister must appoint everyone who is nominated to the board. However, these will be nominated by their associations. 

What hon. Musasizi was proposing is not very clear. I think it is better we say, as it is here, “The out-growers will be three and the millers will be three”. But we can add what the chairperson suggested that; “these will represent the regions.” It increases the number but it is of absolute essence because we want to take care of the out-growers. Unless we say, “The millers will be two, the out-growers will be two and then they will be rotating from the regions.” Otherwise, we can keep them three knowing that the number has gone up but it is necessary. I beg to submit. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When I looked at the numbers here, according to the Bill, the out-growers are supposed to be two and the millers are supposed to be five, which brings the total to seven. 

I support the committee’s proposal on page 12 that we increase the number of out-growers to four but according to the minister, this law is supposed to bring harmony. When you look at these millers, is there no kind of misunderstanding among them? If we say that they should be two, won’t that also bring conflict among them? Won’t those available positions go to those who are dominant in that case? 

I think that we should increase the number of millers such that in case there is a misunderstanding among them, it can be catered for by their representation. I suggest that we have four out-growers and then three millers so that the number here, which is seven, can still be maintained, instead of two. The four out-growers can come from the regions, as he said; the north, west, central and east and then, we can also have the three millers. That is my proposal, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 4 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are still handling clause 3.

MR OLANYA: My proposal is on clause 4. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not yet gone there. You wait. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first and foremost, I think we need to know the function of the board. If we know its function, then you direct at which level the person will be appointed. For example, what is the function of the Permanent Secretary on the board of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? What is he going to do there? 

Then, it is in that regard that we will look for somebody, probably who falls in the department, which you want to look at. However, for the minister to come and say that the person should be at the rank of commissioner, what about the out-grower? The out-grower is a farmer; he digs and only knows little English. Does he have to come and negotiate with a commissioner, who has read all the books? These are the reasons we should consider. 

The functions of the board buffer for policy and it is this policy that will promote the sugar industry. For example, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in charge of taxes, the Permanent Secretary of trade ministry is in charge of trade, the Permanent Secretary of the agriculture ministry is in charge of digging; these secretaries are not supposed to be part and parcel of this board. They should go and tell them what policy we want to promote. Let me ask, if I sit as a Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, then whom will I report to? Do I report to myself? 

Madam Chairperson, to begin with, we should delete these Permanent Secretaries –(Interruption) 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. According to the Constitution, under Article 164, the Permanent Secretary is the accounting officer. Therefore, anybody that is appointed or is supposed to be appointed to any board has to be at the calibre of the Permanent Secretary. My understanding was that the Permanent Secretary being on the board is a policy issue but he can delegate an officer, on whom he can superintend. That officer can be on that board and reports to the Permanent Secretary whatever decisions have been taken at board level. 

The point of clarification I am seeking from you is whether we are not differing from this policy position of the Constitution, in regards to accountability? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think my colleague has a point but he has misread it. An accounting officer is accountable to Parliament under Article 164 of the Constitution. However, these ones, that you are putting here, are not accountable to Parliament but their industry, where they come from. 

Therefore, it would be very wrong for us to send a Secretary to Treasury to again – if you read this law, I think it was conceived wrongly. If you continue reading it, they say, “The board should lobby for tax exemptions.” The person they got to lobby for tax exemptions is already seated on the board.  These are wrong things. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to make this proposal – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I propose that we stand over clause 3 – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, it has a problem and the reason I am raising it – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us stand over it and we harmonise it. Let us go to the others because there are too many proposals. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can we stand over it and go to clause 4 as you consult? 

MS AMULE: Madam Chairperson, I have a proposal on that clause. I would wish to propose that we substitute the words “Permanent Secretary” with “the representative from the ministries of trade, agriculture and finance” with a person who is at the level of a commissioner appointed by maybe not below –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all these, is about clause 3. Let us think about it. You are removing the PS and bringing the commissioners directly. The minister is doing something else, the other one is saying bring more and another one, is saying bring less. Let us leave it for now and go to clause 4 and we will come to it while you think of the best strategy for equity and accessibility.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the matter of the board in this Bill is almost the Bill itself and it is very important. Once we don’t sort it now, then the other relevant clauses are all about the board and its functions.
 
It is very easy and we have passed Bills here. With boards, we say “the Permanent Secretary or his representative.” A representative can be an institution like an investment authority and there can also be an institution of the focal person in the ministry on that industry because they are technical people in charge of certain sectors.

There is somebody in charge of pensions in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is a technical person who follows up on the policy and reports to the PS. We constitute these representations to ease communication between Government and these bodies; you put somebody from the ministry for easy communication. For example, if there is something that has come up in the industry; sugar has plummeted in prices, what do we do as Government? You cannot detach it from the Government institutions.

Therefore, it is very easy for us. Should we say “Permanent Secretary or a representative below him at the level of the Commissioner” and we move to the next level?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have listened carefully and all the practice that we have had when making the laws. For instance, look at the Administration Act of Parliament where you are the Chairperson of the Commission. We say a Prime Minister is a representative of the commission but there, the Prime Minister appoints a minister who appears before the Commission. 

When you put a Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to be on the board, it does not mean that he must be there but there must be a focal person within the institution because they are a department. It makes it easy if it comes as a policy; a Permanent Secretary is a technical person in that ministry. That is why all the laws – when you go to Electricity Regulatory Authority in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Permanent Secretary is on the board. Why? Once the policy issue comes up, he is the one technically to lead that department and account. He is the custodian of that institution. 

That is why all the practice we have been having on other laws, the Permanent Secretary is there for a purpose. When any policy issue comes up, he must report and he is attached to Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go to precedence; is there any law where we have gone below the PS? No, we have not. Let us maintain what we have been doing. We have been giving the PS the power – yes, in all the laws. We should not make a different standard. If we agree with the issue of PS, let us look at the numbers.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with you entirely. According to the statement that the minister has given that the person to be appointed will ease communication; when he sits there, he can then report back to the PS for any policy decision. 

Once words move from one person to another, there is always distortion. Since we have been passing laws here and we have been putting the PS, let there be the PS because the board is a serious decision making point whereby we cannot rely on information moving from one person to the other. Maybe, by the time the information reaches to the PS, it could be distorted. Therefore, what do we fear?  

The issue is that we have to make sure that the out-growers are fully represented. In this case, I would like to suggest that the number of out-growers be increased beyond two. I think this will help us to be consistent with the relevant laws that we have been making on the Floor of this House. Thank you.

MR KASUMBA: Madam Chairperson, a lot has been said about the representation of the out-growers. The committee in its report on page 3 provided a list of out-growers and there are four associations. 

When you look at those associations, they represent regions. I would like to suggest that since we have four out-growers’ associations coming from different regions, then we increase the number of out-growers’ representatives from two to four. I beg to submit. If anything, it should be increased to five because one region – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR KASUMBA: We are in a liberalised economy and have people who are going to produce sugarcane in areas that are not reported in the report. For example, a Member muttered here that within the central region, people are bound to grow sugarcane. They will also establish an out-growers’ association. I, therefore, implore this House to adopt five representatives of the out-growers. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is five millers and five out-growers. Would that be -

MR GUME: Madam Chairperson, let us be very critical on this law. The out-growers put in effort. They are also part and parcel of the millers because the millers put in capital. 

Now, the two partners must have a fair say in the running of the organisation. If we have four out-growers and four millers that would be a better way because everybody has equal shares in the participation of this sugar industry. 

If you said that we should have five and the others are three, it would mean that the three will have no stake in the running of the affairs of the sugar industry.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are all aware that the out-growers have been marginalised for so long. If we are talking of the out-growers being 68 per cent of all the sugarcane growers, I do not see the reason the minister fears when we will be having more hand in the board like the PS. If we leave the out-growers to be four, one of the out-growers can easily be compromised. What we know - compromising coming up with the decisions and policies. If the minister fears, let the out-growers be four and we leave the millers to be three so that even if one is compromised, the deal can stay secure.

The other serious concern is about the minister. Where we are now, the minister is the one to appoint. And again after appointing, the minister remains with a lot of power – even to dismiss some members of the board. We must make sure that the powers of the minister do not go beyond the powers of the board members or the societies of the millers and the out-growers. 

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, We have to represent the people in making this law. The out-growers proposed equal representation. And it is what has been recommended by the committee by raising the number from two to four. I wish to concur with what the committee recommended but also to the honourable members that if we choose to tie up the representation on regions, we may be missing a point. 

Today, regions that have not been growing sugarcane are getting into this business. It may get to a level where they have no representation. I think what we need to put in this law is the strengthening of the cooperatives or the associations which may be used as the springboard for identifying the representation of the out-growers. 

For the Permanent Secretaries, we need all of them there or their representatives because failure to understand the manner in which an industry works incapacitates them to make appropriate decisions that can help this industry growth. 

Therefore, the number of four to four on the part of out-growers and maintaining the other representation is fair enough for the farmers or out-growers to have effective representation.

MR OLEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The most important thing in an enterprise is taking decisions. Without decision, this independent enterprise will always collapse. In my view, this august House must look at the out-growers as well as the investors; all these people matter to me. In my view, let's have that number for the regions and also have the millers to have either three or four. 

The Permanent Secretary now will be responsible for seeing how the matters - if the matters come in a way that makes this country grow, then he can decide. Otherwise, we want to balance this number because all these people also matter; the investor will bring in the capital and the out-growers will also be catered for. In my view, let us have four-four and then we get a wise PS. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are proposing four-four-three.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I need to concur with my colleagues. For the out-growers, given that they come on this board from a disadvantaged position, I need to concur that they should be slightly more than the millers. They should be four and we get three millers.

Madam Chairperson, my concern is equally on clause 3(2) where we say, “The members of the board shall be appointed by the minister”. The moment this statement is explicitly stated the way it is; the minister will look through Busoga and appoint one person, and appoint another in Buganda. So we are giving powers to the minister to appoint a person who is either his or her friend or an in-law to that board –(Interjection)- whatever the direction, as long as the powers are with the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, isn’t there a proposal?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think we have concluded. We have said that even the millers and the out-growers are representatives. The minister cannot fail to appoint because they have chosen somebody for him and he has no alternative. They elect amongst themselves and present to him a person, and he has to appoint –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that said?

MR KASULE: It is said here in (e) and (f); two representatives - they are representatives, and they are not his friends. They are representing an association. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what we need to add is, “two representatives of the out-growers chosen from among them” or something like that. The source should be clear.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, still, when the minister appoints somebody from an association in Busoga, he will be a representative of the millers or the out-growers. The moment we say the minister appoints, even when he appoints somebody from that association he will be a representative. We want an explicit statement that gives the power to the association to send their representative to the board not the minister to appoint. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the source I was talking about. We need a clear source of that representative.

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Chair, I would like to concur with the suggestion that we have three representatives from the millers and four from the out-growers with justification. 

There are three millers’ associations so we can have one from each. There are four out-grower associations, we can have one from each. When you add four to three, those are seven. Even when you had the formerly suggested five representatives of millers and two from the out-growers, they are seven. So we don't change the number but we make it better. I therefore concur with the other Members that we have three millers’ representatives and four out-growers’ representatives. Thank you.

MS AKAMPULIRA: Madam Chairperson, when I look at the Bill, there is a lot more that we need to understand as we go on with other sections.

I, therefore, propose, according to what you had said that we first look at the other sections. We first look at, for example, the functions of the board, the powers and so on and so forth then after we come back to this. Though the chair of the committee said that it is important for us to look at the board; that the board is very important, I think after establishing or looking at the functions of the board and other parts, then we shall come back to this and from there we will know where we are going.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Chairperson. I want to support honourable Pentagon on this basis. We move from the equal representation to fair representation of all stakeholders. This is because if the millers have three associations and we pick one from the three associations then look at the out-growers, there are four associations; we pick one from each. That is already fair representation. So the number should be seven, Madam Chairperson.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do believe that we are insisting that the number of the out-growers is proportional because there are two aspects. There is equality and proportionality. The number of out-growers is far higher than the number of millers. Even in terms of representation, Madam Chairperson, those who are more should have a higher representation than the ones who are fewer at a ratio of 3:4.

Secondly, I also feel that before we even go to the functions of the Board, we need to understand the kind of Board members whose functions we are defining. I agree with the chairperson that we sort out the issue of the Board first and then we can go to their functions.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There was fear by the Members – and I think hon. Kibalya was one of them – about the minister appointing members of the Board. It seems Members were looking at only sub-clause (2). However, sub-clause (6) reads, “For the purposes of sub-section (4), the relevant organisation shall nominate a person for the consideration of the minister for appointment as a member of the Board…” 

It is not only the minister who is going to do the identification of the members of the Board; the minister will get the input from those relevant organisations and so, there is no cause for alarm.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened attentively to contributions from Members. I take the position of the out-growers. When we interacted with them, their position was that of having fair representation where both the millers and out-growers have equal representation.

It would be unfair for somebody to go to a sports arena when they are already outnumbered. When the time to vote comes, you will automatically be thrown out. I propose that if we are to make a just and fair law for everybody, let us have equal representation. 

The other issue is on representation based on regions. I do not support that because the way sugarcane growing started in the 1920s - if you look at the current trend, sugarcane growing has spread to very many different areas. This means that at one time, we are going to have a change in the representation, depending on the number of regions growing sugarcane. I propose that we have equal representation on both sides so that we are fair at the time of making decisions. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, let us have the last word from you. Fair or equal, let him decide. Shall we have 4:3?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, let us have equal representation because we want harmony in the industry. What we are legislating about - we do not want to cause disharmony beginning from the law itself. We want fair representation such that when people go to the field, they are there to harmonise the industry.

We do not want to arm one side better than the other, beginning from the law itself.

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, my concern is about what is called “fair representation” or what you say is harmonising. In this situation, there are two issues that we need to take into consideration.

Firstly, we are all aware that the out-growers have been vulnerable. Secondly, we are also aware that the number of out-growers is more than the number of the millers. If you are talking about fair representation, then that means you should look at the numbers.

For example, when you are giving positions in a committee of Parliament here, you look at the number of NRM MPs and the number of those in the Opposition. When calling for fair representation, you look at these people with more numbers so their numbers have to be more in the committees. 

When talking about the number of members of the Board, we should look at how many out-growers there are vis-à-vis the millers. If you are calling it fair representation, then that means if you put the out-growers at four, then the millers should be three. That is fair representation. Thank you.

MR KASULE: Honourable members, because of the way it was composed and what happened, we have people who are in the field. The honourable member said they went to the field and it was agreeable - including hon. Kiyingi - he said they went out there in the field and the matter that was agreeable among the millers and out-growers is that they have equal representation.

Secondly –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please.

MR KASULE: Secondly, we do not want to entrench imbalance within the law itself. First of all, we are not dealing with the numbers of out-growers. We are dealing with associations of out-growers, not the numbers –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to raise a point of order to the chairperson of the committee in respect of three aspects.

First, if he is talking about fairness, who supplies the inputs to the out-growers? Secondly, who determines the price to the out-growers –(Interjections)– Yes, but they communicate to the out-growers, for your information.

Madam Chairperson, is the honourable member in order to assume that the millers, who are very few, can have the same representation on the Board with the out-growers who are in thousands? 

Is the honourable member in order to undermine the out-growers who have the land and actually have no source of income? They have no food because they are providing the cane to the millers. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is only repeating what people said in the field. (Laughter) Minister, please, guide us. What do you say? This is your Bill. Tell us.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, right from the beginning, we talked of harmony in this industry. We are talking of associations; out-growers’ associations and millers’ associations. Indeed, we have also interfaced with these two associations as a ministry –(Members rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Allow the minister to finish. This is his Bill, please. Let the minister finish.

MR WERIKHE: Colleagues, in order to create harmony, we request that we have equal representation of the millers’ and the out-growers’ associations on the Board. That way, we will create harmony in the industry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is very unfortunate that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is the one saying there should be equal representation. This Bill was made by the same minister who indicated five millers and two out-growers. How does he start saying such a thing?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe he has become wiser. Please propose.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On what hon. Nzoghu raised, the relationship is between the out-growers and the millers. The millers have interest in the Government and out-growers. However, the out-growers relate more with the millers who would want to underpay the out-growers who will only make a complaint that they are being underpaid before the Board, where there are three Permanent Secretaries.

Even if the Permanent Secretary appoints a cleaner, he or she will remain responsible and accountable. I am not bothered by who she or he appoints but the most interesting question here is; who is the most disadvantaged in this group? The most disadvantaged person here is the out-grower. Therefore, the number of out-growers should be more than the number of millers.

I propose that we put the out-growers’ number at four and make the millers three since they are overly complaining. I would like to thank my sister who raised it in sub-clause (6); the minister has no power to change because he will only appoint individuals that have been recommended to him or her.

To avoid wasting time and since we have agreed that we move a motion that there will be a chairperson, three Permanent Secretaries or their representatives, three millers’ representatives and four representatives of out-growers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 4(1) we substitute the word “two” appearing in line one with the word “three”. The justification is that two years is such a short period for the Board to make meaningful decisions in view of the 18 months duration sugarcane takes to mature. 

Clause 4(6) was to propose the tenure of the Board from two to three and then insert the words, “resigns” or “dies” in between the words “office” and “the” appearing in line one.

The justification is to broaden the provision by providing for resignation and death as grounds for the minister to fill the vacancy. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 4 be amended as proposed -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: To begin with, let us look at sub-clause (1); “A member of the Board shall hold office for two years and is eligible for re-appointment for another term.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was amended to three years.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay. If you say the Permanent Secretary is there, there are some who are there for life but you have stated three years; what happens if he is there for 10 years? This can only apply to those who do not hold Government offices. I want to make an exception to say; “except for 3(b),(c) and (d).

The justification is that these can hold office for longer periods and if they are still there, according to the law, they are represented.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, should the minister write and state that this member is for one year, the other for two years? Really?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That will now be the job of the Permanent Secretary of the ministry. If he is there for 10 years, then he is by law supposed to be there but if he goes ahead and writes that he should be there for only this period and three years for the others, which is okay, except -

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I may refer to 3(c) that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to, it is clearly states, “The Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for Agriculture or his or her representative.”

Even if the Permanent Secretary is permanent, he can still appoint a representative to represent them on the board. Are we proceeding well to continue referring to a clause that was already settled, which is even very self-explanatory that the Permanent Secretary or his or her representative…?”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like you to listen to the issue I am raising. If it is the Permanent Secretary and he can go by himself or herself and the law states that - (Interjections) - Please listen, if you want to learn. The one we have passed is okay. However, my concern is that the renewable two terms will only be applicable for clause 4 (4)(a),(e) and(f) but it cannot be applicable to (b), (c) and (d) - (Interjections) - I know why I am saying this.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I would support hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the fact that we put an exception that the rotation is preserved for the representatives from millers and out-growers. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, my colleagues who jump on the Floor should learn from me and they should always be careful when I say something. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Permanent Secretary does not rotate?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, just like in other laws, we have already provided for an exception for those people that can rotate especially for representations from the millers and out-growers because they elect each other on either yearly, or three-year basis so that when they change somebody in the association, that person is also changed here on the Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR KASULE: I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if only he can draft a proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with what the chairman put across. My proposal is; a member of the Board shall hold office for three years and is eligible for re-appointment for one further term except for (b), (c) and (d).

The justification is that this can stay in the ministry for a long time. The rationale is that even if the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is there for only one year, the one who succeeds him will take over. We only wanted to avoid a scenario where a Permanent Secretary is there for many years and you are blocking him from being on the Board. 

The second one is about conditions. Madam Chairperson, we have a problem of ministers changing conditions along the way - on (2) that “the chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in the instruments of appointment.” I want to put it here that there should be regulations.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we have provided for regulations in the schedules and it is coming.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then, if that is the case, what I want to put here is; if you are saying you have left that – specify it in the instruments of appointments and regulations.

The justification is to avoid a minister “jumping” out of regulations and bringing things, which can cause a member problems.

Finally, if the chairperson could agree; the second amendment is “…as it is in the instrument of appointment and regulations”. Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment that after the word “appointment”, we add “regulations” on clause 4(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: No but regulation has another part. Do we really have to add regulation here?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We need to understand something; when a minister is appointing and giving conditions of appointment, I assume that the minister refers to the regulations and the law. Therefore, when you say, “in accordance with regulations”, yet we know that the minister in preparation of the instruments of appointment, prepares them in accordance with the Act and the regulations made under the same Act - Therefore, why do we have to bring it here again? I do not see the reason why hon. Nandala-Mafabi is insisting on this.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the number of years for someone to take - practically, sugarcane normally takes 18 months to mature and 18 months is roughly two years. We are looking at the number of years. I propose that it should be at least four years. Three years is very short and 18 months is roughly two years. Therefore, we should increase the years to four. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, soon you are going to say that coffee takes seven years, so we should have seven years. That is what you are going to say next.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, as we legislate, there is sugarcane being cut now. Therefore, we are not making a law that is going to start sugarcane growing after the Bill has become an Act. Sugarcane is growing right now and people are producing sugar. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from my good friend is, do you want to say that you want a law that states that everybody must respect this law and begin growing sugarcane as soon as we pass the law? The answer is no. Therefore, I think that one does not arise, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have amended the tenure to three years. I now put the question that clause 4, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on the functions of the Board, we propose to substitute the word, “institution” with the words, “cooperative societies” as referring to the out-growers’ cooperative societies. The phrase “grower institution” is ambiguous and to promote the cooperatives movement by boosting establishment of cooperative societies.

In clause 6(2), substitute for the words, “grower institutions” appearing at the end of the provision, with the word, “growers”. The justification is that the word, “institution” is redundant. I think what they are saying is that the word “institutions” is not defined so they want to confine it to “growers” instead.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairperson to clarify this – sub-clause (2), “in this section, ‘parties in the sugar industry’ includes Government, millers – is this out-growers or growers?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this is your Bill, hon. Minister; who are you asking?

MR KASULE: Honourable minister, in sub-clause (2) they say, parties in the sugar industry involves Government, millers, growers and other out-grower institutions. “Out-grower” imputes that you are an out-grower to a miller but “grower” also imputes that you can be an independent grower of sugarcane and not confined to any mill; both words are there.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to move an amendment under clause 6(e) by adding two words, “or mediate”. 

Clause 6(e) says, “to arbitrate disputes between parties in the sugar industry.” 

The justification is to align this law with section 2 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, which defines “arbitration.” In addition, it has also become part of our law; mediation being compulsory for all agencies and courts of the judicature to mediate before you handle arbitration.

“Mediation” is defined under the judicature mediation rules No. 10 (13) where you do not necessarily handle arbitration but you may mediate because in mediation, you do not need an agreement for arbitration. Therefore, it gives a wide discretion to the Board to handle disputes arising out of the sugar industry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, he is adding a word “mediate” after “arbitration” so that it reads “arbitrate and mediate disputes.” 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I had two amendments to make – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On clause 6?

 MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, the first one is on clause 6(2). It says, “….parties in the sugar industry include Government, millers, growers and out-growers.” Madam Chairperson, “institutions” - I know why I want to bring the next one – “or out-grower associations”. Why I want to bring “institutions” back is that some out-growers - you have mentioned cooperative societies - these are institutions. They can have any organisation to deal with out-growers and this association should be given a say in this industry.

Therefore, I would like to move an amendment that we agree with growers, out-growers or out-grower organisations -(Interjections)- let us call them “organisations”; institutions are organisations.

The justification for “organisation” is that out-growers can form a company, a cooperative or anything they want. That is why I want that to be there. That is the justification.

The second proposal I would like to move is to avoid curtailing the board; I would like to create (s) after (q) and (r), that the board should lobby organisations for the benefit of the sugar industry. The justification is that they can go and lobby in the ministry for a price, policy or whatever the case maybe for the benefit of the out-growers.

Therefore, my justification for (s) is that this is another function of the Board to lobby for benefits, which will grow the sugar industry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you read clause 7? It says to lobby for tax exemptions and other incentives or benefits for the sugar industry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 7, if you make a law that their job is to lobby for tax incentives, this is very dangerous. In fact, when we get to clause 7, I am going to move for deletion and I wanted to say that to avoid going to clause 7, we go to (r) and (s). The Board’s other function is to lobby for incentives of the sugar industry. The justification is that they can lobby for any incentives from anywhere, not necessarily for -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the difference to what is there?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I do not know why he is insisting. However, clause 7 is an extension of clause 6. What he has said, “the responsibility of the Board shall be to lobby for the incentives or benefits of the industry.” Maybe he just wants to put it under the main functions and then we delete this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you have defined the functions of the Board. Why do you single out this one? It should be included and should be general; what I am trying to do is for better drafting.

Therefore, (s) should be –(Interjections)- of course another function of the Board is to lobby for incentives for the sugar industry. They should lobby for the benefits of the sugar industry. You do not have to name the incentives like tax exemptions. They can even go lobby for agricultural inputs or anything. That is what we are trying to say. If you agree with those two amendments, I have no problem.

Mr Chairman, do you agree with my amendments?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I am agreeable in as far as putting this clause 7 under clause 6 is concerned and then we remove the tax exemptions and only say, “incentives or benefits of the industry.”

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Chairman, I would like clarification from you. When you put incentives generally, they mean various things, they could even be inputs. However, when you say tax incentives, we have laws that are specific on taxation. Therefore, these are two different things, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and that is why I need clarification from you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the need to single out that one. After (r), insert (s). 

Clause 7 is particular and specific; the headnote is for the Board to lobby for incentives for the sugar industry. However, we need to elaborate and say, tax incentives. That means it was wrong. Therefore, when you put a headnote that it will be particular for tax incentives, you leave it at that. So (s) qualifies to be added on the functions of the Board. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Mine is on clause 6(1) (d) “to facilitate the export of sugar produce in Uganda.” I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on what will happen to the sugar that will be imported.

I am of the view that we include the words, “export and import” because they will have a time when there will be shortage of sugar within the country and automatically, it will create the need to import sugar. So, we need to cater for that –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about the sugar industry in Uganda. To promote, develop and harmonise this industry. We are not talking about the industries outside that export sugar into this country. Therefore, this is in order to have sugar that we produce here in Uganda.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The objective of the Bill reads – “after adopting the objective of the Bill, it is the detail you put in the draft. The object of the Bill principally says; “the main objective is to ensure that there is a sustainable diversified, harmonised, modern, competitive sugar sector to meet domestic demand.” That means it is within the country and not on international trade or anything. That is the principle and once you take that principle, the detail of the body must be embedded in that principle.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is; there will come a time of scarcity within the country and there will be a need to import sugar from other countries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a law dealing with imports in general.

MR KASULE KASULE: Honourable member, the core function of this Board is to help Ugandans, both out-growers and millers to grow enough sugarcane for us to have enough and even for export. The matter of import for sugar into the country will be a Government matter. However, the core function of the Board is to promote our sugar first and not to cater for the interests of the outsiders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7
MR KASULE KASULE: According to the members, they have put it under the function of the Board. However, it does us no harm to emphasise that the Board shall lobby for incentives as another function.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, No. 7 is technically drawn because it must stand as a standalone provision under the law because it is referring to other laws. That is how it should be in legislative drafting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have a different view. I have seen a lobbyist for the first time in the laws of Uganda. To me, for a man who has been a magistrate to come and say we must make a stand alone for lobbyists is going very far. In Uganda, we do not have such a law and that is why we had created (s) to deal with (7).

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that sub-clause (7) be deleted. The justification is that we have taken care of seeking incentives under (s) in sub-clause (6).

MR KASULE KASULE: Madam Chairperson, for us to move, sub-clause (7) falls by the wayside and then we continue to eight.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you also throwing away clause 7 (ii)?

MR KASULE KASULE: Clause 7(2) “For avoidance of doubt, incentives or benefits to be granted to the sugar industry shall be as prescribed by or under the relevant Acts of Parliament.” I think that must also be deleted. It is redundant. We have said the whole of clause 7 falls by the wayside.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 8 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 14 (2), we propose to insert word, “Minister” on the recommendations of (d) and quote between the words “the” and “Board” in one of the provisions. 

The justification is to provide for the involvement of the minister on the appointment of the executive director.

Secondly, insert a new clause immediately after sub-clause (2) to read as follows; “The executive director shall serve for a period of four years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one more term.”

The justification is to provide for tenure of office of the executive director to avoid serving in perpetuity.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of the chairperson of the committee to - when merging agencies, do we need the executive director?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall need them until they are merged because they have to run in the meantime.

MR WALUSWAKA: Then I rest my case.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am concerned about the language that the honourable chairperson has used. He has said that the executive director “shall” and in my view, it may not be fair to make it mandatory. Let us say, “may” and not “shall”. 

To say “shall” makes it mandatory that he has to serve the two terms –(Interjections)– yes but what happens if he does not meet the terms and conditions of the appointment by the Board?
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The appointment letter must have a time-frame. You may be incompetent but you have got your four years.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the four years but it seems this executive director will be alone. In short, there is no assistant. The problem is that when you have only the executive director and you decide that there will be other staff, you will cause a problem. That is why we amended the law to have a Deputy Attorney-General.

I would like to implore the chairperson that we indicate under clause 14 that there shall also be a deputy executive director –(Interjections) There are deputies elsewhere; listen to our justification – who will deputise - Look at all the laws we have made where we have put deputies and secretaries. It will be wrong for us to create a board where there is neither a deputy nor a secretary.

MR KASULE: What we have always done is to put an executive director. Where we have put deputy directors, we have got problems like what you saw in the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). Both are appointed by the minister and nobody wants to listen to the other. The board can appoint other staff members including the deputy director.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason we have had the issue of NSSF is that the deputy executive directors have not been told that they report to the executive director. We amended that in a certain law where we said, that there shall be a deputy executive director who would be answerable to the executive director. 

The justification is to avoid what you are trying to say that when the executive director is absent, you will pick anybody to appoint in his acting capacity. You are assuming he is there 24 hours a day.

When there is no executive director, there must be somebody who will work in his place. This must be recognised by the law. Here in Parliament, we have a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker.

According to all the laws we have made, we have had to avoid the situation of people fighting. We have said that there will be a deputy executive director who reports to the executive director.
 
MR MUGOYA: The concern of hon. Nandala-Mafabi is catered for under clause 6(r) and it states; “To perform such other functions, which in the opinion of the Board are necessary or expedient for the discharge of its functions under this Act.”
Therefore, we leave that entirely in the hands of the Board to avoid unnecessary dispute between – (Interruption) 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Such a substantial amendment could have been looked at by the chairperson of the committee because the conditions of a deputy executive director must be dealt with. The conditions cannot be the same with the executive director. Once you do it and you report - you see what is happening in the conflict of management with the executive director saying, “You report to me…” he is appointed by the minister. I find this difficult. 

We leave it to clause 6. If it is a policy, the Permanent Secretary will be an adviser on that board.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, further to that, it is important that when we making these laws, we factor in the size of the organisation we are creating and the cost implications of some positions. My view is that the Sugar Board is not that big an institution that will require a tall structure of governance and management.

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, it is not true that whenever we have created Boards, we have always provided for deputies. We have a case in point of the Uganda National Roads Authority Act, which does not provide for a deputy. I am about to bring a Bill here on Uganda Investment Authority. We are not providing for a deputy, among other many Bills we have made here.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that in this Bill, we move with what the committee has proposed and we do not provide for the position of the deputy chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 

MR KASULE: on functions of the executive director, Clause 15 (2) (e) substitute for the words, “registration of persons” appearing at the end of the paragraph, with the words, “the functions of the Board.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read it as it is. 

MR KASULE: “Cooperation with other leading agencies and organisations in the matters related to the functions of the Board” instead of registration of persons.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, that does not even sound well. We just plainly say, “under the provisions of this Act”; we do not mention anything to do with the Board.  

MR NZOGHU: I do not even see the relevance of this. I propose that we delete it because when you say, cooperation with other lead agencies and organisations in matters related to functions of the Board, it is obvious. Therefore, I think we just delete (e).

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not want them to cooperate with any one? Honourable minister, what was your rationale? 

MR WERIHKE: Madam Chairperson, I think there is some kind of redundancy here. Well, we had wanted to have the cooperation as it is indicated here with other agencies and organisations in matters related to the registration of persons but it seems it is actually redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I do not think so. You know, these are the functions of the executive director. Therefore, this is one of the functions - to cooperate with other lead agencies and organisations. Maybe we just say what hon. Mugoya said - under this Act, without being specific. However, I think he has to cooperate.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, when you read (h) “ensuring that the policies of the Board are implemented and that the agreed objective target and service standards are met” and also when you come to (j) “performing any other duties necessary for the implementation of this Act, as may be assigned to him or her by the Board”, then having (e) is something inconsequential, it is already implied there.

MR KASULE: Okay without much argument, I think we can say cooperation with other lead agencies and organisations in matters related to - (Interjection) - where hon. Mugoya said cooperation with other lead agencies and organisations in matters related to this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is fine.

MR MUGOYA: We are saying, cooperation with other lead agencies and organisations in relation to all matters provided under this Act. That was my proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, supposing the executive director wanted to work with the Sugar Board of Brazil, do you want to stop him?

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, when you read (j), it reads, “performing any other duty necessary for the implementation of this Act, as may be assigned to him or her by the Board.” That means that (e) is already incorporated in (j) because it is part of those duties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not.

MS KOMUHANGI: I would like to urge my colleagues to support collaboration because it is the strength of the organisation and emphasising it in its own, does not do any harm- (Interjections) - No, collaboration and networking are very important.

MR OTIENO: Madam Chairperson, in my view, I think the reason the committee came up with this proposal, to add this function of the Board is because they realised that (e) is redundant because it was talking about matters related to registration of persons. The committee realised that there was no need of putting this but because it is there – maybe, let us add there “functions of the Board”. It is just an afterthought because if you look at the justification of the committee, they did it because they said the work of registration of persons is not relevant to the functions of the Board.

That is why they decided to have it appear there and make relevance. Otherwise, even in the wisdom of the committee, (e) was redundant.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the justification says; a matter to do with registration of persons is outside the mandate of the Board. However, cooperation with other lead agencies should only be in relation to functions of the Board. Therefore, it was not an afterthought. I think it was put in the Bill erroneously –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: When you are an executive director, you have to make sure that the interest of the Board and the system you are running must have benefits - you are cooperating with leading agencies, which are working properly. These are the functions they have put in the law. I think the one who was trying to put this was emphasising that as a duty of an executive director, you must cooperate with other leading agencies in order to make sure that the interests of the Board you are serving are catered for - you have to cooperate, network and borrow a leaf from others. That is why they put leading agencies and if you do not cooperate - no man is an island. You must look at what others are doing. Therefore, they are giving you a particular person to do it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For instance, honourable members, supposing the tea farmers have issues and they want the collaboration of the sugar farmer, can’t they work together? – Yes, do not curtail their rights to associate.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In principle, we support cooperation within the framework under which the executive director would be performing his or her duties.  However, the proposal by hon. Mugoya seems to be broader than what the provision intends to achieve. The executive director is answerable to the Board. Therefore, when you say that he cooperates with other agencies, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it means that you have even gone beyond his functions and you are giving him broader powers. 

My view is that we look at what the committee has proposed because their proposal clearly addresses what the framers of this clause intended to achieve. I would like to appeal to the House that we adopt the proposal by the chairperson of the committee.
 
MR OTIENO: Let me get clarification from my colleague here. We should not make a law that will make the operations of the executive director impossible at times. Supposing the executive director is doing his/her work very well and because he is guarding his industry, there is a complaint from the tea growers, that the executive director of the Sugar Board is not cooperating with them or giving them information. In the law, it would mean that that secretary is ripe for firing or he is not performing because some other person is complaining that the executive director is not cooperating with them and yet, he is doing very well in his sector. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This time we need to be exhaustive when making this law. We do not want a situation where we shall be found amending Bills and laws every now and then. The argument here is whether to delete this clause or not. We do not lose anything if we do not delete it. 

We are mixing two things here; deleting and then amending the language in this clause. We should leave it there and give provision for the leaders so that at the time they need it, we shall not be required to come to this House and amend it. They will just take advantage and use that clause so we can leave the clause there but change the language – what is the meaning of the clause that we are adding? 

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, before we consider the issue of cooperation, I first would like to go back to the debate we had on Thursday last week, where Members were concerned about the mistake that was made by the licensing authority - the Uganda Investment Authority. It licensed a number of millers near each other. When we looked at that clause, we said, if we are to avoid confusion or overlaps, then we need cooperation with other lead agencies. 

Then, our concern was on the words, “registration of persons.” We said that we are looking at millers and that is why we amended it to be, “the functions of the Board.” I feel cooperation with other lead agencies is very important. It is necessary and we need it –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that in order to construct a factory, you need a lot of approvals. You cannot also get a license to deal in petroleum products, until NEMA has cleared you. That is the last license.  

Therefore, for this executive director of the Sugar Board to be able to license you, you must, for example, have cleared with NEMA, the KCCA council, health and so many other agencies. I think we should have cooperation with lead agencies and organisations in matters related with this law. Let us remove the words, “registration of persons” and substitute them with “cooperation with lead agencies.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR KASULE KASULE: We propose among the headnotes of staff of the Board;
16 (1), we substitute for the word “Authority” appearing at the end of the provision with the word “Board.”

The justification is to ensure consistency since the Bill establishes a Board and not an Authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended -

MR MUGOYA: We are becoming too repetitive. Instead of saying, “The board may appoint such other staff as may be necessary for the proper and efficient performance of the functions of the Board”, why don’t we say, “…for the efficient performance of its functions.” 

MR NZOGHU: I do not agree with hon. Mugoya. The essence of putting the word “efficient” is for the Board to have the latitude to measure whether the functions have been perfectly done or not. Actually “efficient” is a measurable aspect in monitoring but when you just say, “functions”, I do not agree with that. The word “efficient” is better suited there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think he wanted to say, “Its functions” instead of continuing to say “Board.” 
Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the past, we have not allowed things like clause 17 (b), (c), (d) and (e). We have always said that the money should be appropriated by Parliament. We have been throwing these out.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 17(b) is on grants. This is an institution that is just beginning and even if it is given grants, it can be appropriated; even grants are appropriated. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have to leave only clause 17(a). The justification is that even grants were appropriated.

Mr Chairman, you do not need to worry because we will appropriate everything and the Secretary to Treasury will allow it; the fees they collect and even if they are to be allowed to spend. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us delete clause 17 (b), (c), (d) and (e). We have done that with all the other laws. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 (b), (c), (d, (e) deleted.

Clause 18 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the funds of the Board shall be money appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of – that is okay. Let us delete the rest which we have already done. 

Now, clause 18, which you are talking about, I think it is not amended and we have to deal with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think hon. James Kakooza was saying that we forgot to mention clause 2 and it has to also be deleted. We only have clause 17(1)(a). Let us go to clause 18.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, then it ceases to be clause 17(1)(a), it now becomes clause 17. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, clause 17. Let us go to clause 18. The drafts people will deal with that.

MR MUSASIZI: My interpretation of clause 18 is that it intended to address provision (b),(c),(d) and (e) under clause 17. Now that they have gone, do we still need clause 18?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is talking about sound financial principles. There are many other areas of Public Finance Management Act which we need. That one should remain. There are other areas which might need the Public Finance Management Act.

MR MUSASIZI: Okay, Madam Chairperson, I now get the clarification and I would like to withdraw my argument. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19

MR KASULE: Clause 19 is under Part V licencing of mills. It is proposed in clause 19(2) substitute for sub-clause (2) the following:

“(2) A person who establishes or operates a jaggery mill without valid licence granted under subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 20 years or both. 
“(3) A person who establishes or operates a sugar mill or plant to process the by-products of sugarcane without a valid licence granted under subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding ten thousand currency points or imprisonment for life or both.”

The justification is to provide for different penalties since the gravity of the offences are different.

Honourable members, this is clause 19, under the headnote “licensing of mills -
    1) A person shall not establish or operate a sugar mill, jaggery mill or a plant to process the by-products of sugarcane without a valid licence granted for that purpose by the Board.
    2) That a person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points.“

In the wisdom of the committee, they said subsection (2) must have either a punitive action and subsection (3) - they are the ones proposing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what is the rationale? Why not three or five, why 20 years’ imprisonment?

MR KASULE: That a person who establishes or operates a jaggery mill without – honourable members, what the committee is doing, it is separating the sanctions for a mill and it is also for the jaggery mill differently.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, what is the rationale for 20 years’ sentence?

MR KASULE: According to the committee, it is deterrent – (Interjections) 0 Never to do it until you get a licence. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you drive without a licence, do you get 20 years’ imprisonment?

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for your wise guidance. Chairperson, in trade, there are some things people do that are not intentional. For example, through innovation, young people in certain areas come up with some innovative tools in order to gesture and come up some things. 

Long way back in Japan, if you tried to imitate the creation of a car, it was punitive. However, as innovation grew, they realised that in order to boost innovation, imitation of certain matters should only be fineable. Today, they erased it.

Mr Chairperson, within your wisdom from your committee, I do not think that anyone that comes up with that should be penalised by imprisonment. It does not cure anything. The most important thing is the currency points that you came up with. You fine, confiscate and close down the jaggery that he has come up with.

As legislators, it would be prudent for us not to bring up measures that criminalise matters of innovation but it should be penal in nature; fines would be the best. 

Therefore, my proposal is that we retain what we have at the moment.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Traditionally, we have always made our local brew from different sources including sugarcane. Locally, people can squeeze sugarcane and make a product through boiling to get local brew commonly known as “Waragi”. I would like to get some clarification, are we also intending to block our traditional ways of brewing drinks locally. (Laughter) Or is this not going to be affected by this punitive measure?

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I also know how this law relates to the Enguli Act? I would like to know the penalties under the Enguli Act.

MS KOMUHANGI: I would like to respond to what hon. Nsereko raised; that there should not be imprisonment at all, it should only be fines. However, I would like to remind you that you may provide for a fine and someone is not able to pay the fine. That is why they provide for reasonable time of imprisonment. They always go hand-in-hand because one person may fail to pay a fine and you give him a reasonable time of imprisonment.

The time should not be 20 years but there should be reasonable time as a deterrent measure. Can you concede hon. Nsereko; it is a standard?

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the issue of fines. If I am growing my own sugarcane and I decide to add value, why should I be punished yet you are encouraging value addition? I think we should fine those who do it without being licenced. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do about the sentence?

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, we are enacting a law for an industry, which has some realities. There has been much support from Government in this industry. We have very many people who are engaged in it. They are trying everything possible to get products out of the sugarcanes. 

Therefore, subjecting them to punitive kind of laws would not be fair. I want to concur with hon. Nsereko that we may consider a fine but not an imprisonment in any case. I think we should consider maintaining what is in the Bill; no imprisonment.

MR OTIENO: Madam Chair, this law, if we leave it in its current form will squeeze the life out of the ordinary Ugandans. Apart from it being very punitive, this law does not restrict this penalty to either somebody who is operating a jaggery for commercial purposes or for just his or her personal use. We need to clarify here that sometimes we operate a jaggery mill for our own domestic consumption – for subsistence purposes. Such a person, who is doing it for subsistence should not be subjected to the penalty as prescribed by this law. It should only apply to somebody who is operating a jaggery for commercial purposes not for subsistence purposes.

Secondly, this penalty of 20 years, Madam Chairperson, should be reduced to two years or nothing at all.

MR NZOGHU:  Hon. Otieno has given me the Floor, Madam Chair. I am looking at a peasant who has just one or two acres of cane or even less than an acre. But the person can think through to make an innovation to make fertilizers or any other thing. Now, Madam Chairperson, for me to be fined, for example, 500 currency points – which the chair is proposing – that is ten million. You can even calculate how much a local farmer can get from the one acre in a year. It cannot even be Shs 2 million.

I would propose that we reduce the currency points from 500 to 50 because when you put it at 50, it is one million.

Even the imprisonment period is too much. It should be six months. What are we curing?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to ask the minister; what was the mischief you wanted to cure by stopping people from doing jaggery?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think the board we have created must be empowered. The level of punishment maybe is too much according to how the people want to the sector and saw how destructive and disruptive the jaggeries are in the industry. I think we are agreeable to hon. Nsereko to say that the board should have power to license. If you do not have a license, you pay a fine and then, you are closed and then you do not go to prison but the punishment can be closure of that mill or jaggery and then paying a fine. So, it is up to the committee.

MS BAGUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is not the first law that we have made in this country. Therefore, we have to look at what has been happening with other laws. Whenever we are putting a sanction, a fine, we have to put an alternative just in case the person is not able to pay the fine or in case the person deliberately refuses to pay the fine.

This is my proposal; first of all, we look at the person as someone who is trying to work hard to get out of poverty and to improve our economy. So, whatever sanction we are putting has to be that which will deter him from doing something illegal but at the same time that that does not close his productivity completely. I am proposing that we make the currency points 100, that is Shs 5 million and at the same time we make that other alternative of imprisonment of six months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know we borrowed a lot from the white people but I think this was a legitimate trade. Brewing was a legitimate trade in Africa. The Bazungu said it was illegal. Then they started locking us up and fining us. So, should we continue making it illegal? 

MR WALUSWAKA: You had given me to speak, Madam Chairperson. The way the committee and the minister brought this up, is as if they want to kill the local brew. My proposal is that for the sugar mills even the 500 currency points – for an investor this is peanuts. However, for our jaggery, I want to propose that we remove the jaggery from the punitive action and the sugar mill - people pay 2000 currency points or imprisonment of ten years. However, the jaggery – (Interjections)- this is my proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think at this stage, we are battling between the rights of the people to earn their money and the right of the Government to regulate. I want us to go and think about it. 

I would like to ask the minister to move that we report so that we can think about all these. Some are too high, some –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, some of us come from that background. Hon. Kalule, you do not come from that background. Some of us do and we are here out of that money; that is why we want to give you information. 

When we talk about a jaggery, we have different sets of jaggeries. In the villages, there are jaggeries where we use cows to rotate and produce that liquid where you either sell to make sukari gulu or make waragi or make local brew. Then we have these jaggeries where some people use the hands. Then we have that where people use power. We have different sets of jaggeries. 

So, when we say jaggeries in this Bill, it means we shall find our friends in the villages imprisoned. We are creating space for these people to exploit these people even the more.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, that is why I have said, “let us go and reflect on it and then tomorrow, we can decide what is a jaggery and balance it with the right of the people to earn. Article 40 is important. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sugar Bill, 2016” and passed clauses 1, 3, 4, 6, 14, 15, 16 and 17 with amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: No, we did not consider clause 1. We started with clause 2. Clause 1 is on interpretation. We did not touch it. Up to 18.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sugar Bill, 2016” and passed clauses 2,3,4,6,14,15,16,17 and 18  with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, find time to study the stages we are going to. They can have very fundamental impact on our people and the economy. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock in the afternoon. Thank you.

(House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
