Thursday, 6 November 2014

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to make a small adjustment on the Order Paper; item No.6 will come immediately after the laying of the papers. The minister would like to make a statement in relation to the Public Finance Bill. Thank you.

2.58
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to a protest against the South African Government. 

This morning I was travelling to Windhoek, Namibia, via South Africa and I was there for a short period of not more than 30 minutes in the transit lounge of South Africa. I was transiting through South Africa and I was denied entry or denied to proceed with my trip because the South African government needs a transit visa for people travelling through South Africa to most of the southern African countries. 

Madam Speaker, I feel this is totally unfair to Ugandans. This kind of mistreatment should not be done to Ugandans after we participated in the liberation struggle of South Africa, let alone the good enabling environment we have created for the South African companies to do business in Uganda. I had an urgent issue to attend to in Namibia but I could not proceed.

Madam Speaker, we transit through other European countries like Britain, France, Brussels, without being subjected to getting transit visas. If it can happen to us as Members of Parliament, what do you think other Ugandans are going through? We hear Ugandans wake up at 3.00 a.m. to line up at the South African High Commission for visas and they wait up to 3.00 p.m. and at times they do not even work on them.

I would like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to strongly protest this and it to the attention of the High Commission of South Africa so that something can be done urgently. Madam Speaker, I heard you talk about this matter on Tuesday-(Interruption)

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I want to first thank the honourable member for giving me way to give information in regard to South Africa’s treatment of Ugandan citizens seeking visas. 

We are Members of the Pan African Parliament and we represent this country at the Pan African Parliament.Most times when we go with assistants, for example if you are a young mother and you are going with a child, you find that they give you less days but even getting this visa is hard.You cannot call them and they do not call you. People have to stand at the gate from morning up to midnight and this is very challenging. 

Even when they give you the visa, it doesnot cover those days. If I am going to South Africa with a helper, for example, and my invitation is saying that I will be there for two weeks, it means that my helper will be there for two weeks as well. However, you find that the helper is given only 10 days and when she is checking out to come back to Uganda, she is barred because she has over stayed her visa. 

I, therefore, want to thank the honourable member for raising this issue because I have witnessed it myself. I have gone to the South African High Commission and seen Ugandans struggling there trying to get visas to go to neighbouring countries. That is the information I wanted to add. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have joined all the other African countries on this matter. In the last session that we had in the Pan African Parliament, the President of the Pan African Parliament, the Rt Hon. Bethel Amadi, who is the equivalent of the Speaker, was detained at the Oliver Tambo Airport.This forced the members to raise this matter with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs andthe Ministry of Internal Affairs of South Africa because it was an embarrassment. 

If the President of a Parliament can be detained, and it took calls to his high commission to make interventions to have this sorted -So this is not limited to here, and I think the matter we put to them is: where is the spirit of pan Africanism? Where is the spirit of the African Union? 

Madam Speaker, we are on the right track to put it to the Government of South Africa to realise that Africans made a lot of contributions to enable South Africa reach where it has reached.South Africans and the Government of South Africa should take this seriously and address this matter. We cannot be mistreated in our own continent yet you can go to some African countries and countries in other continents without even a visa. Even while transiting, they are now demanding that we must have a transit visa and this is in an African country. 

So I think the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here must also take it up at the level of the Summit when they meet as African foreign ministers under the AU.They must take this up seriously with the heads of state; otherwise, we are going to see a situation where other African countries are going to revenge. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come up with a statement to inform Ugandans about what they should do. Sometime back when Nigeria became very strict by restricting Kenyans from entering Nigeria, Kenyans did the same. They also put restrictions against Nigerians until they came on the table and agreed. If South Africans fail to adhere to the good relationship we are extending to them, as Ugandans we should be able to do the same. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, sometime back the Nigerians had the same problem.A delegation of businessmen from Nigeria arrived at Johannesburg and they were all denied visas. So what the Government didwas, for the next flight of South African Airways to Lagos, they allowed them to fly and they also said no one should get off that plane.When they got to Lagos, the Government said,“no one should get into this country” so they had to fly back with their passengers. That forced them to negotiate and I think now the Nigerians are getting better treatment. 

So honourable members, I appeal to the Prime Minister to direct the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come and speak to us on this issue because Ugandans are really suffering. Thank you.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming students of Makerere University Business School. That school is in Nakawa Division represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Sempala. You are welcome. We also welcome students of New Amsterdam College, Buwenge.I do not know where they are seated. They are represented by hon. Mbagadhi and hon. Nabirye of Jinja.You are welcome. We also welcome the pupils of Amuca Primary School in Lira.They are represented by hon. Geoffrey Omara and hon. Joy Ongom. You are welcome.

Laying of Papers

3.06
MS BETTY AMONGI ONGOM (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of Uganda to the 131stInter Parliamentary Union Assembly held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 12 to 16 October 2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The report will be discussed at a date to be agreed upon. 

3.07
MRS ROSEMARY NANSUBUGA SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay onthe Tablefinancial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following:

i) The Parliamentary Commission

ii) Hotel and Tourism Training Institute

iii) National Council of Sports

iv) National Medical Stores

v) Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project

vi) Targeted HIV/AIDS and Laboratory Services (THALAS) Program and Management Sciences for Health (INC) subgrant (Joint Clinical Research Centre) cooperate agreement No. AID-617-A-10-00006 and sub agreement No. 617-A-00-09-00006-00.

vii) Uganda National Roads Authority – Road Sector Support Project (RSSP II) – ADF Loan – project ID No.P-UG-DBO-018

viii) Uganda Tourism Board

ix) Uganda National Roads Authority- the Roads Sector Support Project I - ADF loan Nos. 210015000644 and 2100150013494 and grant No. 210015004668-Kabale-Kisoro/ Bunagana-Kyanika Road

x) Local Government Finance Commission

xi) Joint Clinical Research Centre

xii) The Uganda Aids Commission

xii) The Uganda National Cultural Centre.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to present financial statements for the year ended 30June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following:

i) Kampala Capital City Authority

ii) Uganda Management Institute

iii) Amnesty Commission

iv) Parliamentary Commission

v) Uganda National Roads Authority

vi) The East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project– Uganda Revenue Authority Component– IDA credit No. 4147 UG

vii) The Uganda Aids Commission

viii) The Local Government Finance Commission

ix) Uganda Law Reform Commission

Madam Speaker, allow me also to lay the reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30June 2013 for the following:

i) Insurance Regulatory Authority 

ii) Public Service Commission

iii) Uganda Wildlife Authority

iv) National Water and Sewerage Corporation

v) NEC Luwero Industries Limited

vi) Uganda Communications Commission

vii) Uganda Broadcasting Corporation

viii) National Enterprise Corporation

ix) NEC Tractor Project Limited

x) NEC Farm Katonga 

xi) Uganda Investment Authority. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable commissioner. All the reports are sent to the various relevant committees except for the ones of the Local Government Finance Commission, which shall go to the Local Government Accounts Committee.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are government institutions that for the last three years,or even seven years, have never submitted reports, for example the Privatisation Unit (PU). The PERD Act is categorical and clear that they are supposed to report every quarter on the performance of that sector and you are very much aware of this. During the Budget process, we raised this matter but Ministry of Finance is adamant that they are not reporting.

Another institution is NPART. They have never come here nor have they presented a report. They are supposed to come to Parliament to seek for extension but for the last three years, they have never come to seek for extension and they are operating illegally. 

I really want to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on why the Minister of Finance has continued to defy this Parliament and the law we make.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to first correct my brother, hon. Ekanya; it is not quarterly but bi-annual. If they have not done it, it is because of the law; so the person who is responsible should be held liable.

Madam Speaker, parastatals or state enterprises are supposed to contribute to the government coffersin form of dividends.I am not referring to those who are doing business. Now, when they do not produce accounts, it means they are hiding our dividends. If there are any state enterprises, which are making profits like Privatisation Unit, which is selling our enterprises and not remitting money, it is high time we make a decision as Parliament. That is why some time back I proposed that we should bring a motion here, which is in your office, to investigate PU. Up to now, I have never been given an opportunity to present my motion. One of the dangerous units we have in Uganda, which has swallowed us, is the Privatisation Unit. 

Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence; when will you give me an opportunity to present that motion?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, as soon as you bring it to my office, I will put it on the Order Paper. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya asked something about PU but I raised a matter concerning a motion. I am sorry; the minister has not answered. Is it procedurally right that we allow her not to answer?

THE SPEAKER: The minister is here to sit in Parliament so she will respond. Let us finish with the petitions.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

PETITION BY FORMER WORKERS OF UGANDA POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION (UNDER 45 YEARS OF AGE AT THE TIME OF DIVESTITURE OF UPTC BUT WERE ON PERMANENT AND PENSIONABLE TERMS)

3.17
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving this petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This is the humble petition of the former employees of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation presented by Teopista Nabulya Ssentongo, Workers’ Representative. 

Showeth and states that the petitioners are former workers of UPTC who were employed on permanent and pensionable terms but were later transferred to Uganda Telecommunications Limited (UTL), Uganda Posts Limited (UPL), Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and Post Bank Limited (PBL) as a result of the divestiture of UPTC. 

Around 2002, the four entities embarked on a massive retrenchment exercise of former workers of UPTC through which some workers were summarily dismissed and terminated without payment of their pensions. 

In 2003, the petitioners, through their representatives, Mwase Bernard and Arthur Ndawula, filed a suit in the High Court and judgment passed in 2013 in favour of the petitioners. According to the ruling, former workers of UPTC were awarded damages, pension arrears and monthly pension, and UTL, UPL, UCC and PBL were ordered to effect the payment. 

Whereas the former workers of UPTC, who were transferred to PBL, have been paid their damages, pension arrears, and are now receiving their monthly pensions in compliance with the court order, the former workers of the other three entities have not been paid to date. 

Despite several efforts made by the petitioners to claim their benefits –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable; you are not supposed to read the entire petition. Read the source and the prayers.

MS NABULYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Wherefore by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament carries out an investigation into the conduct of UPT, UPL, UTL and UCC to establish why petitioners have, to date, not been paid their benefits. And your petitioners as in duty-bound will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The petition is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back.

PETITION BY THE NATIONAL UNION OF CLERICAL COMMERCIAL, PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL EMPLOYEES (NUCCPTE) AND THE EMPLOYEES OF BANK OF BARODA
3.17
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, I also beg to present a petition under the same rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The petition is of the National Union of Clerical Commercial Professional and Technical Employees (NUCCPTE), a trade union, which is affiliated to the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) presented by Ms Theopista Nabulya Ssentongo representing workers.

The trade union presents this petition on behalf of the workers of Bank of Baroda who are members of this trade union. They beg Parliament to look into issues that are barring the management of Bank of Baroda from according the employees of the bank their rights. They ask Parliament to urge Government through the relevant ministry to take keen interest in the dispute between Bank of Baroda Uganda Limited and the National Union of Clerical Commercial Professional and Technical Employees, with a view of establishing good industrial relations with NUCCPTE, which is their trade union. 

Your petitioners as in the duty-bound will ever pray and hereto, the humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition is referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back.

PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF DABAN SUBCOUNTY IN BUSIA DISTRICT 
OVER LACK OF ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE MEDICAL FACILITIES

3.22
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving this petition under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure. 

This is the humble petition of the people of DabanSub County in Busia District over lack of access to affordable medical facilities within the subcounty presented by hon. John Mulimba, Samia Bugwe County North MP.

Now, therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves and urges Government that:
1. A health centre III is constructed in Daban Sub County, just like it has done in other subcounties.
2. The PHC fund is distributed to two health centres in the subcounty as mentioned under.

Your petitioners as in duty-bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the same on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition is sent to Committee on Health for perusal and report back.

PETITION BY ELDERS AND RESIDENTS OF KAWAALA ZONE (II) LC 1, NAMUNGOONA ZONE AND KASUBI PARISH-LUBAGA ZONE AGAINST IMMINENT MASS EVICTION AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS FACED AS A CONSEQUENCE OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY, UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY AND THE NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION

3.23
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure to present the petition of the elders and residents of Kawaala zone II LC1 and Namungoona zone, both in Kasubi Parish, Rubaga Division, against the imminent mass eviction and the environmental hazards faced as a consequence of negligence of KCCA, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Uganda National Roads Authority and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

Your humble petitioners wherefore by this petition pray that Parliament resolves that:
1. The activities of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation in the construction of sewage treatment plant at Lubigi wetland of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in the irregular designation by the wetlands department, together with the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), of the area as a wetland be investigated.

2. Kampala Capital City Authority be urged to routinely maintain the road network in the area.

3. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) be urged to conform to legal and environmental standards in the implementation of the road project in the area.

4. The impending eviction of residents in the area and other actions incidental to this matter be immediately stopped.

5. The residents who have suffered injury, loss and pain as a result of the activities of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the Wetlands Department of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the National Environment Management Authority and Kampala Capital City Authority, together with the Uganda National Roads Authority be compensated. 

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto have appended their signatures and a number of annexure to the petition. I beg to lay the petition on the Table. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is sent to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the people of Uganda petition Parliament, the peoples’ representatives, they want some interventions, they want action. I want to appeal that we take these petitions seriously. 

There is one particular petition, which came to this House in 2012, about Kaazi land for the Uganda Scouts Association. Land encroachers were coming from all over the place. Up to now, this House has never considered it. Two weeks ago, people came claiming 60 acres out of the 120 acres. We know that the Committee of Infrastructure is very busy and has a lot of work, but I think two years with a petition is too long. We need to work on this petition.

THE SPEAKER: We will urge the committee to move expeditiously on all outstanding petitions.

3.28
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise here on a matter of public importance regarding a young Ugandan man by the name of Sam Mugumya who has gone missing. We are only reading contradicting statements about him in the press. The family members came to see me this morning and they want assistance from the government so that they know where this Ugandan is. I have also seen today’s Daily Monitor reporting the same incidence. 

This is one of our youth members in FDC but he has not been traced for the last few days. We have read in the press that the Army spokesperson said he is being held outside this country. If it is so, can the government clarify to the family members and to Ugandans? 

I think if any Ugandan is injured or in pain, irrespective of where they come from or age the Government owes Ugandans an explanation about what is happening to this Ugandan. We saw when the two Americans contracted Ebola in Liberia; the American Government chartered two planes to transport them out of Liberia. Could we have that feeling for Ugandans wherever they are, whatever age, religion and party they belong to such that we all feel a sense of belonging to our country? 

The Minister of Defence and the spokesperson of the Army were quoted on that matter. The Minister of Defence or the Minister of Internal Affairs should make a statement so the parents of this young man know where he is. We know he had been involved in our activities including Walk to Work and many others. I remember one time he was arrested in Bombo as we were trying to enter Bombo to deliver Christmas gifts. That is last time- So can we know from the Government where the young man is? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will be able to say something but members, let us finish with the Order Paper; let us go to item 4(V). 

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF BANDA AND KIREKA CONCERNING UNLAWFUL 
AND FORCEFUL EVICTIONS BY THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

3.31
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a petition under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The humble petitioners are residents of Banda and Kireka and the subject matter of the petition is the forceful and unlawful evictions of your humble petitioners from their property by KCCA and the Police on behalf of Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) and Rift Valley Railways (RVR). 

Your petitioners whereof pray that Parliament resolves that:
1. The evictions by KCCA, URC, RVR and the Police are unlawful and should therefore be halted until Parliament investigates this matter.

2. The Government, through the Attorney General, KCCA, URC and RVR, rightfully compensate your humble petitioners and any occupants in the railway reserve land as per the concession agreement.

3. There is need for a complete inventory of people who reside in these areas, and marking and demarcation of railway reserve land to avoid any more conflict.

4. Parliament appoints a select committee to inquire into the concession between the Government and the Rift Valley Railways.

5. Parliament investigates and oversees the mandate and jurisdiction of KCCA over this matter. 

Madam Speaker, your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and do hereby append their signatures to this petition.

I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. As hon. Kabahenda comes up, I want to introduce Mr John Orach, the lead petitioner for the older persons on whose behalf hon. Kabahenda is presenting.

PETITION BY OLDER PERSONS ON SOCIAL SECURITY

3.33
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition from the older persons under the umbrella of the Uganda Social Protection Platform, the National Network for Older Persons of Uganda, the Uganda Reach the Aged Association and Allied Organisations for Supporting the Social Security for Older Persons presented by Ms Flavia Kabahenda Rwabohoro, the MP of Kyegegwa District and the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Social Protection.

The petitioners pray Parliament resolves that:
1. Government publishes a plan with a clear timeframe for rolling out the social assistance grant for empowerment programmes to all districts.

2. Government allocates resources to fund the national roll out of the SAGE programme to all districts. 

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto append their signatures. These are 1,500 signatures and they are arranged by region. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition should be sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for expeditious handling and report back. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a former Minister of State, hon. Robert Sebunya, and Presidential Advisor on Buganda Affairs. Join me in welcoming pupils from Kibanga Primary School, Kalangala, represented by hon. Fred Badda and hon. Carolyn Nanyondo. They are welcome.Join me in welcoming students of Uganda Christian University, represented by hon. Betty Bakireke and hon. Peace Kusasira. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.Yesterday you rightly guided the House on the Prime Minister’s question time so that we can make this Parliament very prudent and effective.I am seated next to the former chairman of therules committee and we were trying to analyse circumstances under which petitions can be brought to Parliament. When I hear two petitions like one by the honourable member from Makindye and hon. Kasibante, they seem to belike injunctions from court. 

The Committee of Presidential Affairs toured the railway line and appreciated how KCCA managed to remove people who were selling tomatoes in the middle of the railway line. They gave them adequate notice and they cleared the railway line.Now, to see a petition coming before Parliament that the eviction was unlawful and that the committee should investigate,I want to be advised, Madam Speaker,on whether such petitions will not make the work of other Government departments become practically impossible.

We found people selling tomatoes in the middle of the road with built houses and now they claim that the eviction is unlawful. How can we be helped as a Parliament to be more effective? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to prejudge the issue. I do not know whether the people whom they are representing were selling tomatoes. I think there is a debate in the public domain as to the extent of the land that belongs to RVR or to Uganda Railways.So I think let us not prejudge; let us receive the petition, if they are tomato sellers or if they have encroached on the railway land, we shall dismiss the petition.Thank you.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, we have taken note of the inquiries from the honourable members about the Privatisation Unit and NPART. I undertake that there will be a report in this House within one month from both units.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, recognising the fact that the Government has received a number of new proposed amendments from honourable members of Parliament, including but not limited to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Niwagaba, hon. Ekanya; and aware that Government requires time to study, internalise and harmonise the new amendments in order to facilitate speedy consideration of the Public Finance Bill, I beg to move that Parliament stands over consideration of the Public Finance Bill up to next week.Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

3.39
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I find this motion by the minister novel, strange, and contemptuous of our Rules of Procedure.

The Bill referred to was at committee stage of the whole House and I will invite you to look at rule 122 (3) of our Rules of Procedure. The particular motion by the minister could only be moved when you are in the Chair as the Chairperson and not as the Speaker. For that reason, I believe that motion should be rejected. Besides that, Madam Speaker, it would only be the Committee of the whole House to report that they are unable to complete the business of further consideration of the Bill at the stage we stopped, for us to see whether we can stand it over or not.

I believe, therefore, that this particular motion by the minister should be opposed and we proceed to consider this important Bill, which many Ugandans are waiting for.Therefore, I pray that the House goes to committee stage and we consider the Bill as presented.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance is the mover of that Bill. It is also true that we are expecting amendments, which we requested members to present and which I also have not seen. I do not think that staying over a matter for Thursday so as to resume on Tuesday is too much of a bother. As for the procedure, we can go down and do it formally if that is what you want.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

3.42
Clause 8

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Chairperson and honourable members, recognising the fact that the Government has received a number of new proposed amendments from Members of Parliament, including but not limited to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Niwagaba and hon. Ekanya; and aware that Government requires time to study, internalise and harmonise the new amendments in order to facilitate speedy consideration of the Public Finance Bill, I beg to move that Parliament stands over consideration of the Public Finance Bill up to next week.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Sebunya): Madam Chairperson, as you know the Government is the mover of the Bill. I have also been told that hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Ekanya and hon. Niwagaba have come up with new amendments that Government needs to look at because this is Committee Stage. So I humbly say that we can allow them till next week. Well aware that this Bill is very important, we will wait for next week.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. First of all, we understand the position the Minister of Finance is in; nevertheless, this Bill has stayed with us since 2012 and the people in finance are complaining that we have decided not to pass the Bill and that we have hampered their operations.At the time we start to deal with the Bill, the same Ministry of Finance, which has been complaining, is the one now saying that we should stay it. 

Madam Chairperson, the reason as to why they are raising all these fundamental issues is because they had wanted to erode the powers of Parliament. When Parliament said we are awake, we are raising these issues and we should deal with them, finance is running away.Since we are now at Committee Stage, this report is for the whole House and the Bill is ours. They can withdraw it, they can refuse to assent to it, but let us pass the Bill. 

Madam Chairperson, we have been waiting for an opportunity to amend the Public Finance and Accountability Act and today we have got an opportunity. Yesterday, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya raised an issue that the old Public Finance and Accountability Act that we are trying to amend has no sanctions for people who make mistakes. The accounting officers can go scot-free, the Secretary to the Treasury and the Minister of Finance can do what they want. This is an opportunity for us to amend the law.It is our law – the public finance law. Whatever is public is ours; it is not for the Minister of Finance and her staff.

Madam Chairperson, I want to plead with you. I know the Minister of Finance is a good lady and she means well, unlike some of those staff of Ministry of Finance that I have worked with and they are my friends. Let us work on this law.

Madam Chairperson, we should proceed and amend the rules and deal with it. They may refuse to assent to it, but we should finish the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, you proposed some amendments. I advised you to draft them and present them, but I have not seen them. No one is saying that we throw away the law; what they are saying is, “Can we differ until Tuesday?” Is that unreasonable? Minister please –

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The practice has been that if you hand over laws, we proceed with the others that are not contentious and then the minister comes in at the end. Why is this different? We know the Bill belongs to government, but there are contentious issues. Let us stand over them and proceed with the others; when they are ready, they will find us. They are many clauses - eighty of them - and we have done only three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is not true; we have already done more than that. Honourable members, I have made my ruling. Minister, move the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume, and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Finance Bill, 2012”, and has asked for an adjournment and deferred considerations for one week. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Not for one week; until Tuesday.

MR KAJARA: Until Tuesday, next week. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THEWHOLE HOUSE
3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, sorry to take you back, but I had raised the issue of the young man and I expected the Minister of Defence to say something about it.



3.49
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the spokesperson for the Ministry of Defence did report to the public that one of our citizens by the name of Mugumya and three others have been apprehended by the DRC authorities. This information came to us through our liaison office in Beni.

In Beni, we have an office which is manned by officials of the defence forces of Uganda, DRC, and UN. So when the DRC authorities apprehended these Ugandans, they reported to this liaison office and produced these people in that office. They were witnessed by our people and the DRC authorities decided to take them to their capital city in Kinshasa. 

We have accordingly, through diplomatic channels, requested that we know why these Ugandans were arrested and that they be returned to our country. We therefore wait for a response through the diplomatic channels in the DRC Government. I thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I wish the statement could include our former MP, hon. Kipoi, so that the whole country can know where our people are. They are Ugandans, whether they are former MPs or not. So Madam Speaker, through you, the minister should also give a report about hon. Kipoi because the last time we heard, he was arrested in Congo. Most obliged.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we are worried about our former colleague because we are receiving information, though contradicting, that hon. Kipoi was hanged. It is on that ground that we need you to report to Ugandans whether those rumours running around are true or not.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Defence, do you have any idea about that?

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, sometime early this year, the issue of hon. Kipoi came to the Floor of this House. I did report that we had wanted him to be repatriated to Uganda because he had charges to answer here, but our colleagues, the authorities in the DRC, have not respected our request and therefore hon. Kipoi has not been repatriated to Uganda. We have no report that he has passed on, but given this information by our colleague, we will make further inquiry with the DRC authorities.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT 
TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. ALI MAZURUI

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I stand here to move a motion for this august House to pay tribute to a gallant son of Africa, an educationist, a scholar; somebody who has provided academic leadership not only in this region but the entire world, the late Prof. Ali Mazrui. 

He was born on the 24 February 1933 in Mombasa and died on the 12 October 2014. I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker and my colleagues, Prof. Ali Mazrui, an educationist, a scholar, an educator and an African was born in Mombasa, educated in Kenya, UK, and immediately after his education at Oxford University, Prof Mazrui joined Makerere University here in Kampala, where he served as head of Department of Political Science and a Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences. He served at Makerere University until 1973 when he was forced into exile by Idi Amin. 

When he had joined Makerere University in 1963, his name quickly became synonymous with academic excellence and a deep rooted desire for social-economicgrowth on the African Continent. For the ten years Prof. Mazrui stayed at Makerere University from 1963 to 1973, he was dearly remembered for his distinguished service. He laid a very strong foundation for the Department of Political Science where he served not only as a head of department but also as a professor. He nurtured and touched almost all the brains of the academicians we have in Uganda today.

In 1974, he joined the University of Michigan as a professor and later he was appointed as Director of the Centre for Afro-American and African studies, where he served very diligently between 1978 and 1981. 

In 1989, he was appointed to the faculty of Binghamton State University of New York as the Albert Schweitzer Professor in Humanities and Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies.

Prof. Mazrui served all over the world. In addition to his appointmentas the Albert Schweitzer Professor in Humanities, professor in political science, African studies, philosophy, interpretation and culture, and Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies, Prof. Mazrui also held three concurrent faculty appointments as Albert Luthuli Professor-at-large in the humanities and development studies at the University of Jos in Nigeria.

Prof. Mazrui has served in very many professional organisations as an academician, a professor, teacher, and a scholar. He also served as President of the African Studies Association in USA and as Vice-President of the International Political Science Association, and as a special advisor to the World Bank. He has also served on the American Muslim Council in Washington DC. 

During his life tenure, he did quite a lot for Africa and the globe at large. Prof. Mazrui’s research interests included African politics, international political culture, political Islam and North-South relations. He is the author and co-author of more than twenty books. The list of books and journals is quite big.

He first rose to prominence as a critic of some of the accepted orthodoxies of African intellectuals in the 1960s and 1970s. He was critical of African socialism and all strains of Marxism. He argued that communism was a Western import just as unsuited for the African condition as the earlier colonial attempts to install European type of governments. He used to argue that a revised liberalism could help the continent and described himself as a proponent of a unique ideology of African liberalism. 

At the same time, he was a prominent critic of the current world order. Prof. Mazrui believed the current capitalist system was deeply exploitative of Africa and the West rarely, if ever, lived up to their liberal ideals and could be described as global apartheid. He opposed western interventions in the developing world such as in Iraq and many others.He was also long opposed to many of the policies of Israel, being one of the first to try to link the treatment of Palestinians with South Africa’s apartheid. 

In the recent years, Prof. Mazrui had also become a well-known commentator on Islam and Islamism.While rejecting violence and terrorism, Prof. Mazrui praised some of the anti-imperialist sentiments that played an important role in modern Islamic fundamentalism. He has also argued that Sharia law was not incompatible with democracy.

Madam Speaker, Prof. Mazrui held positions of responsible leadership at various levels. Just to mention a few, he was Director at the Institute of Global Cultural Studies in Binghamton State University of New York; he was a professor of political science, African studies and philosophy; he was Chancellor at Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology in Nairobi; he was a senior scholar in African studies and the President of the Association of Muslim Social Scientists. 

He was a member to very many important academic and non-academic organisations in Uganda, Africa and the world over.

Prof. Mazrui was a Fellow of the African Academy of Sciences; a member of Pan African Advisory Council to UNICEF; Vice-President of the World Congress of Black Intellectuals; member of the United Nations Commission on Transitional Corporations. He was also a distinguished visiting professor at many universities and a member of the advisory board of directors of the Detroit Chapter of Africare. The list of the organisations is quite many, Madam Speaker and colleagues.

Prof. Mazrui was a regular contributor to many newspapers, television programmes, you name it. All these earned him a number of awards: the Millennium Tribute for Outstanding Scholarship; Special Award from the Association of Muslim Social Scientist; honorary doctorate of letters from various universities of fields which include divinity, humane letters and sciences of development. Makerere University also gave him an award and various universities in Guyana and so many other awards. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this was a giant son of Africa, an educationist, scholar, parent, father and friend to many. Because of the above, I want to move that this august House pays tribute to this son of Africa. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before hon. Akena comes to the Floor, honourable members, I just want to inform you about the invitation by the Cabinet to play football with the parliamentary team on Sunday as curtain raisers to the match of Ethiopia and Uganda. So, the ladies, who are ready and part of the usual team of footballers, please let us organise ourselves and go and smash the Cabinet. (Laughter) Hon. Opendi is going to be the goalkeeper and she wants to say something.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This football match is dubbed, “Protect the Goal Campaign”. We want to re-engage the leadership in this country in the fight against HIV/AIDS by using football as a platform. 

You are all aware of the various strides that Uganda had made earlier in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Unfortunately, we seem to be losing the battle. So we want to have a national launch, which is scheduled for 9th of November. His Excellency the President will be there to officiate and of course, most importantly, lead the Cabinet team to play with the parliamentary team. 

Madam Speaker, this is a global campaign that the heads of state committed themselves to on the 23rd of June. So we want to have this function at the national level. We shall then also roll this out to the districts, using football as a platform to speak to our people about HIV/AIDS, most especially the youth who are indulging in very risky sexual behaviour that is actually impacting negatively on their lives. 

We expect Members of Parliament to turn up in big numbers and most importantly, let us all protect ourselves as a goalkeeper protects his goal. Thank you, Madam Speaker.The venue is Namboole. We will start at 10.00a.m. but the actual football match between Parliament and the Executive will kick off at 1.00 p.m.

4.06
Mr JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a great son of Africa. 

Prior to Mazrui’s writings and publications, the commentary on Africa was not the best and much of it was not provided by Africans themselves.In the early 1980s, there was a popular book calledThe Africans, written by a journalist from the Los Angeles Times.This journalist had spent four years in Africa but he wrote the book trying to encompass all that was going on in Africa, and much of that book was very unflattering to the Africans.

Admittedly, there were many failures across the Continent and there were difficulties and challenges. However, this so called expert in the name of David Lamb embellished the weaknesses in the African society and the challenges of governance, which existed at that time.

In the first instance, the late Prof. Mazrui produced a series called The Africans as well, but gave a better perspective of Africa’s role in the world and the influences which Africa’s interaction with other parts of the world had brought upon Africa, and he brought the Africans perspective.When you characterise Mazrui’s philosophy, it was hinged more on humanism, though personally I had some difficulties with some of his perspectives. 

His contribution to the intellectual debate and to understanding Africans and Africa, and to give an intellectual vision of where Africans should be aiming at, is a great contribution to this continent and to the political perspectives of where we have been and where we intend to go. As the honourable minister has mentioned, in the course of his life, quite frequently, Prof Mazrui’s positions ended up causing him conflict, sometimes within the very institutions where he served. However, he remained true to his beliefs, to his vision, and left us a legacy which we can pick up from and continue to develop a perspective for Africa. 

As we try to honour the late Prof Mazrui, the real challenge for future generations of Africa is to really understand what he tried to transmit and to work towards getting our own perspective of where Africa is and where Africa should be.To me, that is the best Mazrui has given us. As for those who may have not read David Lamb’s book, I would advise somebody to look for it. It is available on Amazon. It is not complimentary but gives a perspective of what others thought of Africa and gave their perspective as experts on Africa. Definitely, Mazrui’s depiction of Africa and Africans is a far better legacy which we wish to follow.

I cannot really say too much about such a great man, whose work started from long before I existed. All I can say ismay his soul rest in eternal peace and his works continue to enlighten the future generation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR JOHN KEN–LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Minister of Education for plotting that important motion.

I am not surprised that hon. Akena was partially disturbed by Mazrui’s interpretation of certain things because at one time, he became very critical about hon. Akena’s father’s invasion of the Lubiri as well as the abrogation of the 1962 Constitution (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I happen to have been a great friend of Prof. Ali Mazrui and I would like to pay tribute to him. On top of the list of many books which the honourable minister has mentioned, Prof. Ali Mazrui authored over thirty text books and some of the most telling inspiring books included, A Tale Of Two Edens, The Trial Of Christopher Okigbo, and The Politics of War and the Culture of Violence. Those were very prominent books in the understanding of the philosophy of culture and war.

As a research assistant of Prof. Mazrui at Makerere University, I remain to state the glory that I saw when I was working in the Department of Political Science. It is quite true that if it were not for Prof Mazrui’s nurturing, I would not be what I am today. I am able to command because of Prof Mazrui. (Laughter)

Prof. Ali Mazrui mentored me; he groomed me and even sponsored my basic education. Ali Mazrui was one of the most effective communicators of our time.He was also a debater of style. Whenever he spoke in a contest of words of literature, people admired him and he always ended up victorious.

Prof. Mazrui, by character sketch, was endowed with intellectual skills and a rare art of oratorical prowess. He spoke and when he spoke, in whatever he spoke he conquered the world.That is why, while debating with the late Dr Akena Adoko in the KCC so many years ago on the role of intellectuals in Africa, Prof Mazrui came out with a definition of the African intellectual, which has not been challenged up to now. He argued, in definition, that an intellectual is a person who is fascinated by ideas and has acquired the skills to handle some of those ideas effectively. Akena Adoko did not have words to respond to that definition. 

Most importantly, there was the debate between him and Prof. Walter Rodney, which took place at Makerere University in the presence of Prof. Webster, a historian of prominence at Makerere University at that time. I was young but I was following what was going on. I remember the skill that Prof. Mazrui used to apply whenever he was talking; more often than not, when he was talking to the students - what you call the common lecture or a public lecture - every part of his lecture was popular and attracted the attention of so many people.

We would like to pay tribute to him because he was a man that we may never get again. We are just privileged that we have had him; otherwise, he was not the kind of person we would easily have associated ourselves with. In respect of that, I would like to propose that Makerere University and the Government of Uganda put up some memorial monument to remember him.

For those of you who did law, and the Speaker of Parliament is a former student of Makerere University School of Law, it was Mazrui’s deanship that started the school of law currently in Makerere. It was during the time that he was Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences that the first department of law was started. We would like to pay tribute to him, including those of us who are still grappling with ideas of law.  

Finally, in respect of the role he has played, allow me to recite a poem. I have been reciting poems for so many people – (Laughter)- and I think that it would be most unfair not to recite a poem in honour of my mentor, Prof. Ali Mazrui. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, recite your poem quickly.

MR KEN-LUYAMUZI: I am just reciting the poem whose title is, “Tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui”

Tribute to Professor Ali Mazrui
Mazrui, Ali Mazrui, Al’amin Mazrui
When you departed, Professor
It was the darkest of days 
The clouds invaded the sun
The stars chased the moon
On the orders of the Lord.

You were a man of joy,
With a sense of humour
And a voice of command
A thinker of passion
A researcher of science
And a debater of substance.

When you talked,
You talked to the World
Whenever you lectured,
You united the Globe
Whenever you wrote,
You taught the universe.

Uganda cannot forget you
You developed Makerere
And cultured integration
Your dons are yearning for you
Wherever they are
I see Yash Tandon
I see Tim Shaw
I see Selwyn Ryan
I see Apolo Nsibambi
I see Dennis Cowen
I see George Kanyeihamba
I see Nursey-Bray
I see Okello Oculi

You are missed by many;
The Parliament of Uganda
Which you once addressed
Wole Soyinka
Ngugi wa Thiong’o
Chimamanda Adichie
Raila Odinga
Barack Obama
Muwenda Mutebi II.

Africa rejoiced
When you were born
You are a Kenyan Asset
You are a Ugandan Asset.
Adieu Ali Mazrui,
Adieu Al’amin Mazrui,
Till we meet again
Mazrui, Ali Mazrui, Al’amin Mazrui.”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.19
GEN ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice and pay tribute to one special, unique and distinguished and internationally recognised African, Ali Mazrui. 

I was a young school boy in secondary school when we started studying history, which was one of my special subjects, but I did not know Ali Mazrui until Senior Four when our teacher called me Mazrui because I passed a history test well. From then, it became my name in Mbarara High School. It made me love history and I even became the president of the history club and I started finding out who this Mazrui was. 

Who is this person that our history teacher admired so much? He became very famous for mainly tackling subjects that were rarely talked about in the education system - culture, language, the Africans in their true picture.That made him different and distinguished his from all the other teachings that were being taught in secondary schools and universities where they were teaching us more about European history and not bringing out the history of Africa.

He wrote many books and you know that there is an adage that says, “if you want to hide anything from the Africans, put it in a book”. Ali Mazrui did not only write but he made a lot of effort to speak out to universities and different fora in the world, differently from the language of the compromisers and the apologists. 

He spoke direct to the point as an intellectual. He made the status quo or people who were in the regimes quake sometimes.That is why he would get into trouble sometimes and had to run away from Africa to America.

He spoke directly as an intellectual in analysis of situations, especially on the importance of language. There was a book called The Tower of Babel on the importance of what a language can do especially an African language; here, he was talking about Swahili. He wrote 39 books, which is unique, as they are internationally recognised. Very few Africans have done that. These are books that analyse a situation with a good and deep understanding of the African society in comparison most of the time with the other countries of the world – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you. All the time you would hear him it was like a different person.So he was not only an orator but also a good intellectual and analytical person who would argue a point and every authority would recognise it.

The recent award that he received was from the House of Lords in 2000, which was the Millennium Tribute for Outstanding Scholarship. For the House of Lords to award you that honour, you must have distinguished yourself. So, he made Africa proud and the African individual proud and promoted intellectualism. I thank you. 

4.24
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The news of the death of Prof. Ali Mazrui found me in South Africa where we were attending the PAP session.We learnt of it through our colleagues in PAP. Within a short time, everyone was very concerned; you could seehow many hearts were broken because of Mazrui’s death. This affirms the fact that Mazrui was not only an accomplished academic but also a Pan-Africanist, and many people have benefited from him in those areas. As an academic, many people benefitted from his knowledge and as a Pan-Africanist, many people benefited from his works. 

Madam Speaker, I was not taught by Mazrui but I am aware that he introduced the international relations study in Makerere University, which was many years ago. Many years later, I benefited from that when I went for my Masters in International Relations from Makerere University. I must confess that it has partly made me what I am in politics and globally in international affairs. Many other people have also benefitted from Prof. Mazrui’s works.

Two, as a Pan-Africanist, I have also had my share. Right now, I am a member of the Pan-African Parliament and I do know that the works from Prof. Mazrui contributed very much to the creation of the Pan-African Parliament. So we pay tribute to him for his work which has benefited many people. The challenge before us is to see that we emulate Prof. Mazrui and make use of the works that he left with us.

If I may quote from one of the accomplished American writers, an attorney of the 19thCentury who lived from 1909 to 1981, that is, Albert Pike; he said, “What we do for ourselves alone dies with us.What we do for others and the world remains and is immortal.” Professor did great work for this world and country and his work will be remembered. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming the teachers and pupils of Kyetume Church of Uganda. They are represented by hon. Byandala and hon. Nabukenya. Join me in welcoming members of Muno Mukabi Savings and Credit Association. They come from Kisozi Sub County in Kamuli District, which I represent together with hon. Muzaale.(Applause).

4.27
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to support this motion in paying tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui, a celebrated scholar, researcher and educationist and all those distinguished achievements.

I think that it is important for me today to raise a critical issue that has gone on unchallenged in this country for some time - the decision we have made as a country to downgrade and to uphold a policy of sciences versus arts. With this, the Uganda that we are envisaging where critical thinking, like the one that Prof. Ali Mazrui had, will die. I have no quarrel with my friends who are scientists, but I have a real issue where a community will be short of political analysts, social workers, lawyers and artists like me. I have been asking myself, when that day comes, will we take issues of politics and governance to the laboratory to check and analyse or we need to develop critical thinking?

So, I would like to tell Government today that this proposal you have made is going to kill critical thinking and it is dangerous for this country.You need to generate more Ali Mazruis in this country to diagnose the political and social problems of this country. I hope that the minister, in paying tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui, will also be rethinking that decision.

Secondly, Prof. Ali Mazrui offered researched criticisms on various aspects of society, governance and politics. He was revered, admired and actually he was even hated for his very critical views andmore particularly, by bad and irresponsible leaders.In our day and era, we need courageous professors - men and women - to redirect Africa away from bad governance and away from bad leaders. To refocus the governance question in Uganda, we need all those professors in Makerere and in all those universities to emulate the courage of Prof. Ali Mazrui. I am challenging the academia in this country to play their role.(Member timed out)

4.31
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman representative Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a student of humanities, I came to know about Prof. Mazrui through the Pan-African Youth Movement. He lived his life as one of the greatest Pan-Africanist the continent will ever have.

We have been told that he authored so many books, but one that really struck me and took all my attention was a document on the African entitled, “The Triple Heritage”.He exhibited great African ideas and as a professor and a director of humanities in the Institution of Global Cultural Studies, he put Africa on top of the world.

He is not only remembered for his oratory power but for being a great inspiration to the young people. Indeed, we have heard and we know that he is one person who stood to criticise bad regimes. He was a democratic person. We have lost him at a time when we really need him in Uganda because I believe that his great power could have impacted so much on our country in this era where we are facing an inheritance of dictatorship. 

I wish he did not go; I wish he could still live. I wish many of us could pick something from him and challenge dictators no matter what; we may be exiled, but still fight for our continent, Africa. I beg to support the motion and I pay tribute to him. May his soul rest in peace.

4.33
MS FLORENCE IBI (FDC, Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to second this motion and to pay tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui. In 2005, he was elected as the top-most intellectual person in the world on the list of 100 public intellectuals.

You talk about any university, the cream of the American education system, and the name of Ali Mazrui will be there in all the states of the USA. Talk about universities in the UK, Ali Mazrui will feature somewhere. Talk about the top-most universities in Africa, in Singapore and wherever, his name will feature. So it is modest and honourable that this House really finds room to pay tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui who, as has been said, was also a World Bank advisor. These are some of the people Africa will miss badly.

This brings me to the point about our education system. When we look at the trend of events, the schools we have at the moment, Government has to fight to work three times more in order to have Uganda produce the likes of Ali Mazrui. Forget about those who went to school in the good old days, those who managed to reach the levels where they are. If we continue with the trend of UPE and the USE unchecked, honestly, when we talk about the leaders, the whoiswho in Africa, Uganda will not feature anywhere at all.

Among the publications that Ali Mazrui had, I fell in love with Soldiers and Kinsmen in Uganda. That is what he wrote in 1975. There was also African Impact on American Higher Education. Here, an African analyses the education system in America. All these are brains that would really shape the trend of events at the global level.  These are heads that we should strive to emulate.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, each time I listened in to a programme, especially that hosted by Shaka Sali on WBS when Mazrui was going to be interviewed, I really felt like gluing myself to the television to get whatever little I could grasp from such an intellectual head - (Member timed out.)

4.36
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a very distinguished son of Africa, a colossus. 

I joined Makerere University after Prof. Mazrui had left. I was in the literature department but the name Ali Mazrui resounded with reverence throughout the whole university in every department. Ali Mazrui, as my colleagues have said, was highly intellectual and highly committed to his intellectual work. He was a historical and social critic but his criticism was based on facts. He criticized constructively, unlike many critics today. Because of this, he was very highly respected.

He promoted Africanism as the President of the African Studies Institute, and persuaded scholars all over the world, be they Africans or those of other races, to take studies in this association, which later by the way became an institute. He did Africa proud by being named the 73rd top most intellectual person among the 100 that were selected.

He was a great free thinker and researcher who was not afraid to speak his mind because it was based on facts. I think we all stand to benefit a lot from his work and we should emulate him, most especially the young people. I, therefore, challenge the young people to carry out research and publish their work. 

His intellectualism made him widely acknowledged globally. I think we should emulate him by promoting the humanities. We all know how important it is to encourage our students to study sciences but we should not forget the humanities, seeing the example of a person like Prof. Ali Mazrui. May his soul indeed rest in peace and may we continue with his work. Thank you.

4.39
PROF. EDWARD MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. 

Prof. Ali Mazrui was an excellent academic administrator. He did not only promote the Department of Political Science and Public Administration in Makerere University but he led many other institutions outside Uganda. We remember him especially because he was the founding Dean of the Faculty of Law in Makerere University. The Faculty of Law started as a department of law in 1968 in the Faculty of Social Sciences and Public Administration where Mazrui was Dean.

He was a very hard worker and he was a Pan-Africanist par excellence. Above all, he brought intellectualism and intellectual analysis to grips with the day-to-day issues affecting ordinary people. 

He used to give public lectures in the evenings at Makerere University in the main hall and the main hall used to be full to capacity. People would even stand in the windows to listen to Prof. Mazrui, not because of the high sounding intellectual jargon but because he brought intellectualism and intellectual analysis to grips with the day-to-day issues affecting ordinary people. We need to use this opportunity to focus on the role of intellectuals in Africa and the commitment of intellectuals; whether they have social commitment, whether they are committed to being fascinated with ideas and ability to handle them in the “ivory tower” approach or in addressing actual issues affecting the ordinary people. 

Madam Speaker, do the Africans know who they are? Do they know where they come from? Do they know where they want to go? It is not a mistake to be an African; it is not a curse to be an African. One of the positive contributions of Ali Mazrui was to help Africa to tell its story positively to the rest of the world. We should identify other Africans who may be in that category and celebrate them when they can still hear us. 

I thank the Minister of Education for bringing up this matter but I think he owes Parliament a comprehensive list of the publications of this professor rather than each of us picking up and so on. I think he can do it quite easily. 

Madam Speaker, you have done a great thing to put a tribute to Ali Al’amin Mazrui on the Order Paper of this Parliament. Mazrui is dead; long live Mazrui. 

4.43
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to pay tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui. 

I have to admit that I was not a student of Prof. Ali Mazrui and I studied sciences and not political science or history or anything like that. However, that does not mean that I did not recognise the very high intellectual power of Prof. Ali Mazrui. In the early 1980s, while I was a student in Zimbabwe at the Christian Brothers College in Bulawayo, there was a television series called “The African”, which was actually hosted by Prof. Ali Mazrui. In this television series, the professor would explain African history in the various parts of Africa. He would shift from East Africa to North, West, Southern Africa and he would explain the history of the African people, the civilisations and the inventions. 

He would really show that the African people were really proud people, very intelligent and they are not people who should be looked down upon. He made Africans proud. Like every contributor has said, it was very useful. That television programme and all the writings of Prof. Ali Mazrui have been very important to bring up the image of the African people because other writers have tended to put down Africans. Therefore, I am really also very much in favour of the motion.

When hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was making his contribution, he proposed that maybe a monument be put up in honour of this great professor. In addition to that, I would propose that we have annual memorial lectures similar to the one which is held by the Bank of Uganda for the late Mubiru. I think that type of lecture would help. We bring in people - professors and people of that calibre and level - to give lectures to our people and students so that people can recognise that it is important to have that level of thinking and analysis.

I end by thanking the late professor for his contribution to African thinking and history and also for holding up the African people in the world.


4.46
MS AMONGI BETTY (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I graduated as a political scientist from Makerere University where professor was the head of the department in 1965. I think my first interaction with him was in Woodrow Wilson International Centre for Scholars in the USA. At the time we were engaged in the peace talks and I was called by the International Political Science Association to talk about what was going on in Juba. 

Madam Speaker, as political scientists, we are taught that we should allow freedom of ideas and indeed Prof. Ali Mazrui lived to that principle. He spoke about truth and justice and he demanded for moral accountability. He respected diversity. He was not shy to speak when a government violated human rights. He spoke against brutality of many dictators in Africa and not only in Africa but he spoke about the brutality of dictators in the Western world. While lecturing in the USA, he was a big critic of the USA invasion in Israel and many western policies, especially in regard to developing countries. Every time Africans wanted an intellectual voice against most of the issues around the globe oppressing Africa, he was at the forefront of talking about it. 

He spoke too much about issues related to freedom and indeed Prof. Ali Mazrui has been somebody whose ideas any African would be proud to associate with anywhere in the world. Therefore, I want to pay tribute to him and thank him for being indeed a person that spoke for moral issues, respect of diversity and freedom of ideas. He lived to show that freedom of ideas in democracy is necessary. I appeal to the Government to learn from what he said, did and what he wrote for democracy to flourish. (Member timed out.) 

4.50
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank God who created Prof. Mazrui and the good Lord who also gave the late professor all the wisdom that people have talked about in this House.

Science and technology has made the world a small village and at least once in a week I use to Google and also go to You Tube to listen to the wisdom and inspiration which the late Prof. Mazrui was trying to put across. Whenever I would listen to him, I saw a real professor. You know, we have many professors but some are not real professors. The late Mazrui - (Interjection) - I have kept track of the statements that he has made and the journals that he has actually contributed to and I have seen consistency; he would not retract his statements and he would not kneel down for nothing.

Prof. Mazrui was a real professor. To prove this, he was actually among the eminent personalities who advised on the transition from OAU to the African Union and he never retracted that; you can see that the African Union has been here for some reasonable time. He has died when he has not retracted his statement or his advice as to whether again we should go back to another kind of arrangement. In his wisdom, he saw that the African Union was more about having a broader scope of various Africans to look at ourselves as a continent.

Madam Speaker, he was also a consultant in constitutional changes. You have seen very well that for the Kenyan Constitution, the late Prof. Mazrui had an input. I was in Kenya at the time when they were searching for the views of the Kenyans as to how their Constitution should go and he had his contribution there. 

Recently, when the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, was going before the ICC, he even handed over the instruments of the presidency to his Vice-President. Madam Speaker, he even left State House in his private car and actually went to his home, prepared himself, went to the airport, filled the forms at the airport just like any other common person at the immigration department and he boarded Kenya Airways –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just in relation to other constitutions that Prof. Ali Mazrui contributed to, when we were in Ghana as Parliament of Uganda to visit their Parliament, according to their Constitution, if the President is away or if he is traveling out of the country, he has to hand over power to the Vice-President. When the Vice-President is leaving the country - we actually witnessed with hon. Sseninde and hon. Namabidde where the Speaker was taking the oath of presidency. So, these are some of the Constitutions of African countries, like Ghana, that Ali Mazrui contributed to. 

So, we also want to see in Uganda situations where the President and Vice-President may probably be away and the Speaker takes oath of presidency. (Laughter) These things are not personal; these things are public things. So, we should learn from Mazrui’s input. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Otto. Madam Speaker, there are people who have stamina and there are people who are consistent. I believe one day, one time, if the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga took the presidency of this country, she would set a precedent in this country unlike some people who, even when they are in State House, they are not sure whether they are the President. (Laughter)

4.56
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the Minister of State for Higher Education and all those who have spoken in support of this resolution, in honour of the late Ali Mazrui. 

I was a young student in 1955 in Makerere when there were not too many African lecturers in the university and Mazrui was one of those, still a young man at that time, who came and dominated the Makerere campus. Ali Mazrui was somebody you could not miss in an audience because when he chose to speak, you could not lose your attention on what he was saying. The words he chose to use, the imagery, his emotions and his voice could not be unnoticed. He was such a presence that many people developed an admiration and I am certainly not surprised that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was not only his admirer but he became his convert. I think the language hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi uses and the imagery is certainly to be traced in his presence with Mazrui at Makerere. (Laughter)

Mazrui, as a lecturer to first year students, captured everybody as a political theorist. Do not accuse him of being an empiricist, do not accuse him of using too many facts, but from his conceptual framework when he was teaching about Rousseau, about Locke, John Stuart Mill, there is no way you could not be attentive. Really, that created admiration for him, but also an excitement of ideas. I think his greatest image-building had to do with his delivery. 

I am going to refer to his publications, Nkrumah: The Leninist Czar. You know, the picture, I remember now, when it appeared in Transition with a Czar, the king and Nkrumah being a “socialist” and then you have that contradiction or comparison of Nkrumah, the Leninist Czar. 

There was also The King, the Queen’s English and I, when he was talking about the late King of Buganda – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Two minutes for professor.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you. You wondered whether what you captured was his English or his ideas about Mutesa or indeed the concept of kings. So, you kept in touch with what was what. 

I think teaching is about exciting the mind, and Mazrui was an effective teacher. I remember his article, The Poetics of a Transplanted Heart, when Christiaan Barnard carried out the first transplant; you can imagine him talking about how poetry comes from the heart. Now, how is this new heart going to be carried in an old body and still have the poetics from the heart?

Mazrui, an African, at a time many people thought Africa cannot produce a global figure. People like Nkrumah had come up and were sabotaged when they were still young. Mazrui, in the intellectual field, seemed to capture the images that had been lost. I think his lectures, which were popularised on the BBC, led many people to think that Africa had a lot to offer than they had thought. 

I cannot have enough time to describe Mazrui but let me finally say, he gave you a clear picture that we have more than we bring out. He was a man of small stature - he was not a big fellow - but his focus gave him a global picture. We are all capable of doing more than we deliver. I think Mazrui must be remembered as someone who towered Africa, towered the world and gave an image that any human being, fully motivated creatively can create an impact. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to Prof. Ali Mazrui as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I direct the Clerk to extract the resolution and send it to his family and also a copy to Makerere University, where he spent a lot of his time.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It occurred to me that given this time we have spent in recognition of Prof. Mazrui, wouldn’t it be a good idea if Parliament tried to acquire a collection of his works and put it in our library in recognition of his works?

THE SPEAKER: Are you looking at a Mazrui Corner in the Parliamentary Library? I think it is a good idea.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank members for supporting the motion. Secondly, I fully support the idea of the monument, and Makerere University has done something. In 2009, Makerere University honoured this great son of Africa by initiating the Ali Mazrui Endowment Chair and the East African Ali Mazrui Centre for Global Studies. These two constituted the Mazruian project at Makerere University. At the time, Mazrui was in attendance and he gave us a go-ahead. In so doing, he allowed us to use his name forever. I just wanted to share this with you, that something has already been done. 

In addition, I support the idea of another monument and even the idea of public lectures. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock in the afternoon. 

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 November 2014, at 2.00 p.m.)
