


PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 4 November 2021

Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for coming to this session today. I would like to remind the committees that we referred a number of assignments to them to be handled, especially the Bills, because we need to finalise and have them processed in the House.

This has been the Uganda National Week of Science. You will allow me to amend the Order Paper to have a statement from the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation; a statement of about five minutes. The statement is not for debate but for our information. We will have that report and then proceed with the Order Paper. I thank you so much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.20
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Dr Monica Musenero): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Uganda is observing the National Science Week from 2nd to 9th November 2021 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe for record purposes, you need to tell the House who you are.

DR MUSENERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am called Dr Monica Musenero Masanza, the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation, Office of the President.

This week, starting from the 2nd to 9th November 2021, we have been celebrating the World Science Day and we will end the week on 10 November 2021.

The World Science Day for Peace and Development is annually celebrated on 10th November globally. It was initiated by the United Nations Education and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) in 1937 to recognise and promote science and technology in the advancement of societies. 

Internationally, the theme is: “Future of Science, Technology and Innovation (STI): Impacts on Education, Skills and Work.” In Uganda, we have domesticated the theme and we are celebrating under the theme –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the honourable minister while making her maiden speech. However, since it is a statement, I do not know whether we are proceeding well when this statement is not uploaded on the system yet we have to use it for our further consumption.

In most cases, when these ministers finish making their statements, they dash out very fast. I do not know whether we are proceeding well without the statement online.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have heard the Government Chief Whip saying that it is uploaded. Is it uploaded?

MR SSEWUNGU: Then you give me your iPad.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My friend Ssewungu has been trying his best to get access to my iPad. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is calling me Ssewungu yet I am hon. Ssewungu. Is he in order to say that in the august House?

MR TAYEBWA: I am sorry, my brother.

MR SSEWUNGU: No, the Speaker has to rule. Is he in order? Your friend, you call him Ssewungu instead of calling him honourable. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu omusomesa, the Member has apologised.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that the Clerk’s office had finished uploading. Let me crosscheck. However, luckily enough, you said that we are not going to debate it today but let us ensure that it is uploaded as soon as possible in case it is not yet there.
 
MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this statement is by the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation. Is she too big that she must employ another minister to explain the fate of her statement? Her statement is missing but another minister must stand up to explain. Is she a queen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, it is the maiden speech of the honourable minister. Please, she is coming here for the first time. Let us accord her - she is a girl child –(Laughter)– you were not here yesterday. 

As we wait for the report to be uploaded, just give us a summary. Do not read it but summarise the science week as we wait for it to be uploaded.

DR MUSENERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The science week precedes the World Science Day for Peace and Development and in Uganda, we are celebrating it. We started on the 2nd and we have marked it with three major activities; the Uganda Science Innovators’ Awards - this is new in the Uganda environment. 

Since 25th October, we publicly announced a competition and we had a total of 165 entries. The process has gone through five stages and we are now on stage five. The first stage was the announcement then we had the short listing of those who had submitted. We had the live pitches where the innovators in the competition came before a panel of judges. We started on Tuesday for the public to vote their favourite.

Therefore, whereas we started with 165 people, right now we have 30 who are currently competing and among those, we shall have a total of 12 winners. We were supposed to have 18 but in some groups, we did not have the age categories. Madam Speaker, these applications came from all over the country; from 34 districts.

The other activity that we are marking is an exhibition, which is going to take place at Kololo Independence Grounds. We have set up the exhibition in a unique way. There will be six centres known as industrial cities. This exhibition is scheduled to open on the 8th. It will be open to the public for two days - the 8th and the 9th November and on the 10th, we are expecting to celebrate the World Science Day, which will be presided over by His Excellency. Therefore, although the exhibition is still open, entrance will be restricted.

I take this opportunity to invite honourable members to check out this exhibition when it opens on the 8th and 9th. It is intended to showcase what we have in the country and what we are doing in the field of science, technology and innovation.

I am very gratified that we had a lot of entrants. Our youngest applicant, who has qualified to the last stage, is a nine-year-old who saw the challenge of COVID-19 and invented an online learning platform for her fellow primary school children.

In conclusion, allow me to thank Ugandans and invite Members of Parliament to participate in the voting of these innovations. The videos are online. In the paper, you will see the link. Thank you. 

2.30
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the update but seek a few clarifications from her. It is true we need to promote science and technology. It is the way to go.

I would like you, Minister, to clarify about the Kiira EV technology. You remember that four to five years ago, some group of young men came up with the technology of manufacturing locally-made vehicles in this country. The Government promised to give support to the group of people that invented those cars. I would like to find out how far it has gone.

Secondly, about our Kayoola Bus – I remember that when Kayoola Bus was introduced, it toured all regions in this country and the Government promised to support and inject huge amounts of money in order for the company to make many buses. I would like to find out how far the Government has gone. 

Otherwise, we need to promote technology and our young people need to be encouraged as far as innovation is concerned. I beg to move.

DR musenero: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member, for the question. Kiira EV and Kayoola Bus are now part of the Kiira Motor Corporation, which is driving our indigenous motor vehicle manufacturing. The building of the plant is at 90 per cent and we hope to launch the plant, which manufactures buses, by February next year. 

At the moment, however, buses have been manufactured. This Friday, we will have the pleasure to showcase the vehicles, which have come out of this process – the different types of buses and cases. Thank you. 

2.33
Mr joseph ssewungu (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for that information. However, one time I saw the Kiira motor vehicle being transported to Kyankwanzi on a car carrier, yet it was new. How would it have been taken by a car carrier, yet it is new?

Let me hope that the same story will not happen at the exhibition where the Kiira vehicle comes on a car carrier, yet it is a new vehicle that is supposed to move on the ground. If the factory is at 90 per cent, how do you carry a new vehicle on a carrier? It means that it cannot move by itself to the destination where it is required. That is the clarification I am kindly seeking from you.

2.34
Mr Solomon silwany (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether we are actually manufacturing or assembling. As far as I know, we do not manufacture any part of a vehicle in Uganda. I would like the minister to make it clear: is it manufacturing or assembling different parts to make up the Kayoola Bus?

2.34
Mr Aloysius mukasa (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala City): Madam Speaker, I think it was the very kind of clarification I wanted to raise. The question is, can we get guidance from the minister whether there are available plants that manufacture the different parts that make up the whole vehicle? We are just receiving statements from the minister but we cannot ascertain the real plants and their location. Thank you.

2.35
Ms helen Kahunde (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. I am seeking your clarification and explanation on the research and innovation fund, which was established by the Government of Uganda to support different scientists, researchers and innovators in as far as innovation and research in different lines – science, agriculture, health and other areas – are concerned.

There is a general complaint, honourable minister, that some few officials within your ministry just handpick the different innovators and assign them the money instead of having a good framework or procedure where every Ugandan from every corner of the country can compete, apply and benefit from this fund for their different research and innovation work. Thank you.

2.36
Ms Brenda nabukenya (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and also inform her that the Dubai Expo is going on. We have been able to view what other countries have been exhibiting in regard to technology. Some countries have come up with robotics and very advanced technology such as genomic science. This helps in medical studies and advancement of technology and development. I wonder what she is planning.

In primary schools, we used to have exhibition days when we would do different things such as electricity and heat projects. I feel like we are still there, regardless of what is happening. I need to see that Uganda is embarking on a project that is powerful and will be promoted and sold to other countries. I think we can only think of being a modern or a very developed country if we also invest in science and technology.

Therefore, I would like her to tell us how far they are going. How much is being invested in the areas of genomics – advanced technology – and how much money is being allocated to these advanced science technologies? 

We cannot say that we are moving if we are not investing in standard labs that can empower the young people. 

Madam Speaker, when you go to China and tell them to construct for you a template or something small, they will do it because even a small child is exposed to technology at an early age. We are missing out on this because in this is digital era, science is taking centre stage. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to inform this House what Government is doing in regard to advanced science and technology. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a response from the minister on what has been raised? Let us hear from other Members and then she will respond at once. 

2.39 
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was abolished; the President said so. Nonetheless, it was resurrected and transferred to either his office or residence. 

We passed a resolution here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, there is no ministry that has ever been transferred to the President’s residence. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we passed a resolution here - because the minister had moved to State House ahead of the ministry - transferring both the ministry and budget to go and “meet” the minister where she had gone. 

I had thought that the first thing would have been for the minister to tell us – I do not know why Africans like ceremonies – that the most important thing for her, the first time she appeared in Parliament, is to speak about the science week.

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to tell us whether that transition has now been completed because we passed money here for that ministry and then it was transferred. A request was brought here for Parliament to transfer the money to go and “meet” the ministry somewhere in State House. Therefore, has that transition been completed? 

In our resolution, we said that a Vote must be created and so, that money must not go to the residence but to a Vote. So, has that Vote been created? Otherwise, it would be meaningless for a minister to come here and brief Parliament on a one-week ceremony and not the ministry; how it is facilitated and what it is doing. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to ask the minister to tell Parliament whether the transition has been completed. Has a Vote been created and has she paid the staff that were in that ministry? 

2.41 
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, scientific innovation is as useful as its adoption. We are seeing Ugandans grappling with a number of challenges yet some of the innovations are not aligned to our problems. For example, many cities are grappling with issues of waste management, inaccessibility to energy and what the President calls “haemorrhage” where we have to import everything including a toothpick.  

I do not know how your ministry is ensuring that whatever innovations are available get adopted by the ordinary Ugandans so that they are not just redundant but are very applicable and in use to solve our problems.  

Secondly, Government had proposed the need for science packs in various regions. That would help to incubate and accelerate scientific innovation. I would like to understand the extent to which you have led the Government in achieving these strategic objectives. 

Lastly, a member recently moved that we must ratify the nuclear treaty. There are indeed threats emerging from scientific innovation; biological weapons that we must deal with and countries are moving towards putting biodefense and countering cyber threats. I do not know whether you are coordinating with the security people to ensure Uganda is safe from threats emerging from the scientific world. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. On the issue that hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju raised, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was only moved to the Office of the President. When that was done, we had to act as per section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, to reallocate the funds from one Vote to another. 

The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation originally had its own Vote but which was now transferred to the Office of the President. That was a transfer of funds together with the functions. 

Hon. Ssemujju’s question is: much as we did that in compliance with section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, is that process completed now? This is because before you came to this House, there was a complaint of how some staff were not paid and how others were laid off. That is the clarification that the House needs to know. 

The other issue is whether we really have a manufacturing plant here or an assembling plant. Do we assemble it here? 

DR MUSENERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The processes of manufacturing or assembling are different. However, in vehicle manufacturing, globally, there are part suppliers and the people who manufacture. 

In Uganda, we currently import a number of components and we make the bus body. Our strategy is to make sure that we can make at least 65 per cent of the bus by 2030. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is being sincere; she has said that we do the assembling. 

DR MUSENERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We work like all the other vehicle manufacturers. We source parts. Some of them are sourced internally and others are imported. We build the vehicle. The vehicles are currently manufactured. The ones for testing are at Luweero Industries –(Interruption) 

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The beauty behind science is that scientific words are very clear. You do not even have to describe certain things. Manufacturing and assembling are two different words. Therefore, the minister does not have to use very many words to explain to us whether we are manufacturing or assembling. 

Therefore, I do not know whether the minister is in order to confuse the House by saying that we are manufacturing yet in essence, she is describing assembling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I already commented and said the minister is being sincere. She is saying we are assembling; parts are brought and we assemble. Let the minister finish - The problem is you do not want to accept that you do not manufacture. Why don't you accept that you assemble? She said, assembling. Honourable minister, continue. You have two minutes. You are talking to the Speaker; do not listen to whatever they are saying. This is her maiden speech -

DR MUSENERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second issue was about the Innovation Fund. The fund was implemented up to the last financial year. When I was appointed, I put in place a task force, which is preparing a report. The current Innovation Fund has been put on hold until we have the modalities or the performance of the other one cleared. 

The mechanism for selection of the current innovation competition is public and straightforward. If a few individuals were being selected, we shall get it from the report. We are working on the status of Uganda's technology and we know where we are -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we shall get it from the report. Members are saying that you need to be transparent on how this fund is accessed. People need to know because if they do not have the information, they will not be able to access it. Basically, people need information.

DR MUSENERO: Madam Speaker, there is a committee which was put in place to come up with ways of improving transparency because I got complaints. Therefore, the next innovation funds will not be given out until we address those issues. 

On the issue of transition, the process is as you described. It is ongoing but not completed. [A Member rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister first finish.

DR MUSENERO: The issue of nuclear belongs to another ministry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has finished. What did you want her to clarify?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the honourable minister about the Innovation Fund is, would you consider decentralising the Innovation Fund and create innovation committees at a decentralised level?

I will give you an example in Uganda. The more you centralise the activities, the more you will not hit the notch. If you look at Japan and Germany, innovation committees are from wards and villages. We have young men and women outside there that are innovative in various skills in science and technology.  For example, the humble person that has innovated banana fibre to provide the best material for manufacture of paper money is a humble Ugandan down there in Kigezi. That is science and technology. 

I wonder whether these people have taken time to even scout for that person and you can look out and try to search for this. The more we decentralise the art of scouting innovative ideas down to the village level and involvement of the political will of leaders at that level, the more we may achieve.

The point of clarification I would like to seek from you is as to whether you and your committee are reconsidering the issue of decentralisation of scouting of innovative ideas and pitches. Whether it is in science and technology, ICT or innovation of all levels down to the parishes or sub counties and wards, please tell this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister should come back with a report on science, innovation and technology and give this House information on what you really do and how you do it. 

However, for now, she is telling us that this is Science, Technology and Innovation Week. Now we are giving you time; come back to this House and tell us about the funding, the transition process, the funds that we put in Makerere on innovation and the criteria of how you choose which people to benefit. You will give us that information in two weeks. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON UPDATE ON COVID-19 VACCINATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had an assignment that we had given hon. Aceng on ascertaining the state of hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya. The report has been brought to our office and we are in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. We will inform the House of the next step and the action that we have taken. 

However, we are in consultation with the Executive, the Leader of the Opposition and Parliament. As we agreed yesterday, it is not ethical to talk about one’s health but we are handling the situation. Thank you. Hon. Aceng -

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for following up on the matter of our colleague, hon. Ssegirinya. I will take your guidance. However, hon. Ssewanyana is also sick. I do not know whether this Parliament will wait until he is at the level of hon. Ssegirinya to intervene. Maybe you can take advantage of people who have been to prison like hon. Chris Baryomunsi to tell us what happens there because people go there when they are okay but they –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, we will ask hon. Aceng to follow up on the issue of hon. Allan Ssewanyana and give us feedback. At least one thing we can tell you is that we are closely following it up. 

2.56
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to start by appreciating you for informing the House and I do apologise to the House. I am also a medical personnel and I cannot break my ethics. She has given you a good report. 

My duty today is to update this august House on vaccination. Allow me to start by updating you on the status of COVID-19 vaccination in the country. The national objective of the COVID-19 pandemic response is to minimise the number of infections and deaths. Response activities are determined and guided by the national task force through a multi-sectoral approach. 

In line with the above objective, the response strategy is currently focusing on the following interventions:
 
Surveillance

As of 1st November, the country had registered 126,272 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 3,217 deaths. Additionally, the current admissions stand at 298 in both public and private facilities and 15 deaths in the last seven days. The hotspot regions are Teso, Lango, Kigezi and Kampala Metropolitan area. 

Madam Speaker, I provided a curve there for people to look at and compare the first wave that we had in 2020 and the current second wave.

In order to prevent a third wave and importation or emergence of new variants in the country, the National Task-Force is carrying out the following activities; 

    i) Enhancing surveillance in all districts for early identification of cases;

    ii) Enhancing surveillance at the airport and all the 53 official land border crossing points;

    iii) Carrying out regular and systematic genomic sequencing to detect any new variants - locally emerging and imported. Genomic sequencing is when we look at the different clans of the genes.

    iv) Through Ministry of Education and Sports, we are supporting head teachers/heads of learning institutions to carry out surveillance and early reporting of suspected cases in tertiary institutions that are open and the rest of the schools, once they are open;

    v) Following up the use of Rapid Antigen Self-tests with World Health Organisation and once approved, we will consider its use in schools 

Safe reopening of sectors under lockdown

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President has continuously eased restrictions on most sectors. During his most recent address to the nation on 28 October 2021, the President promised to open up the economy fully by January 2022. 

This decision will be guided by the completed vaccination of the 4.8 million priority groups and others. However, the National Task Force continues to review the epidemiological picture and the vaccination coverage of the priority groups and eligible populations.

Patient care

Madam Speaker, during the second wave, the following was experienced: high patient numbers, inadequate oxygen supply, insufficient bed capacity and high cost of care in the private facilities and retention of dead bodies. 

Against this background, the following is being undertaken.

    i) We are fast tracking the installation of oxygen plants of two types.
        a) Pressure Swing Adsorption, which is the gaseous type at National Hospital (1), that is Mulago and Regional Referral Hospitals (15) and
        b) The cryogenic (liquid) plants at three designated regions.

    ii) We are preparing selected district hospitals in hard-to-reach areas and islands as treatment centres to cater for patients that have challenges accessing regional referral hospitals. 

    iii) We are strengthening Home-Based Care through refresher training of Village Health Teams and equipping them with the Home-Based Care toolkits. The toolkits comprise a pulse oximeter, timer, thermometer, disposable gloves, aprons, sanitisers, reusable face masks, torch, gum boots, bag, medicine box, job aids, registers and referral forms for them to use.

    iv) Follow up with schools to designate sick bays as isolation units for mildly sick children and equip them with basic Infection Prevention and Control materials.

Strengthening decentralised response

Madam Speaker, the implementation of the preventive health measures is majorly carried out by the local Governments. The National Task Force will ensure continuous functionality of the District, Sub-County and Village Task Forces. 

COVID-19 vaccination

Madam Speaker, vaccines are the safest and most cost-effective, proven public health intervention for the prevention and control of COVID-19 infections. COVID-19 vaccines prevent severe disease and hospitalisation and protect the healthcare system from being overwhelmed. 

The Government of Uganda prioritises COVID-19 vaccination as a strategic intervention for control of the pandemic and for safe and sustainable reopening of the economy. A total of 22 million people – these are Uganda Bureau of Statistics estimates 2021 - above 18 years of age are eligible for vaccination. 

However, 4.8 million vulnerable populations – those are health workers, teachers, security personnel, the elderly of 50 years and above and those below 50 years with co-morbidities - were prioritised for vaccination first. Furthermore, 330,000 students in tertiary institutions aged 18 years and above have been included in the priority category to facilitate re-opening of these institutions. 

On 10 March 2021, Government launched COVID-19 vaccination, following receipt of 864,000 doses of AstraZeneca vaccines through the COVAX facility and a donation of 100,000 doses of the same vaccine from the Government of India. 

Since then, the vaccination programme has been rolled out to the entire country. Eligible persons are required to report to the vaccination site with the following documents; national identity cards or any other identification documents like driving permits, work permits, passports or a Refugee Identity Card. 

Other means of identification can be used like letters from the Local Council leaders. Identification is extremely important for purposes of records, follow up and a reminder to receive one’s second dose of the vaccine. Individuals that are eligible and without any form of identification will still be vaccinated using a next of kin means of identification.

Individuals who are reporting for their second doses should come with their vaccination cards. Government is providing two forms of vaccination documents to every person who is vaccinated.

    i) We give a vaccination card at the vaccination point after one receives the first dose of the vaccine;

    ii) An electronic vaccination certificate with a QR code that is generated by the District Health Information System, two weeks after full vaccination. This certificate can be generated and downloaded by accessing the link that I have provided. 

Madam Speaker, the good news is that the United Kingdom is recognising our digital vaccination certificates. We are working with the European Union, also for them to recognise our vaccination certificates.

Government has received offers of COVID-19 vaccine adequate for 27 million people as follows; 

    1. Eighteen million doses of Sinopharm vaccine from China that will be procured by Government of Uganda through the COVAX facility. This will cover nine million people of the target population. It is estimated to arrive between October and December, 2021. 

    2. Nine million doses of the Johnson and Johnson vaccine that is being procured through the African Union. This will cover nine million people and it is estimated to arrive between September 202l and September 2022. 

    3. Eighteen million doses of vaccines through donations from the COVAX facility and other country-to-country donations to cover nine million people. These will be various vaccines depending on availability and so far, we have received over five million doses, that is, AstraZeneca, Sinovac, Pfizer and Moderna.

To-date, the Government has received a total of 8,891,410 doses through donations of which 3,938,730 doses have been utilised countrywide. Distribution of the remaining 4,605,080 doses is ongoing. Of these, the Government has procured 3,478,000 doses and more are expected. We expect an additional 12,288,750 doses of various vaccines by the end of December 2021

I have provided a table – Table 2 – showing vaccines received between March and October 2021.

On the next page, Table 3 is showing us the vaccine pipeline between November and December 2021, totalling 12,288,750 dozes. 

Table 4 is vaccine pipeline up to 2022. When you look through, those are Government purchases of Johnson & Johnson and Sinopharm, totaling to 22,539,600 doses. 

Pipelines of donations can only be known once they are communicated by COVAX facility. By the end of that year, we will have received over 44,700,000 doses. 

COVID-19 vaccination strategy

The Ministry of Health developed a Uganda COVID-19 Vaccination Implementation Plan (UCVIP) and a deployment plan to guide the vaccination programme –(Interruption) 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the rules of this House are very clear on the dress code but it seems we are becoming another fashion house. As you can see, hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, the Minister of Internal Affairs, has arrived in this House wearing a curtain-like material –(Laughter)– in a shirt that does not conform to the rules of this House. 

Madam Speaker, we need your guidance and ruling. 

Gen. Otafiire is one of the most respected people in this House and a seasoned politician. Seeing him wearing something similar to a curtain may put this august House in a very dishonourable situation. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we deserve a ruling. Otherwise, we might start copying him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, you raised an issue and you again – the General is putting on African wear, which is allowed in this House. (Applause) However, it is also good that you introduced the General because some Members did not know him. General, you are welcome. Have a seat. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Member of Parliament – my friend, hon. Nsereko – that this is a house of Parliament and not a fashion show and this is called a Mandela Shirt. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think people just needed a light moment. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate that, that is Mandela Shirt but it is worn in a certain way. Can I request my good friend, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, that when you wear a Mandela Shirt, you must fasten the last button? Please, just button to complete it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, can you go and button for him? (Laughter) Hon. Aceng, continue with the report. Members, let us continue with the report.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I humbly request that you allow the General to release that button. It is very tight. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The man will suffocate. (Laughter)

DR ACENG: The UCVIP, which I will lay on Table, has the following objectives. The general objective is to vaccinate 22 million people, 18 years and above, against COVID-19 by the end of 2022.

Specific objectives

    1. To vaccinate 4.8 million priority people by end of December 2021. 

    2. To utilise all the 6.5 million doses of vaccines received in the country by the end of December 202l by vaccinating eligible persons 18 years and above, meaning we have opened up vaccination to everybody 18 years and above.

    3. To utilise all vaccines received in the country before expiry. 

    4. To conduct vaccination outreaches closer to the communities.

The Ministry of Health also developed principles to guide COVID-19 vaccine implementation plan. The principles are:

    i) Equity: Equitable access to vaccines by all individuals, populations and districts, including marginalised, vulnerable, displaced and imprisoned populations.

    ii) Quality: WHO authorised vaccines are used; adequate cold chain secured and maintained and vaccination is carried out by trained health workers under supervision. 

    iii) Health systems and multi-sectoral approaches to strengthen existing service delivery mechanisms with full participation of the communities. 

Progress on vaccinating the 4.8 million priority population

So far, about 2.5 million, that is 51.7 per cent of the 4.8 million priority population, have received the first doze of the COVID-19 vaccines while 705,000 people (14.7 per cent) have received the second doze and are, therefore, fully vaccinated. 

I have provided a table which shows the performance of vaccination of the priority groups. However, it is important to note that figures depend on timely entry of data into our electronic system called EPIVAC by individual districts and many districts delay to upload data due to challenges of connectivity, power and internet bundles. This implies that the number of people vaccinated is higher than what is captured in the table below, as evidenced by the vaccine utilisation data. 

Madam Speaker, as you can see, 90 per cent of the health workers have received the first dose; 63 per cent of security personnel and 66 per cent of the teachers. The elderly are at 13.6 per cent and people with comorbidities are at only 7.4 per cent. I would like to request that you allow me not to go through the entire table; Members can continue to look at it.

Vaccination of the priority groups has been slow due to the following factors:

    1. Initially, vaccination sites were limited to five per district and this affected accessibility yet the vaccines were also limited in amount;

    2. Limited availability of vaccines between the months of March and August 2021;

    3. A myth and misconceptions surrounding the COVID-19 vaccines; and

    4. Inadequate mobilisation and sensitisation of the population by district leaders.

Madam Speaker, in order to increase uptake, the Ministry of Health has expanded the vaccination activity from only static sites in the health facilities to outreaches in the communities e.g. churches, taxi parks, markets, bars etc. This has increased the number of vaccination points and taken vaccines nearer to the communities. 

Beginning 8 November, the Ministry of Health will be holding regional vaccination campaigns starting with regions with high infection and these include: Teso, Lango, Acholi, Kigezi and Kampala Metropolitan area. The full breakdown is in the vaccination plan that I have provided.

Tertiary Institutions will also have outreach sites to help students returning to be vaccinated. 

To prepare the country for COVID-19 vaccination, Government and partners evaluated the entire cold chain system to assess the capacity for storage of vaccines at all temperatures. The Government has adequate capacity for storage of vaccines at 2 to 8 degrees for 3 million doses and -150 to –25 degrees for 35 million doses, across the country. 

To date, Government has enhanced capacity to store vaccines that require ultra-cold temperatures (-8 degrees) to 4.5 million doses. This is adequate for vaccines that require such temperatures.

Madam Speaker, to mobilise and sensitise leaders and the communities in order to create awareness and increase demand for COVID-19 vaccination, the Ministry of Health has undertaken the following:

    1.  Regular media engagements through statements’ press releases, talk shows, media blitz and earned media;

    2. Developed and disseminated a booklet with key messages and talking points on COVID-19 vaccination to guide leaders and health workers;

    3. Developed and disseminated a booklet on Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) on vaccines and COVID-19;

    4. There has been regular development and dissemination of social media interactive posts with key messages on COVID-19 vaccination;

    5. We have carried out sensitisation of religious, cultural and political leaders;

    6. The ministry has held several training sessions for the media on COVID-19 vaccination to enhance accurate reporting;

    7. We trained public relations officers of all Ministries, Departments and Agencies for them to support sensitisation within their respective organisations and institutions;

    8.  We have trained social media influencers to communicate correctly critical information to demystify rumours, misinformation and myths;

    9.  We have oriented district task forces on COVID-19 vaccination;

    10. We have procured airtime from the major media houses to disseminate information for awareness creation in the local languages; and

    11. The ministry is supporting local governments to conduct grass root mobilisation of communities by provision of job-aid information booklets to VHTs.

Adverse events following COVID-19 vaccinations

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health, the National Drug Authority and partners are monitoring and managing possible adverse events following COVID-19 vaccination through the following:

    a) Tasking the district teams to promptly report any adverse events following COVID-19 vaccination;

    b) Thoroughly investigating and managing reports received accordingly; and

    c) Assembling a team of specialists that comprises haematologists, epidemiologists, vaccinologists, physicians and pathologists to evaluate the reports, investigate and manage cases and provide scientific evidence for correlation, if any.

Funding the National COVID-19 vaccination programme

Madam Speaker, the total cost of the National COVID-19 vaccination plan, including the cost of vaccines and supplies, storage and distribution, and operational costs in the districts, is Shs 1.4 trillion. 

The Government and partners have already provided part of the funds amounting to Shs 619.5 billion, as seen in the breakdown below:

    a) Funds from GAVI for vaccine deployment is Shs 12.8 billion;

    b) Supplementary budget by Government of Uganda in this Financial Year 2020/2021 for vaccines procurement is Shs 18.5 billion;

    c)  Contingency funding from Government of Uganda in Financial Year 2020/2021 for vaccines procurement and operational costs is Shs 30 billion;

    d) Allocation to National Medical Stores by Government of Uganda in Financial Year 2020/2021 for vaccines procurement and handling is Shs 80 billion;

    e) Re-allocation from the item of vaccine co-financing for the traditional vaccines for purchase of syringes for COVID-19 vaccination by Government of Uganda in Financial Year 2020/2021 is Shs 3.9 billion; and

    f) The total cost of vaccines, that is the 18 million doses expected through donations, is Shs 475.4 billion.

The funding gap for the purchase of vaccines and supplies, storage and distribution and operation costs is Shs 790.8 billion at an exchange rate of US$ 3,500. This funding gap was communicated to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in a letter dated 7 September 2021. The gap is exclusive of the donations received. 

While we await their response, I have been made aware that Shs 560 billion has been set aside for vaccines; the finance minister can confirm that. 
I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Dr Ruth Aceng, for the comprehensive report. We shall debate this report for 20 minutes.

3.26
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the submission. Regarding the district, sub counties and village task forces - and I would like to present this on the assumption that it might also be a problem in other districts - in Kumi District, as you may be aware, Madam Speaker, every village task force is given facilitation. However, the money that was sent was less and could not cover 57 parishes. This affected the performance of the district task force.

Therefore, I expected the minister to hint on such and given a proposal or way forward to that effect because the task forces are following this since it was from us.

I would like to also share and let the House know that although the minister has said that there is a procedure for following up on people who realise some side effects, the management is not easily handled at the district level.

I would like to find out from the minister – since she is a doctor by profession: Are there specific conditions that should be considered as the vaccination is going on so that they can, for instance, be exempted for some time? The people down there have been saying that and I want to get clarification from the minister. Thank you.

3.28
Ms Christine akello (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a question to the minister: They are only vaccinating people aged 18 and above, yet we are aware that students are the super-spreaders of COVID-19. 

Last time, they are the very people who infected parents when the schools were closed. The rate of infection of COVID-19 was high. What is going to happen if they are not vaccinated and yet the schools are soon going to be reopened? Thank you.

3.29
Ms midius natukunda (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement on the status of COVID-19 and vaccination.

However, my concern is about the students as they are among the priority people to be vaccinated. Most of these students do not have national identity cards. When they go to the vaccination centres, they are being turned away. In her statement, she mentioned the identification that is needed; she talked of passports, work permits and refugee identity cards but did not talk about any identification for students. 

She talked about using the guardians’ cards but is it possible to use the students’ identification cards? Once you turn away these students, they get demoralised. They may not even go back the next day yet they are a priority if we want to reopen schools safely.

Can the Ministry of Internal Affairs explain to us? In 2017, they went to all schools in Uganda registering students for national identity cards. Until now, they have not got the cards. What they do is to give a certain number that you show but that is not enough. Can you, please, tell us the status of these identity cards that were registered way back in 2017? Thank you.

3.30
Mr yona musinguzi (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to thank the minister for trying her best to make sure that we fight the pandemic.

However, in her report, she has read to us most of the supplies for COVID-19 that are either donations or importations; the procurements from us are limited. I would like this House to recall that in 2020, a certain group of – I may call them scientists – convinced the President that they could produce a vaccine for COVID-19. Indeed, they went ahead and drew big sums of money. In 2020, they drew Shs 20 billion under a company called Preside, which is a sole company under the directorship of the one who has been here called Dr Musenero – she is one of us.

In 2021, she convinced the President that when she is a Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation, she will produce a vaccine. She went ahead and got Shs 50 billion from the ministry. The scientists in the same ministry have not got any salary. They have even abolished the ministry but she went ahead to get the Shs 50 billion – that she would make a vaccine.

As of yesterday, I was at their head office in Ntinda where the so-called “Preside” is. I have not found any test tube in that office. There is no laboratory. I have not found there any scientist because I found her cousin who is the security guard, guarding only chairs in the office. (Laughter)

We would like to know –(Interjections)– she ran away but let this Parliament not be used for rubberstamping masquerades that come and siphon money. We remain clapping that we are passing a budget when actually we are passing it into some people’s pockets.

Madam Speaker, I beg that – Hon. Ruth Aceng is suffering a lot importing and looking for donations when our own money can buy for Ugandans medicine yet the money has been siphoned by people who have marketed themselves, gone to the President and lied to him that they can. They even chased away the right doctors who would do for us wonders in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. They went ahead and convinced the President to abolish the whole ministry all in the name of fleecing the country.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that through the Minister of Health, who is suffering with importation and donations of COVID-19 vaccines, the money, which was given for COVID-19 accountability should be given under that Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation because she is part of us – (Interjections) – information allowed.

Mr okin: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way for me to give you information. What my honourable colleague has stated is a very serious allegation. Good enough, he has decided to mention it in this House. Therefore, we cannot take it any lightly.

The information I want to give to the Member, Madam Speaker if you can guide, is that he should come with a personal statement on this matter such that the Members are able to internalise and talk about it and we see how we can be able to go on. You can see that if Shs 50 billion has been given to a minister to manufacture a vaccine and up to now we still do not have it; I think that is a very serious allegation that has to be investigated. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, first of all, what you are saying is an allegation. You have not backed it up with any evidence. If you want this House to take what you are saying seriously, please lay the evidence on the Table so that we appreciate that what you are saying about the honourable minister is the truth.

What I would also request – since we have asked the minister to come back to the House, keep your question and bring it up when she is in the House. We cannot discuss a person who is not in the House. 

She asked for permission because she is appearing before the Committee on Budget – I gave her permission to go. Honourable members, let us handle it when she is in the House. We all appreciate your concerns but we want evidence laid on the Table to back the allegations.

Mr musinguzi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have never stood here on hearsay. I am privileged to have been a former assistant commissioner in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. I am talking from an informed point of view.

The Innovation Fund, which –

The Deputy Speaker: Okay, lay the evidence on the Table.

Mr musinguzi: I can lay myself, first of all. (Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: Can we go to the next person. Honourable Government Chief Whip, we want accountability on the money that is being transferred to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and we need all the information backing up the allegation that hon. Yona has brought to the Table. We will get that report. Can I hear from the Government? 

3.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues raised – [A member rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The way I like your indiscipline of standing when another person is speaking - Can you sit so that somebody speaks?  

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the issues raised by hon. Yona are serious allegations. I am going to pick a copy of the Hansard and pass it on to the minister so that the moment she answers or brings a statement on the Innovation Fund, she responds to the allegations brought here. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did listen very attentively to my old friend, hon. Yona Musinguzi. He was not only animated in his submission but he was even willing to lay himself as evidence to the allegations. (Laughter)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it provided in the rules that you can lay yourself on the Table? 

MR MPUUGA: That is how dramatic and animated his submission was. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which part of his body is he laying on the Table? (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, that was the crowning moment of his animated submission. On a very serious note, those are grave allegations to the person of the honourable minister regarding the manner in which public affairs are being handled. The honourable minister asked for permission to go to the Committee on Budget, probably to defend another “heist”, if I can borrow the submission of the honourable member. 

Madam Speaker, I think this House can do this country justice by asking the honourable minister to appear before the relevant committee of Parliament, before her supplementary budget is considered, and explain herself. The honourable member should also appear with evidence before the committee and make these allegations so that the minister explains herself, before we can consider any further request from her office. That report should come to Parliament and the minister should defend herself on these allegations. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is going to be very difficult for us to operate when a Member comes here and makes very serious and wild allegations without any evidence. It also becomes hard when we subject a minister to a committee over personal statements. 

I request that the Member be given time to lay on the Table his evidence. The moment you get that substantive evidence, Madam Speaker, you can guide on the next step. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, like I said before, we cannot debate about someone that is not in the House. We have asked the minister to bring a report to this House in two weeks. However, on the allegation that has been put on the Table, we can ask the minister to come here on Tuesday to respond to the allegation by hon. Musinguzi. 

Hon. Musinguzi should also come with evidence to support his claims. Let us have this debated on Tuesday before the supplementary budget is brought. If we see substance in the matter then we will suspend the supplementary budget. If we have that concluded then we will sort out everything. 

3.42
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS, TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the President several times in his addresses and he continues to assure Ugandans that Ugandan scientists are developing a vaccine against COVID-19. 

In light of the allegations being raised by hon. Yona Musinguzi, we request the minister to update Parliament on the process of developing a vaccine. I do not think she received money as an individual to develop the vaccine. Therefore, I agree with your guidance that we require – [Hon. Yona Musinguzi: “Order”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musinguzi, do not switch on the mic and start shouting “order.”  Let us have respect for the Speaker’s chair. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I agree with your guidance that we could require the minister, probably on Tuesday, to come and update the House on the process of developing the vaccine, given that this Parliament passed money for that process. We shall take a decision after listening to the minister instead of rushing to condemn her when we have not listened to her. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Her Excellency, you are most welcome to the House. Government Chief Whip, we need this information to be passed on to the minister. She should be in this House on Tuesday to respond to that. She must also come with all the relevant documents backing up what she is doing; how much she has taken and the transition process on what was raised before. 

MR TAYEBWA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. [HON. MEMBER: “Procedure”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you pick the mic and start saying, “procedure”, I will not give you chance to talk. 

3.45 
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the report she has presented. However, there are a few concerns that need to be taken seriously as far as the COVID-19 pandemic fight is concerned. 

Honourable minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, today you have taken long here. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Hon. Yona Musinguzi was cut midway when he was giving this Parliament information. The minister is being instructed to come here and defend information that has not been completely given. Ordinarily, all the information must be given to Parliament and then the minister can come and answer.  

If the minister turns up here on Tuesday, like you have guided, to respond to only what the Member had so far said and the Member raises other more serious issues, like he was doing before – because you wanted many other people to speak – what do we do, as a House? 

He had started speaking and because he was limited by time, he stopped and the minister was instructed to come and respond. Hence, the procedural issue I am raising is whether at least by the practice of this Parliament, you do not allow the Member to give this Parliament full information and then all that information is given to the minister to come and respond. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, if the Member did not finish his question, can you put yours down in writing to the minister such that you have all the information that is required and it is documented? As far as I know, I have given each of you two minutes to debate. If you want to come and make a presentation for two hours, bring it on the Order Paper. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I started by appreciating the Minister of Health for the statement she has made. However, some gaps are still hanging that need to be tied very seriously for our community to respond positively in helping us fight the pandemic. 

First, I want the minister to take note and verify whether the Shs400,000 that was advanced to every village in relation to paying the VHTs, the chairpersons LCI and the taskforce reached the villages.

Secondly, honourable minister, there is a lot of concern as far as “waiting-in-motion” is concerned. What is “waiting-in-motion”? People leave their homes early to go for vaccination but it takes them long. Those who go in the morning come back in the afternoon. The waiting takes very long. Maybe the people there are not well facilitated. We need to take care of that because it is leading to apathy.

They have talked about issues of IDs. It is very important that we take note of this. It is not only students who do not have IDs but we also have many of our community people whose IDs either did not come or got lost. 

Therefore, we need to take care of this, probably by you addressing the media to capture this very sensitive information; that an ID is a requirement but any ID that is available should be considered. 

Lastly, even some of us who have been vaccinated - I remember vaccination started here in Parliament but to our surprise, there are Members of Parliament, our support staff and many others across the country who have received both jabs but the data capture seems to have a problem. Their certificates have not been issued to date. 

Therefore, it is something that we must take note of to ensure that we really create confidence in what we are doing for purposes of supporting those –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my colleague. When students reported to the universities, many were denied entry because they were not vaccinated. The minister should clarify this.

However, when students went for vaccination in other centres, many of them were told that the vaccines were not there. They were also asked to go with their national identity cards yet some did not have these cards. Therefore, many are stranded. This is very serious, Madam Speaker.  

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much for that information. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the public out there seemed to have picked the position that Parliament adopted to restrict those who do not have vaccination cards from entering and the talk is going around that very soon, one might not go to public places. Therefore, if this can be upheld, I think we can move very fast and get many of our people vaccinated. I thank you very much.

3.51
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report as it is good for the consumption of the country. Given that almost all institutions want people to have vaccination cards and given the report you have given to us that the vaccines are not going to be enough, why don’t you adopt a multi-pronged approach, especially now that we have some scientists here? For example, during the time when we had many cases of COVID-19, Dr Ogwang came up with Covidex and Gulu University invented Covilyce-1 as well. 

To what extent do we have such kinds of treatment - because they have been helping people. I have a testimony of a person who was infected with COVID-19 from Kalongo. We gave the person Covidex and within three days, the person had recovered. Can you help us, as a country, to know the fate of Covidex and Covilyce-1 so that they can help the country to curb this pandemic?

However, we thank you very much for the good report that you have given. Lastly, I was maybe waiting to hear something about Test and Fly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was discussed yesterday.

MR AMOS OKOT: I missed that. I need to understand more about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to really thank the Ministry of Health and other professional bodies. We have gone through a hard time in Uganda and they have really tried their best to manage COVID-19. 

In addition, we must thank the Government for the efforts made. As a House, we should really support and see that we curb COVID-19. We have some loopholes but these can be sorted out. They are not as serious as they may seem. 

What we need is to encourage our people to go and get vaccinated. I get surprised when we say everybody must come to the House with a vaccination card then somebody serves me with a notice of intention to sue because I have said it. (Laughter)

Our role as leaders of this House is to ensure your safety. We want to assure you – we have taken a decision as Parliament and we will not allow anybody to intimidate us. We must act as an example to this country. Let people get vaccinated. Go and mobilise your people to get vaccinated. We need people alive to vote for you tomorrow. However, if we do not advise them to be vaccinated, you mean the dead bodies will vote for you? Leader of the Opposition? 

3.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for the statement. Of course, the whole country is very keen regarding the extent and depth of the vaccination outreach so that the country can be opened up and citizens can resume their normal lives. 

I have essentially two or three concerns, which I would like the minister to address. One is that the vaccines we have enlisted are about five or so varieties. If somebody takes Pfizer today, will the next procurement follow that trend to know that I have sent 50 doses of Pfizer to Masaka and therefore, I must follow up with the same at the next procurement? What will happen if, for example, you fail to get the same type for the same region in the same numbers? What will happen to citizens? Is it safe to be inoculated with different types at different intervals? The numbers are staggered; the numbers are inconsistent and the reception is also inconsistent. 

Kindly clarify to citizens such that people do not go or rush for a second jab of a different variety. I am advised that there are types for which we require a single jab. Are they at our disposal? Can we be advised and how many of that type have so far been sent to the community?

Madam Speaker, the second issue I would like the minister to address is: Parliament gave the ministry Shs 18 billion to procure vaccines. How much of that has been absorbed so far, before we hunker for donations? 

Initially, the argument was that vaccines had been rationed and were not available. They are now available. How much of this has been utilised for us to be sure we are no longer at the mercy of the donors but we are able to procure in time and take care of the needs of the country? 

The third concern, Madam Speaker, is about the situation of health workers involved in this exercise. Will the minister assure this House and the country that she has mobilised enough logistics to take care of the desired and required health workers, so that we do not end up with expiries in storage because of failure to mobilise resources to sustain health workers? 

The complaints on allowances are awash yet we have not heard confirmation from Government that indeed, they have taken care of this concern and therefore, the health workers are at peace and will be able to turn up and provide the necessary service to the citizens.

Lastly, as a scientist, there are concerns out there which partly explain the fact that there are cases in some areas where the uptake by men is very limited. The concern by men in silence – and I hope Members of Parliament are not part of the reason – is that some of these vaccines have tendencies of arousing impotence. Therefore, men are scared of these –(Laughter)– yes, I have heard it; the doctors must have picked it. The boy child is so scared of this vaccine –(Laughter)– and therefore, is wary of the future.

Honourable minister and doctor, please assure us that the boy child is insured against impotence, courtesy of this vaccine. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I think it is only you who can assure us because you are a boy child.  (Laughter) I think hon. Aogon has information; maybe it has affected him.

MR MPUUGA: I will allow him space to give it.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, indeed, the boy child is concerned. You know, the problem with the “boys” here is that they find it hard to give testimony but the scare is real; everybody is scared.

Away from that, allow me to sneak this to the LOP. There is a concern in the country – away from the concerns of the boy-child – about the single registry. In the event that we have another lockdown, how do we track the most vulnerable people for urgent intervention?

For instance, the money which was given by the Prime Minister, how do we handle that? That is another question upon which Government should give a strategy. Do we have a robust social protection system? All these are issues of concern.

MR MPUUGA: I think the information that the honourable member has given will require another day and hopefully, the Prime Minister will be able to respond. Provide the question to the Prime Minister to come and properly elaborate on the social safeguards you have for the community. 

You are aware how we all got scattered. Let me take information from hon. Oguzu Lee, Madam Speaker, because he helps us –(Interruption)

MR OGUZU: Thank you, LOP, for the opportunity. Indeed, there are concerns regarding the uptake of the vaccines. We are aware Uganda is a country that has ratified conventions that relate to observance of human rights. It would be important that the minister clarifies whether vaccines are indeed mandatory or it is an issue of choice.

Just like some people have concerns relating to religious beliefs, there are people who think their age cannot allow them to take the vaccine. There are those who say the emergency use approval cannot guarantee their safety. I think there are a lot of issues that need to be debated yet that environment has not been provided.

What we see, in many places, is a tone that seems to be intimidating. Either way, the most important thing is the legality of all that we are doing, as a law-abiding country, must be upheld.

So, the information I want to give you is that people who are not taking these vaccines have concerns and the minister should respond to them and if there was time, we would highlight those concerns. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: With the permission of the Speaker to accommodate two more colleagues; hon. Betty Aol. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all appreciate that COVID-19 is a new disease and we would love to have more information about it.

In Gulu, as I try to disseminate and encourage people to go for vaccination, some teachers lost their colleague after vaccination. There could probably be people with some special conditions and who do not have to get this vaccine. 

So, I just want to tell you that two teachers died in Gulu after receiving the vaccine. This is the information I had to give. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: I will take information from Dr Abed and hon. Serukenya and cede ground.

DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: LOP, haven’t you taken over my role? (Laughter)

DR BWANIKA: I just want to inform the honourable minister that in the last wave – the second wave – the epicentres, which were major, were schools. I want to know from you whether you have come up with different SOPs for these schools. Are you going to manage them differently because we are soon sending children back to school again? We want to hear from you about what your plan is – a different one for the schools.

Lastly, about the medical workers who are at the frontline; many of them came down with COVID-19 and some of them succumbed to COVID-19. Have you compensated their families? Have you compensated those who are still alive? We want to know from you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. My presumption was that when you spoke, you had spoken for the Opposition. But I am also glad you took on the role of the Speaker. Congratulations (Laughter). Honourable minister, can we have a statement from you? 

4.07
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you Madam Speaker. I have a very important issue to raise. The good thing about the Minister of Health is that she comes excellently prepared and sometimes we forget some of the underlying issues. 

I have read the report. The minister has not come up with a commitment from Government as to how and when the facilitation of health workers will be improved. Because right now, although they are working 24 hours – Madam Speaker, you are a woman like me and we are lucky to have a woman in that docket. Imagine it is your son or daughter who is working 24 hours and you facilitate this person only Shs 5,000. It is unfair. 

Through my network, I have come to discover that there are very many agencies that are willing to help the Government but the Government is not coming out with a commitment. Can the minister assure us that she has a commitment to improve the allowances for the health workers? 

Secondly, I wanted to call the Leader of the Opposition to order because the boy child is complaining that when they are vaccinated, they will not function properly. Some years back, there was famine in Uganda and for the first time, yellow posho was brought into the country. Very many men were saying that if you eat the yellow posho, you will not function properly. One of the leaders coined a very good message. He said that when he started eating yellow maize, his wife produced twins. 

Therefore, the Leader of the Opposition should go on the Floor of Parliament and say something like, “I have been vaccinated twice and I have even married a second or third wife.” (Laughter) This is a message that – of course as a Christian, I would discourage you from doing that. But let them know that it has made you better. That will encourage others who are discouraged. 

I wanted to tell my Leader of the Opposition that when you take that kind of leadership, you have to be positive and tell the country that all is well because if you do not, some people who believe in traditional practices will claim that even the Leader of the Opposition spoke the other day and he was not sure of himself. That will discourage the nation. 

Madam Speaker, the LOP was very smart. He ran away from me as if he knew and had read my mind that I was going to call him to order. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have a very important activity that we need to perform this afternoon. It is an international activity where we shall be receiving the Olympic torch at 4.30 p.m. here in Parliament. We will leave the Chamber and go and receive it. 

You are aware we are preparing for the Commonwealth Games which are going to be hosted in UK from 28 July to 8 August 2022. The game organisers will stage the official Queen Baton Relay of Her Majesty. This really is visiting from country to country. This afternoon, it will be in Uganda at 4.30 p.m. It will be brought to Parliament of Uganda and we will go and receive it from outside our building here. 

Even as we debate, we should be mindful of the fact that at 4.30 p.m. we have that activity that we are going to perform. We have only 15 minutes to that event. 

4.12
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Health. I just rose to provide some information, particularly in response to some of the issues raised. 

Yes, these vaccines went through emergency approvals but the process of developing them follows the same protocols. That the vaccine candidates are initially tried on animal models and if they pass, they are tried on human beings through three phases of clinical trials. Side effects, the efficacy, the safety issues are all assessed. When they pass, that is when they are approved. 

As a scientist, I have read extensively on the trials which were done and they were being done in various countries. For AstraZeneca, the trials were done in Brazil, in the UK and South Africa. Most of the fears that the people are raising are unfounded because the documentation does not indicate that these side effects were found. 

Therefore, issues like impotence are not recorded as side effects, which were observed. I am sure most of the men in this House who are active have received two doses. Personally, I have received the two doses and I do not find any problem. I actually feel more potent than I was before. (Applause) 

The assurance I just wanted to give the honourable members in this House is that globally, there are campaigners against vaccines; so they post a lot of false information which can be misleading. 

For us as medical scientists, we are satisfied that the vaccines have no serious side effects to warrant anybody to fear them. That is why we have taken them.  

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I wanted to seek – the minister is talking about impotence but the honourable member sought information about underperformance. Impotence is at a high level. I wanted the minister to clarify whether it does not lessen performance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you mean you have reduced this House to discussing private matters? Why don’t you go for a sex conference somewhere? (Laughter) If you have that problem, go to “Mukamanayamba”. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, there is no documented evidence that men who participated in these trials sexually underperformed. That evidence is not there. So you should not worry that you will underperform sexually. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable members for the questions and the encouragement. 

I will be very quick. Money sent to the district task forces being less: the districts are under the Ministry of Local Government. Money was channelled through the Ministry of Local Government for implementation. I, therefore, request that if there is an opportunity, let the Minister of Local Government be given time to explain.

Are there exemptions to the vaccine? Not that I know of. Actually, those who are more vulnerable to infection should get vaccinated first such as people with cancer, diabetes, hypertension, HIV and the like. You need to get vaccinated first because you need to be protected.

Why are we vaccinating only 18 years and above and not the children? Madam Speaker, research is still on-going in children. Research in the US has shown effectiveness in children 12-17 years if they are vaccinated with the Pfizer vaccine. Otherwise, all the other vaccines are still undergoing clinical trials and we are waiting for their reports. However, we have taken good note of the research that took place in the USA and our scientists are considering it very seriously.

Regarding the issue of students in tertiary institutions, Madam Speaker, they can use their identity cards; that is allowed. However, students’ denial of entry is very unfortunate because these students have been at home and it was not easy to access them. 

Since they came back to school, working with the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have agreed that the tertiary institutions will have outreach centres in their compounds. Come 15th, we are staging ourselves there and vaccinating them so that they can all be vaccinated. I will pass on the information to the Minister of Education and Sports to ensure that students are not turned back home.

Madam Speaker, the issue of development and manufacture of vaccines is under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and I would request that at an opportune time, she updates us.

Regarding the issue of waiting time being too long, yes in my statement, I clearly stated that initially, there were fewer vaccination sites. However, we have opened up more and we have opened up outreaches. We are moving region by region. Therefore, the question of waiting for too long does not arise.

We have given opportunity for all forms of identification to be used. Therefore, nobody should get worried.

Regarding the Members who have not got their certificates, we regret and apologise for that. If we can have their names, we will work that out and give you the certificates.

Madam Speaker, we no longer have challenges with inadequate vaccines. Therefore, nobody should be worried that we won’t have enough vaccines. However, for those who would like to use Covidex and Covlyce-1, you are free to use them because they were cleared by the National Drug Authority. However, they are still undergoing clinical trials; they are not yet approved for use on everything since they are still undergoing clinical trials.

Madam Speaker, I request my brother - because it is coming to 4.30 p.m. when I have not finished - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: The clarification I am seeking is if, for the first dose I got AstraZeneca and you do not have it available, can I get Johnson & Johnson or Pfizer?

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I was coming to that but since my brother is impatient though he is a good brother to me, I will answer him. If you got AstraZeneca, you can only get Pfizer. That is the only research that has been concluded. Otherwise, you cannot mix vaccines. We also discourage mixing vaccines. Our own scientists are doing a study on mixing the vaccines just like other countries. Honourable members, do not mix vaccines because evidence has not been shown through research.

Madam Speaker, regarding the Shs 18.5 billion that was provided by this august House, I did talk about it. It is under financing for vaccines where I gave a breakdown of the supplementary of the Shs 18.5 billion and also what we have used so far. It is on page 17. 

I request my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, to turn with me there. That amount of Shs 619 billion has already been used. The Government of Uganda has paid for her vaccines. We used that money to pay for Johnson & Johnson. The Shs 80 billion that was provided, we have also used. Madam Speaker, later on I can give my brother more information.

The logistics to motivate the health workers - Allow me to thank my mother for a very passionate appeal. Madam Speaker, it is true that we have been facilitating our health workers with Shs 5,000. It was being given with the knowledge that vaccination will take place at the health facilities. Those are the static sites.

The assumption was that people would come willingly and get vaccinated at the static sites. We have been trying that for so many months, since March to date. The truth is people are not coming. It is easier to get numbers when we move closer to the people and perhaps that is why we have very few elderly people who are vaccinated because distances to the facilities are far for them.

Therefore, we have discussed this issue because in our routine vaccination, whenever we have campaigns, we facilitate the health workers with a safari day allowance of Shs 12,000 and transport allowance of Shs 8,000 making a total of Shs 20,000. We have agreed with our partners that health workers should be motivated as such.

Do I have the resources? To answer my brother, no. I do not have them. I have not mobilised enough; I have mobilised some to take me to Teso, Lango, Acholi and Kigezi. This is what has been given to me from partners. I need support because the health workers need to be motivated if we are to utilise all these vaccines without expiry, which is one of our objectives clearly written in the plan.

Madam Speaker, again allow me to thank my mother and Dr Baryomunsi for ably answering the issues concerning the boy child. I will only add that research has not documented that issue as one of the side effects.

Death or infection after getting COVID-19 vaccination - Madam Speaker, infection after vaccination has been documented and that is why we are very clear to say that the vaccines prevent you from getting severe disease and death. We have not said that it prevents you from getting the disease.

However, getting only one dose is not a 100 per cent guarantee that you will not get severe infection. Therefore, for you to be fully covered, you need to get two doses and you are only sure 14 days after the second dose. We have documented a few people who have gotten the first dose and died but after the two doses, we do not have any documentation of severe disease and death.

On the issue of schools, Madam Speaker, I provided information on what we are doing with schools under surveillance. In my statement, on Page 3, I have stated clearly that we are supporting headteachers to carry out surveillance and report. 

We are also following up on a rapid antigens test for self-tests, designating sickbays as isolation units for mildly sick children and equipping them with basic information and prevention control materials. The standard operating procedures (SOPs) remain the same worldwide. 

On compensating medical workers who died, we compiled a list and forwarded to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Ministry of Health does not compensate.
 
Madam Speaker, allow me to say a big thank you to this august House. We have truly got very good support during this COVID-19 pandemic for all our interventions. We are truly grateful. I thank you. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. As Parliament of Uganda, we will continue supporting you in ensuring that the lives of our people are protected, especially during this COVID-19 pandemic. As it was said yesterday, let us not just debate here but talk about it. Tell people what COVID-19 is – the dangers – and encourage them to observe the SOPs.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to register my apology. Being the Leader of Government Business, whatever takes place in the country concerns you. I know it is time for Prime Minister’s Question Time but also, the activity out there – that is waiting for us – is your activity as the Leader of Government Business. This is a very important activity for us, that has been scheduled for 4.30 p.m. Let us receive the relay and then leave it to proceed to another country – (Mr Ssewungu rose_)

Hon. Joseph, why don’t we first do - I thought you are a sportsperson and I thought you love Uganda. Not every country gets this opportunity.

Honourable members, I, therefore, adjourn the House to Tuesday next week. However, let us all go and receive the relay.


(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 November 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
