Tuesday, 11 November 2014

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala,

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. With a lot of sorrow, I want to announce the death of Dr Myles Munroe, his wife Ruth, his daughter Charisa and six other members of his delegation who died yesterday in an airliner crash in Bahamas. As you know, he was a friend of the Ugandan Parliament and last year, he was our lead preacher at the National Prayer Breakfast. So I would like to invite Members to stand up for one minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, please join me in welcoming students of Kampala International University. They are up in the Gallery. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. John Ssimbwa and hon. Naggayi of Kampala. They have come to study the budget process and see how Parliament communicates with the public.

Also join me in welcoming members of the Soroti Speakers Association; they are led by the Speaker, Mr Andrew Odong. They are here at Parliament for a three day study visit; they are undergoing some orientation in parliamentary studies institute. They are represented by hon. Osegge, hon. Mukula and hon. Omolo. You are welcome.

Honourable members, for some time, there has been a demand on some areas of the Constitutions that need to be amended. Yesterday, I received a letter from the Minister of Justice, which I will read to you and I quote: 

“Constitutional amendments: I refer to the State of the Nation Address by the H.E the President on 5 June 2014. In his address, H.E the President gave notice to Parliament of the intention of Government to introduce Bills to amend the Constitution during this current session of Parliament. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs together with the Uganda Reform Commission have now compiled all the proposals related to the amendment of the Constitution, which they intend to present to Cabinet for its consideration.

I have received proposals for amendment of the Constitution from the Judiciary, ministries, departments and agents of Government as well as from the civil society.

In September 2013, I requested the Leader of the Opposition to submit any proposal for reform of the electoral laws that the opposition may have so that I could include those relating to the Constitution in the on-going process for amendment, but I did not receive any response.

The purpose of this letter is to request you to inform all Members of Parliament who may have proposals, and I will now amend it and say any other stakeholders who have a proposal for amendment of the Constitution, to submit the proposal to the Uganda Law Reform Commission on 8th Floor, Workers’ House by Friday 21 November, 2014. Proposals should contain the following matters:

a) The provision of the Constitution proposed to be amended.
b) The proposal or the amendment
c) Justification for the proposal or the amendment.”
Signed by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

So, honourable members and the public are informed that they can now present their proposals for amendment of the Constitution.

Secondly, honourable members, last week we agreed to establish a select committee to inquire into the procurement process for the Standard Gauge Railway in Uganda. So, I now nominate the following member:
 
Hon. Eng. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko, MP Nakifuma as the Chairperson,
Hon. Maxwell Akora Ebong, member,
Hon. Clement Ongalo Obote, MP Kalaki, member,
Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, Sheema, member,
Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi, member,
Hon. Xavier Akampurira Kyooma, member, and
Hon. Susan Amero, member.

So, they will be seven.

Honourable members, these are the terms of reference: to inquire into the procurement process for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway in Uganda. 

Secondly, to examine the contract signed between Government of Uganda and China Harbour Engineering Company and advise on its economic and budgetary implications and affordability.

Thirdly, inquire into the circumstances that led to the termination of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Uganda and China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation, for the rehabilitation or upgrading of the existing railway line from Malaba to Kampala.

Fourthly, inquire into the conduct and propriety of the government ministers and officials involved in the process referred to above. 

This committee is expected to report back to Parliament on Tuesday 11 January 2015, so they have exactly two months. Thank you very much.

3.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues that are very general but very urgent in nature. Both have to do with the region of Teso. 

The first one is that in June this year, quarantine was imposed in Teso over the outbreak of the foot and mouth disease and it has continued to be in force to date. Unfortunately, no vaccination is going on and we cannot sell animal products and we do not have meat to enjoy. 

I would like the government to explain to us the essence of this quarantine given that there is no vaccination going on. I also wonder whether we should then just continue marketing the animals if Government is unable to do anything to vaccinate them.

Madam Speaker, the second and very important matter that I want to raise is that for nearly the whole of this year running, the media in Teso and overall the country have continued to report and document systematic killings. People have been gunned down in Teso almost on a weekly basis. 

The main characteristic of these murders is that they happen during broad day light. Investigations are not conclusive no matter what and the survivors if any, especially the offspring of those who have died, are further victimised. So I wonder whether the police are able to follow through these suspects. And often times, it is also said that it is the same suspects all over the region.

Madam Speaker, I would like to point out a number of cases for the record of this House. On April 22 2014, in Bukedea, Dr Emunyeret Patrick Samuel was hacked to death. Two of his children were also cut with pangas and injured, and since then, the children of Dr Emunyeret are fleeing all over the place; there is no protection and this murder investigation has never been concluded.

In December, close of last year, a young man called Opolot Walter died in the police cells in Kyere. So, while this matter is being investigated and the people who were alleged to have killed him, including the police, are before the courts of law, another challenge has come: the family of this boy cannot stay at home. They don’t have any protection and even the organisation called SODANN (Soroti Development Association and NGOs Network) that documented this murder has had its officers hunted out of Soroti. The manager has had to flee; they have literally closed the organisation and we can’t hear anything from the police. 

Lately, a lady from Soroti, I think just a month ago; a one called Akello was shot in broad day light. Nothing has happened about Akello’s murder in Lale. Only a week ago, a man called Auruku and his brothers, in Kyere were shot dead. The list is endless, Madam Speaker. What is disturbing is that it looks like -(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, hon. Alaso, for giving way. I just want to give information, especially to do with Bukedea, that the late Dr Emunyeret actually did not die alone; there was his sister, who was also hacked, went into coma and died two days later. There are also many other deaths. There is a man who was shot dead at 8 p.m. over a year ago, but up to today, we are not getting any information from the police whether the culprit has been arrested or they are doing any investigation. And that was in the middle of Bukedea town. 

In Malera sub-county, where I come from, it is almost the order of the day now; people hack each other. So far, five people have died but you don’t get anything from the investigative organs. That is the information I wanted to give you, hon. Alaso. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think the situation is extremely bad given that additional information. I am also told that in Mulago, on a daily basis, there are over 20 people dead. But let me concentrate on the situation in Teso for this afternoon. It is very disturbing that the police receive these complaints and they do not conclude the investigations. 

It is also disturbing that these murders take place during the day. People are being hacked to death in broad day light and the police will take another five or six hours before they intervene. And, if they intervene, you will hear the suspects were given police bond and you will hear the same group in Ngora and Katakwi. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to:

    1. Ask Government to immediately inquire into the murder cases in Teso. Government is supposed to protect these ordinary people; protect all of us. Life has become so cheap in Teso and indeed so cheap in this country. So I would like them to inquire and give this country hope that we are safe as we go about our daily business.

    2. It would appear there are gangsters that are known to some elements in the police and it would be good if Government again follows these gangs of criminals.

    3. Madam Speaker, some of these people die in police cells, anyway. Is it possible for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate the conduct of their police officers? Because if you die in the hands of the people who are supposed to protect you, then there is real trouble.

    4. Lastly, I would like to ask that government assures the victims, like those children of Dr Emunyeret and the relatives of Opolot who was killed, that even after you have lost your dear ones, at least you can be protected; you can be safe to continue with your own life in the same home. So, is it possible to assure the victims, like this organisation, SODANN that has nearly closed because it was doing humanitarian work; helping people who cannot afford legal aid? Is it possible to assure those people that they can continue to serve this country without risking their lives? Madam Speaker, that is my request.

THE SPEAKER.I hope the Prime Minister will be able to address the issue.

3.23
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I stand on an issue of national importance. I travelled back from my constituency last night. While I was in Kitgum, I got very disturbing scenarios which are going on about the children who are nodding in Northern Uganda. We have a total of 1,200 children in Kitgum District who are nodding. Out of those, 50 have been raped and out of the 50, 35 have given birth. So, we have children out of rape of the nodding children totalling to 35 babies. Out of the 50 rape cases, only nine suspects have been arrested and they are in cells. Last Friday, as I arrived there, an 11-year-old girl was raped by a man of 32. That man, Okeny Samuel, actually had one of his children nodding who died early this year. He was caught red-handed with this 11-year-old girl. When he was brought to the police station, I went to see him - the gentleman is HIV-positive. The man is in cells and pretending to be mentally disturbed. 

As I speak, out of those 1,200 nodding children, in Kitgum, alone – that does not include Lamwo, Pader and Gulu, where we also have the nodding disease. Already 100 are dead. Five of the nodding children were loitering around away from their parents and they got lost. They have totally disappeared and their bodies have never been found. And this is only in Kitgum. 

Therefore, I stand here to pray that, Madam Speaker, we request Government to arrest all these gentlemen – [HONOURABLE MEMBER: “They are not gentlemen; they are rapists!”] - As a mother, I am just being polite. I do not want to use the words I would have used. But these people should be arrested. Last week, one of the boys who are also nodding was sodomised by a man and that boy is from my village. He is my uncle’s son and we want the rapists to be arrested. 

Two, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order members!

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I want the government to establish a police post in a place like Timango where there is concentration of these children. The distance to the nearest police post is about 25 kilometres away and the people there have already offered their land - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the point has been made. Please, windup because the other people also want to speak.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - that we establish a police post for these people. Lastly, we ask the government to come to this Parliament to update us on the status of the nodding children in this country. Since we had this issue in Parliament, we have not been given an update on what is the status quo and what the government has been able to do. Children are dying because there is not enough food, including those who are in the main hospital. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition

3.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs for listening to the people’s appeals and requests for amending the Constitution as we prepare for the next elections. 

I want to acknowledge that we received the letter he referred to. I refer to the letter he read – the Office of the Leader of the Opposition received the letter hon. Tayebwa referred to here a while ago. And we are about to come to you with a copy. But then, the process had started outside Parliament of various parties, civil society organisations, academia and the views of the stakeholders who are not in Government - it was better for us to harmonise our thoughts so that we do not bring to you so many memoranda, but an agreed and harmonised document. We have since been going around the country under free and fair elections campaign. The beauty of it is that it has all been embracing. All people have been attending irrespective of their parties and whatever affiliation. 

We intend to have a national conference on 24th of this month, and at the end of it, we shall have a ready document with a harmonised position for all the views which we think are out there. 

From your letter, honourable minister, you said that you are closing on 21st November 2014. We would like to appeal to you that you give us up to a week after 21st so that after the conference, we can bring you a harmonised document which will be useful for this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before hon. Ekanya comes, I want you to join me in welcoming staff from the National Assembly of Namibia. You are welcome. They are benchmarking with the Clerk’s Department for two weeks. 

3.30
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Thursday, the order paper had a business about the creation of districts. You are quite aware that the people of Tororo County started demanding for a district status when the number of districts in this country was just about 30. We now have over 112 districts -(Interjections)- our people even ate rats - (Laughter)

When the people saw that Government is going to create new districts in the newspapers - I too saw the order paper and Tororo was not in the list. Some elders called me and they were wondering whether there is equity and unity in this country and were wondering when their demand would be attended to. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Tororo would like to hear from Government; when will their demand be attended to.

THE SPEAKER: You are asking me to speak in anticipation. I have not yet read the report. It has not yet been presented. I hope the Minister of Local Government is listening. It is a serious issue in Tororo.

3.32
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very Madam Speaker. I want to address my mind to the letter that you have just read from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafire. 

I know our rules bar us from anticipating and therefore talking on issues which are not there. But I am also aware that the Electoral Commission published the road-map to the 2016 general elections. I am cocksure that the road-map certainly has got a relationship with the constitutional amendments that we are going to have. 

Madam Speaker, you are on record for having demanded several times that these amendments be brought to Parliament ahead of time so that ample time is given for all the stakeholders and committees of Parliament to digest and get views from as wide a population as possible so that we can come up with a holistic amendment.

We are now in November; I beg you to reflect on the road-map given by Eng. Dr Badru Kiggundu about the 2016 elections and yet we are here expecting work from the minister. I know from of my civil service background that this will go to the Cabinet. I know how long it takes to draft a Cabinet memo; how it goes there and channelled out and what it takes, let alone the time we are going to spend here as a committee of Parliament to prepare these amendments and bring them late for debate. 

The issue I am asking is the belated letter that is coming to us; are we going to be in time for a very comprehensive enactment of the Constitution and other subsidiary laws which are very close to our hearts in as far as these elections are concerned?

I am worried, Madam Speaker; we should have held this amendment yesterday. I mean from the past experience, the way we took long on this amendment, I am cocksure is the same way we are going to. Is it possible to act in this process that within a month or so this amendment is here so that all stakeholders are involved? 

My prayer is that this amendment should not take long in Cabinet after it has taken so long in the ministry. This is my prayer. Otherwise, we will have a hurried constitutional amendment with subsidiary laws which will not help this country or it will interfere negatively with the road-map which has already been given by the Electoral Commission.

Some of the things which are written there in the programmes are already hinged to constitutional provisions especially the fact that a presidential candidate must have a day in each district. That means 112 districts and if we are to have these five or 25 districts, including Terego which is already constitutionally a district, in schedule no.23 of the Constitution - first schedule; what will the number be? 

So, my prayer is, can the Executive work in harmony with Parliament, while appreciating the challenges that we are going to face so that this amendment comes here tomorrow rather than another one month or so? That is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Prime Minister, can you address us on the outbreak of foot and mouth disease and the resultant quarantine; the killings in Teso, the issue of the nodding disease and of course the district of hon. Ekanya?  (Laughter) Then maybe the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can tell us whether you are within the road-map of the Electoral Commission.

3.36
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have listened to the catalogue of problems and they are not peculiar to one area of Uganda. When you look at the papers of today, you will see that there was shooting and killing of one business man in Kampala.

So, this problem of killing is not located only in Teso land. Therefore, we are aware and this is a problem that we all must address; investigations must take place and solutions found so that it is taken note of. It is not a question that we are negligent about but some events go ahead of time like the investigations.

Madam Speaker, the issue of nodding disease has been with us. We have tried to check the cause to address it. I do not think the honourable member is accusing Government of not cooperating with all involved to find a solution and certainly the issue of raping these nodding children is abominable. It is so painful in that I could see it on all the faces I was looking at. It is not even enough to call it animalism, it is unthinkable. And if really we all had a way of stopping the unthinkable, we would do it earlier.

Madam Speaker, yes, arresting has to do with information flow. And I think before we come to the Floor of Parliament, much as we seem not to have much trust in the police, I think the first reporting point would be to the police before we report to Parliament. And I would like to really appeal to all of us – (Interjections)- if order can help -(Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. It is very unfortunate that a senior citizen of the age of my colleague, while talking about a very painful issue can even have enough guts to say: “If it can help.” 

Madam Speaker, before I came here, I had gone to the police. These people were held briefly and released back into the community. My plea was that Government should direct itself through its own agencies to have these rapists arrested. Is the honourable minister, the grand-pa of this Parliament, in order - (Laughter) - to insinuate that I have come here without consulting with the local levels and asking if rising on a point of order can help rescue the issue of my nodding children?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first I would want to remind all of you about our Rules of Procedure. We need to address each other with decorum. So adjectives of young, old or ugly are really not appropriate in this forum. But I want to ask the minister to address the question of the need to arrest and prosecute these rapists.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Obviously, we must arrest these rapists and those who are released without proper prosecution must be re-arrested and the police who do that must be disciplined and arrested for crime because if you do not implement the law, then that is negligence.

So, Madam Speaker, when I go back, we will look into this – (Interjections) - please let me speak my own mind rather than being directed. I think the honourable Speaker has already indicted –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA: Madam Speaker, we are listening to the Leader of Government Business; we are listening to a Prime Minister and we are not listening to somebody who is speaking their mind. Either, what you state is from the Prime Minister and Government or your mind. But we need you to state for – (Interjections)- so is the Prime Minister in order, instead of addressing the very serious issues which have been raised by Members, to tell us that he is just speaking his mind?  

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I think what we want from you is an undertaking whether your minister who is in charge of that sector will come and speak towards these issues. I think that is what Members want. (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I take it from the way you have put it; it will be on record and it will be followed. First of all, I want to inform the House that I was not involved in the distribution of cattle in Teso land. But secondly, I also am aware –(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very much worried and surprised that the senior minister from my constituency and my LC I, was not involved in the distribution of cattle and actually he is answering questions concerning the Government. We are not talking about Minister Kabwegyere; we are talking about the Government. So, is he in order to start talking on his behalf instead of talking on behalf of the Government? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the Prime Minister is unable to take action, I direct the Minister for Agriculture to come here and explain to the country about the quarantine and the foot and mouth disease. (Applause)

3.56
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I am grateful to the honourable Leader of the Opposition for giving us a road-map of what he and his colleagues in the Opposition intend to do and I will most graciously oblige their request to a certain time for receiving their proposals.

This is because the Constitution is an important document; the law by which we are governed. I can assure you that we are not going to rush it. We are going to give everybody time so that we come up with amendments that are well digested. The Constitution is being made by us, it can be amended by us and we will own it and live under it. I will therefore oblige. 

As for the road-map, the Electoral Commission is under my stewardship, the road-map for the Electoral Commission is not a commandment from God because I cannot debate with God. That can also be adjusted in accordance with the dictates of the electorate. Besides, we all own the process; but when you honourable members of the House, who are elected as the representatives of the people dictate to me, I will oblige. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I did not hear anything conclusive. I think because the explanation was a bit technical for me – I mean on the issue of the murders in Teso. I thought I would hear a commitment on that as well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and respond to the issues of the killings in Teso. The information is in the Hansard. Clerk, please, extract it and give it to the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Health will speak to us on the Nodding Disease issue.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT, JULY 2012 TO JUNE 2013



3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gadison Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Annual Report of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority for the period July 2012 to June 2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report is sent to the Committee on Finance and Planning for perusal and report back.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013
TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR- GENERAL

3.50
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following Institutions:

    i. Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU) Component – (IDA Credit Agreement No. 4554-UG)
    ii. Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Bank of Uganda Component (IDA Credit Agreement No. 3588-UG) 
    iii. Uganda Energy Credit Capitalisation Company Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) IDA Credit Agreement No. 4554-UG and GEF Trust Fund Grant No. TF 9094484, I beg to lay.
    iv. Ministry of Water and Environment (Joint Water and Sanitation Development Facility – East (WSDF-E) Component
    v. Directorate of National Citizenship and Immigration Control for the year ended 30th June 2013. I beg to lay.
    vi. Uganda Road Fund for the year ended 30th June 2013.
    vii. Makerere University Business School
    viii. Allied Health Professionals Council
    ix. Mbarara University of Science and Technology
    x. Directorate of Public Prosecutions
    xi. Directorate for Ethics and Integrity
    xii. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    xiii. Office of the President
    xiv. Ministry of East African Community Affairs
    xv. Mbarara University of Science and Technology – Students’ Academic Records Management System
    xvi. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
    xvii. National Council for Higher Education
    xviii. Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (Funded by the Government of Norway)
    xix. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Strengthening Evidence Based Decision Making II
    xx. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Irish Aid Support to Gender and Equity Budgeting (Education Sector and Karamoja sub-region)
    xxi. Ministry of Health
    xxii. Makerere University
    xxiii. Busitema University
    xxiv. Uganda Cancer Institute
    xxv. Ministry of Information and Communications Technology
    xxvi. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    xxvii. NEC Construction Works and Engineering Ltd
    xxviii. Ministry of Defence
    xxix. Law Development Centre
    xxx. Uganda National Examinations Board
    xxxi. Rural Electrification Agency
    xxxii. Gulu University
    xxxiii. Inspectorate of Government
    xxxiv. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services
    xxxv. National Council for Sports
    xxxvi. National Council for Disability
    xxxvii. Ministry of Water and Environment
    xxxviii. Uganda Public Service Reform Programme, IDA  Credit Agreement No. 4199-UG
    xxxix. Uganda Seeds Company Limited
    xl. Uganda Police 
    xli. Uganda Prisons Services
    xlii. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic   Development
    xliii. Atomic Energy Council
    xliv. Ministry of Tourism Wildlife and Antiquities
    xlv. National Library of Uganda
    xlvi. Nurses and Midwives Council
    xlvii. Ministry of Water and Environment 
    xlviii. Joint Partnership Fund and
    xlix. Lira Referral Hospital.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. All those reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANNCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, you recall last Thursday, my colleague did ask this Parliament to give us a bit of time to reconcile with Members who had moved fresh amendments and I want to report that when we left this place, we went to your parlour, sat and agreed. The proposals are still coming; I even got some this afternoon. But we also agreed because some colleagues will not be here in the early days of this week; we are having a meeting on Thursday to harmonize the positions.

Consequently, Madam Speaker, as you recall yesterday, when I rang you, we have not completed this harmonization process. So I am begging that we be given chance to complete this process so that when we return here, we will be able to deal with these clauses without constraining you and wasting time of Parliament. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, what is the minister saying? Has he moved a motion -

THE SPEAKER: I think he is asking to defer the consideration of the committee stage. But no one has sent me any copies of the amendment; you are dealing with each other among yourselves; what about the Speaker? When can I have texts of the amendments? They should be circulated also to the Members.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Accordingly, as you have directed this afternoon, we shall have the amendments circulated to you and to the Members. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUSI: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek procedural guidance. Movers of Bills could be government or a private member. They can introduce Bills to Parliament and the Bills are sent to the committee. Committees generate reports and then we debate. If amendments are to be moved in this manner, would it not be procedurally right for the committee to handle those amendments? Is it correct for such amendments to go back to the ministry or the mover of the Bill, when actually the Bill is within Parliament? I find it a bit procedurally strange. I just want your guidance on how we should be handling such matters in future.

THE SPEAKER: You know we have made it almost a practice that people move amendments even on the Floor and we discuss them here. So unless we agree that whatever amendments come – we may change our rules but the practice has been that people can amend here; they make proposals even on this Floor. So I think it is okay.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, additionally, it is just because the chairman of the Committee on Finance is engaged elsewhere; he is the one coordinating us. I am just raising that because - (Interjections) - he is coordinating the Members who moved those amendments. We agreed last Thursday - these are the very Members we want to harmonize with.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Public Finance Committee stage is deferred up to Thursday.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007


4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? Seconded by the Minister of Finance and Minister of Gender; proceed.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007 is intended to adopt measures to criminalize drugs related offences under the domestic laws in conformity with Article 3 of the United Nations Convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and other related international conventions.

The Bill is also to make provisions or mechanism to generate resources for law enforcement agencies through the confiscation of money and properties obtained from illicit trading in drugs and provide deterrence against local drug abuse and to put in place the mechanism for the rehabilitation of drug addicts.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite the chair to present the report.

4.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Before I present the committee report, I beg to lay on Table, minutes of the committee regarding the consideration of the Bill together with the report from the Uganda Youth Development Link which is entitled, “State of Drug and Substance Abuse in Uganda”. 

I also beg to lay the Chemical Analysis Report of miraa or khat by the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory and also a chemical analysis report of miraa or khat by Makerere University. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is the introduction to our report: The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill was initially tabled in Parliament in 2007. This Bill lapsed with the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. However, it was saved for consideration by the current Ninth Parliament. 

As required by Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Minister of Internal Affairs tabled the Bill for the first reading on Tuesday, 12 March 2013 and this Bill was duly referred to the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for consideration. The committee hereby reports.

The policy and principles behind the Bill: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Bill seeks to do the following: 

    1. To criminalise drug related offences under the domestic law in conformity with Article 3 of the UN Convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and other related international conventions.
    2. To make provision for the generation of resources for law enforcement agencies through confiscation of money and properties obtained from illicit trading of drugs.
    3. To provide deterrence against drug abuse. 
    4. To put in place a mechanism for the rehabilitation of drug addicts.

Relevance of the Bill: the current law on the subject of drug trafficking and abuse is the National Drug Policy and Authority Act, Cap. 2006. This law has several defects in it and is very week that it does not adequately address cases of illicit drugs and psychotropic substances, especially in the face of Uganda increasingly becoming a transit route for consumers of drugs.
 
The Bill proposes to suppress the problem of drug trafficking and abuse, to promote international cooperation as well as provide law enforcement agencies with resources for use to curb the problem.

We used the following methodology and I would request that in the interest of time, I skip the methodology.

Observations of the committee: Illegal drugs trade 

Illegal drug trade is a global black market that is dedicated to the cultivation, manufacturing, distribution and sell of drugs that are subject to drug prohibition laws. Most jurisdictions prohibit trade except under licence of many types of drugs through the use of drug prohibition laws. 

Available literature indicates that trade in narcotics was considered a legitimate business until the end of the 19th Century. Along with it, was the general perception that misuse of addiction producing substances was essentially a domestic problem and a result of ingrained habits in particular areas of the world.
However, at the turn of the 19th Century, advancement in technology and increased globalisation enhanced the production, distribution and the allure of consumption of narcotics and psychotropic substances that were being inter-alia produced from opium and cocoa leaves. In the circumstances, the problems that were hitherto considered localised became globalised. This ushered in the need for the concerted international effort to curb the illegal drugs trade.

The ratification of the international treaties such as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961, Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971, and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 1988 by various countries, Uganda inclusive, was aimed at galvanising international cooperation to combat illegal drugs trade.

These treaties contain obligations whose compliance with by state parties play a great role in controlling the illicit inflow of narcotic drugs within jurisdictions of state parties.

However, it is noteworthy that in spite of being a party to the fore mentioned international conventions, the problem of drug trafficking persists as those involved adopted changing security measures and technology.

The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007 is therefore part of the home grown approaches to stem the problem of drug trafficking and play a more proactive role among the community of other nation states in realising the aspirations of the fore mentioned conventions.

This is exemplified by the comprehensive definition of illicit trafficking in clause 2 of the Bill, which is not only limited to conveyance but even the cultivation and consumption of substances considered narcotic in nature.

If enacted, the Bill will go a long way in stemming the possession and trafficking of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the prohibition of cultivation of certain plants.

Prevalence of drug and substance abuse in Uganda
Drug abuse sometimes referred to as substance abuse or chemical abuse is a disorder exemplified by negative and often destructive patterns of using a substance that leads to significant problems or distress. Drug abuse is usually a precursor to addiction or rather the physical and psychological feeling of need to use a substance in order to function. This comes with prolonged and repeated use of a substance.

Drug addiction also called substance dependence or chemical dependence is a complex disorder characterised by the use of a drug or other substances for non-medical purposes with the aim of producing a mind altering effect in the user. This is the definition by Ministry of Health (2005).

It involves the use of illicit substances such as cannabis; this is the botanical name for marijuana or licit ones like khat, the botanical name is Catha edulis - misuse of legal drugs or use of a drug or substances for purposes other than that for which they are intended.
 
Drug addiction is a disease that is characterised by a destructive pattern of drug abuse that leads to significant problems involving tolerance to or withdrawal from the substance as well as other problems that use of the substance can cause for the sufferer either socially or in terms of their work or school.

According to United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2008, 205 million people are involved in substance abuse worldwide. Of these, 24 million people are estimated to be problem drug users many of whom are unable to stop without treatment. Injecting drug users are estimated at 13.2 million worldwide. 

In Africa, substance abuse is a public health problem reported to be on the increase since the 1970s that is as per the UNDP report of 1997 and UNDOC report of 2008. World Health Organisation showed in 2006 that while 17 to 42.8 percent of youth in Sub-Saharan Africa are involved in chronic excessive drinking of alcohol, those involved in abusing drugs such as cannabis and others are 7 – 38 percent. 

Uganda is one of the leading countries with big numbers of victims of use of cannabis or khat in particular. The Ministry of Health indicated in 2005 that 5 – 10 percent of Uganda’s population estimated at 30 million people according to UBOS, 2008 report are users of alcohol, cannabis, khat, aviation fuel, tobacco, amphetamine, pethidine, among others.

More recently, a 2010 statistical report by the World Health Organisation estimated that the prevalence of drug use disorders in Uganda, in the population aged 15 plus, stood at 0.03 per cent and 0.09 per cent for boys and girls respectively. This is a threat to the social fabric of the Ugandan society. 

Appearing before the committee during the consideration of the Bill, the bulk of the witnesses attested to the fact that drugs and substance abuse is on the rise in Uganda with detrimental effects. A separate review of secondary data by the committee reveals that at any given time, there are at least 140 people admitted to Butabika Hospital over drug abuse, most of them youth between 18 and 25 years. A separate study in Kampala found that 22 per cent of students used and abused drugs, alcohol, marijuana and khat, being the most abused in that order. According to the Executive Director of Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital, drug abusers constitute at least 20 per cent of patients admitted to Butabika usually as a result of severe mental illness.

The committee notes that while addiction cannot be criminalised, it is imperative to stem supply by curtailing trafficking and outlawing consumption through punitive measures as per the proposed penalties in the Bill while enhancing rehabilitation of addicts.

Restrictions on Cultivation

While the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961, to which Uganda is a signatory, places restrictions on cultivation of cannabis and opium under articles 22, 25 and 28, a state party is under an obligation to establish a government agency to control cultivation. In Uganda, section 49 of the National Drug Policy and Authority Act, 1993 provides that no person shall cultivate any plant from which a narcotic drug can be extracted without the written consent of the minister responsible for health in consultation with the National Drug Authority. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to prohibit the cultivation of certain plants listed in the fourth schedule of the Bill including Catha edulis commonly known as khat, mairungi or miraa.

A remarkable point of contention in the Bill with regard to restrictions on cultivation is whether or not to outlaw khat. It is a highly addictive drug categorised as a stimulant that creates feelings of euphoria. It originates from the Catha edulis shrub, which grows abundantly in parts of East Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. In Uganda, it is widely cultivated in various localities such as Arua, Wakiso, Butambala, Buikwe and Mpigi.

It is a source of livelihood for the communities that grow and trade in it. The proposition to outlaw khat is due to its narcotic content, especially that of cathinone. The committee extensively discussed the issue of the cultivation of mairungi, considering that it is the mainstay of thousands of households across Uganda. 

The committee sought a report from the Directorate of the Government Analytical Laboratory and Makerere University on the biochemical composition of mairungi. It was revealed that while mairungi has positive components, both nutritional and medicinal values such as crude protein, vitamins A and C, calcium, iron and potassium, it also contained dangerous ingredients such as Cathinone. Cathinone is the dependence-producing constituent of khat leaves. Because of this, chewers report their subjective experiences of khat use in a positive way when consuming small amounts. 

The effect of khat on the brain and spinal cord is similar to that of amphetamines, which are stimulated through synapses. Fatigue is elevated, appetite is reduced, attention span is decreased and levels of alertness, sexual libido and motor activity are increased. Users can quickly develop a psychological dependence to the drug, which increases their confidence, friendliness and contentment. 

After chewing ceases, an unpleasant after effect tends to dominate the experience: insomnia, numbness, lack of concentration and low moods, and some chewers also experience an unpleasant effect during the chewing process, describing anxiety, tension, restlessness and hypergolic hallucinations. 

The Directorate of the Government Analytical Laboratory informed the committee that the experiments had indicated that consumers of khat had been exposed to the rapid growth of potentially harmful bacteria in their mouth. The short term advantages of increased energy, alertness and sexual libido hitherto enumerated are grossly eroded by the long term addiction and other health complications such as anorexia, gastric disorders, depression, elevated heart rate, hypertension, insomnia, increased risks for heart attacks, heart disease and cancer of the mouth and liver damage that arise out of long term consumption.

Based on this, the committee is of the view that Government establishes a special bailout package for the derivation of alternative livelihood for the communities that prior to this legislation relied on khat as a source of livelihood. This is because while the producers derive economic gain out of growing and trading in khat, the consumers bear the brunt of its adverse effects.

The Locus of Mental Health in Uganda’s National Healthcare System 

A 2012 report entitled, “Developing a National Mental Health Policy; a case study from Uganda”, asserted that whereas evidence suggests that a range of interventions are effective in treating and preventing mental disorders in low and middle income countries, mental health is not given the priority it deserves in most of these countries. This results in a significant gap between the level of mental health needs and the availability of quality services to appropriately address these needs. In low and middle income countries, especially those in Africa, an estimated 76 per cent to 99 per cent of people with serious mental health conditions have no access to the treatment they need.

The report further evaluates Uganda’s draft mental health policy and reveals glaring loopholes in the draft policy. This is closely corroborated by a 2006 study that revealed that Uganda has a draft mental health policy and an outdated mental health law, but no separate comprehensive mental health strategic plan.

The study further reveals that the mental health authority was part of the office of the Principal Medical Officer in charge of mental health at the Ministry of Health headquarters. There was one national mental hospital, 27 community-based psychiatric inpatient units, one day treatment facility and no community residential facilities. 

The day treatment facility treated 0.64 per 100,000 general population. There were 1.4 beds per 100,000 general population in the community-based psychiatric inpatient units and 1.83 per 100,000 beds in the mental hospital, and all the above had an occupancy rate of 100 per cent. 

Uganda had seen an increase in the number of mental hospital beds in the previous five years, from 450 to 500. All forensic beds were in the mental hospital while 62.4 per cent of the psychiatric beds in the country were located in or near the largest city. The majority of the patients admitted had a diagnosis of mood disorders, followed by epilepsy and substance related problems.

In addition, primary healthcare staff received minimal training in mental health, and interaction with mental health services was rare where there were no mental health professionals. It was found that there were 1.13 human resources working in mental health per 100,000 of the population. Rates were particularly low for clinical psychologists, social workers and occupational therapists. Most psychiatrics work for both government-administered and private facilities. There was an uneven distribution of human resources in favour of the national mental hospital and the urban areas particularly in the main city. 

Considering that rehabilitation of drug addicts is a core aspect of mental healthcare, the plight of mental healthcare services in Uganda today warrants urgent attention, resources and action by the powers that be. The Bill provides for the creation of two funds, a rehabilitation fund, that is, in clause 54 and a drug control fund in clause 72. This is aimed at boosting resources required for effective rehabilitation of addicts and stemming the proliferation of drugs respectively. 

The committee hopes that allocation of adequate resources to these funds will go a long way in facilitating the various activities required for stemming the proliferation of narcotic drugs and the proper rehabilitation of drug addicts.

 Concerns over the Inclusion of Essential Medicines in the Second Schedule which proposes Narcotic 

Drugs to be outlawed

During the consideration of the Bill, concerns were raised about the inclusion of some drugs such as methylphenobarbital, which is used as a sedative and as an anticonvulsant in the treatment of epilepsy, in the schedule of the Bill which lists narcotic drugs that are slated for outlawing by the Bill. It is noteworthy that the interpretation clause defines narcotic drugs as any substance specified in the second schedule or anything that contains any substance specified in that schedule. 

Clause 4 also specifies the penalties to be levied on any person caught in possession of such drugs. However, considering that some of these drugs are actually essential medicines, the committee notes that sub clause (3) of the same clause makes exemptions for medical and dental practitioners which, in the view of the committee, takes care of these concerns.

The Rationale of Strong Deterrence of Drug Trafficking and Consumption 

Considering the detrimental ramifications of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the committee has opted for strong deterrent measures against trafficking. In the view of the committee, stemming drug abuse inter alia begins with mitigating supply. To this effect, the committee has proposed hefty penalties for offences in this Bill. In clause 4, for instance, as a penalty for possessing a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, the committee proposes to increase the prescribed jail term fivefold, from not less than two years to not less than 10 years. 

The theory is that criminal penalties are necessary to deter people from getting involved with drugs. The committee therefore hopes that the enhanced severity of the penalties in the Bill will go a long way in aiding the achievement of the objectives of the Bill.

Institutional Arrangement

The committee notes that as it currently exists, the fight against the proliferation of narcotic drugs is under the anti-narcotics unit of the Uganda Police Force. Compared with the region, Kenya for instance has a fully-fledged autonomous entity known as the National Authority for the Campaign against Alcohol and Drug Abuse (NACADA) established by an Act of Parliament, while Tanzania has an inter-ministerial commission for the coordination of drugs control. The advantage of autonomy of narcotics control institutions is greater efficiency, effectiveness and objectivity in their work. 

This Bill seeks to establish an advisory committee for the rehabilitation of narcotics addicts appointed by the minister and the National Coordination Committee for Drugs Control, with the former to handle matters of rehabilitation and the latter matters of trafficking. The committee views this separation of roles as good. With much needed autonomy and multi-sectoral involvement, the committee is optimistic that there will be greater efficiency and effectiveness in the fight against proliferation of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007 be passed into law with the amendments.

Madam Speaker, there is a minority report from one of the members of the committee who is a miraa grower and he was voted by miraa growers.

4.32
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence and that of this House. I have a minority report and I intend to give arguments in support of my report and position. 

Madam Speaker, I will go straight to the gist of the matter. First and foremost, I agree 99.9 per cent, with the Bill and the committee report, except on miraa. My position on miraa, which is normally called mairungi, is premised on the following: The Bill, in essence, seeks to control and not to out-rightly ban; so by including miraa in Schedule 2, in addition to the four that are there, it will be out-rightly banned. Its growth and production - the penalties in here are so severe. 

My point of contention is that even at international level, miraa is No. 20 on the list of UN drugs; and all research shows that it is the least potent. Alcohol is No.5, tobacco is No. 9. Now, in a country that is the highest consumer of alcohol in the region and where tobacco is still grown, where do we get the moral authority to go for miraa, which is No. 20, without known scientific research? 

I am speaking about a crop that I know is grown from Arua to Mubende to Nebbi to Butambala. In my constituency and district, it has overtaken coffee and any other cash crop. So many families today depend on miraa for a livelihood and for paying school fees at various levels. 

If this Parliament has to find its way and try to include miraa in Schedule 2 and therefore ban it, care must be taken that the livelihood of people is not disadvantaged just in one go. If my reading of this law is to be proved right, I would consider that from the day the Bill is assented to, all those severe punishments will be meted out to the people who are growing miraa.

We visited Nairobi to benchmark; in a district called Meru, miraa is part of a huge export and a whole airport is being constructed for purposes of exporting it. Recently, we went to Ethiopia with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and visited factories owned by the military. On the production line wherever we went, people were very productive and chewing miraa openly. (Laughter) 

As we speak, in the United States of America, there was a vote carried out last week during their mid-term elections and five States - I am not speaking about miraa - voted to ensure that marijuana becomes legal. Therefore, we are enacting a law which is not forward-moving. The world is moving in the opposite direction and we are moving in the opposite direction.

I would like to contend, Madam Speaker, more strongly, because I do not want to go through all these documents, that if Parliament finds its way and wants to include miraa on the list in Schedule 2, I would beg, in my recommendations, that: One, miraa should not be included in schedule 2 but should be severely regulated. Its growth, selling should be regulated, like the measures that are placed on tobacco. This should be undertaken so that slowly by slowly, we discourage people from its consumption and its growth.

That is my point of contention. It should not be orally encouraged. I am not here to encourage the growing of miraa; I am here to advocate that a deliberate campaign, as we have taken on tobacco, be undertaken instead of an outright ban tomorrow. That will not work because all that you are going to achieve is that the growth and consumption of miraa will go underground.

In the region, in Kenya and other countries, it is not banned. You are in the East African Community, so you cannot be an island to legislate on such a sensitive consumption product. That is my most urgent prayer.

Secondly, if this Parliament finds its way and feels it wants to include miraa in schedule 2, then as the committee has stated, there must be a rider. Before the Police and law enforcement agencies go for miraa, which is scientifically proved world over - even in the UN report, nothing substantive has been concluded as yet. Studies are still underway and that is why in most countries like the UK, the Netherlands and everywhere it is not a banned substance. 

We should not be emotional while we are legislating. I beg that if you find your way and you want to include it, you should then take special care. Special care must be taken so that before full implementation of schedule 5, people involved in the growing - Madam Speaker, I am speaking not only for the people of Butambala; we visited Buikwe, Mabira, all the way to hon. Sseninde’s district, to Medard’s constituency, J.B. Mutebi’s, to Mubende and all those regions are growing miraa abundantly. 

My bone of contention is that if you want to do so, then care must be taken so that before you implement it, people are moved away and an alternative is found for their survival, which I think is feasible. Otherwise, the crime rate will increase and poverty will be enhanced, and what comes with poverty is known all over. 

We visited gardens in Butambala with honourable Members of Parliament and we were shocked to learn that one acre of miraa at family basis is equal to 20 acres of coffee in annual income. (Laughter) I know now in my constituency the richest people are miraa growers. I am telling you a fact.

Madam Speaker, my two recommendations are: one, miraa should be severely restricted; it should not be included in schedule 2 but red-flagged. That was my point of contention. Secondly, if you find that it is within your powers, care must be taken so that before implementation of that schedule, there should be an adequate package for the people who are growing miraa. I beg your indulgence and I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have listened to both the main report and the minority report. The report has been signed by the necessary one-third of the members. Let us hear your views on both.

4.43
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (FDC, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report, and I also want to thank hon. Kivumbi for the minority report he has brought. 

I have three points to make: One, the world is moving and on narcotic drugs generally, the world is taking another dimension. In 2012 in the US, Washington and Colorado states moved to decriminalise the use of marijuana. They went ahead to legalise its use for recreational purposes, although it still remains actually illegal to sell, possess and use it under the federal law.

Now, the whole world is seemingly moving towards decriminalisation or recreational use of drugs and for medicinal purpose. In China, recently, the son of Jackie Chan, that is, Jaycee was arrested and it actually resulted into serious debate on the Chinese position on narcotics. 

Back to Uganda here, we read very many stories and actually, the report gave us advantages of miraa - we have heard about the sexual reactivity and so on - and the disadvantages, as my sister has whispered. Now we want to actually totally ban the use of miraa, not even its production and so on. My question would be, have you ever heard of coffee being dangerous when you take it a lot because it has high cholesterol levels? Have you moved here to actually ban or to regulate the use of coffee in this House or even waragi? 

I think miraa must be left out of this business one hundred per cent. Let us ban other things probably, but let us leave miraa because we have to go and do our thorough research before we finally make a decision which is emotional. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MS RITA NINSIIMA: (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the chairperson for presenting the report. 

I would like more clarification from this committee regarding the manner in which they have included epileptic cases in this Bill. You talked of epilepsy, you talked of issues like phenobarbital, the drug for epileptic cases; I want to see exactly how you are separating epilepsy from these other drug abusers, so that we can get the message clearly and see how to help our people. Thank you.

4.47
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I want to thank the Shadow Minister for the minority report. 

Indeed, the committee visited my district, Butambala, and I was with them and we consulted with the miraa growers. Yes, we know that narcotics can be a disaster and a danger to our lives, but in this case, for the mairungi, I have testimonies. When I first saw this product, I thought that it was dangerous and I was actually mobilising my people to stop growing it. However, I took time to do research in my constituency, and to prove that miraa is not dangerous, my people are healthy. (Laughter) The crime rate in my district is, I think, at two per cent and I can assure you that we have no threats from mairungi growing. 

It is also a source of income. More than four sub counties in my district rely and derive their livelihood from miraa. Now, for the committee to suggest and yet they indeed visited - Madam Speaker, hon. Simon Mulongo tasted miraa – (Laughter)– and he is very normal. According to the report that the committee got from my constituency, there is no danger, whether scientifically or psychologically, implicated in the use of miraa. 

Like the argument has been given, we know how dangerous alcohol is, especially waragi, which is even carried in sachets and in pockets of bus drivers who are driving buses and killing our people. Now, nobody has come on this Floor to say there should be no production of alcohol in this country or sale of alcohol, but we are punishing people who are deriving income and indeed living healthy with this produce. 

Madam Speaker, I will accept that the other narcotic items be prohibited but not miraa. In this respect, for my constituency, as I said clearly, four sub-counties derive a livelihood from mairungi; so if there is a substitute product that my people will grow and derive a livelihood from, then I will support this ban of mairungi. Without that, I cannot let my people suffer and be poor. Coffee has failed to grow in my constituency, maize is not a good product, mairungi has -(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the honourable member who brought the minority report. He advised that we should not debate this thing emotionally and I hope we are going to take the right trend. Indeed, I advise that we should not rank the value of money higher than the lives we are losing. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in many of the districts, even at the smallest trading centres, the idlers, the majority of the youth are chewing mairungi, even in Adjumani District. This afternoon, we debated the incident which took place in Acholi sub-region, including the rape of underage children. The excitement, which people are talking about, has got a lot of bad effects. Therefore, I support the committee’s proposal that miraa be included. 

Two, I disagree with the opinion that unless Government provides alternatives, these things should remain as they are. I do not agree with it. I am aware Government has taken an initiative to ensure enterprise selection in all the districts. I am sure all the districts have gone through these processes and there are other crops that have been identified. Therefore, pegging management of this drug to Government providing an alternative will not be fair. 

Madam Speaker, rehabilitation of the drug addicts - I have visited our mental hospital, Butabika, and interacted with some people who got treatment after sometime. What I realised is that what is lacking is handling –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee chairperson for this report, and I out-rightly disagree with my Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs’ views in his minority report. 

Mairungi has caused havoc in the West Nile region. If you went to the city centre at Arua Park, the youth you find there are wasting their time eating mairungi and khat, and I speak about this with passion. All the mairungi that is grown in Butambala is consumed in Arua Park and is transported to West Nile region, where you find the majority of the idle and disorderly youth. West Nile is known for very strong, energetic, hardworking people but all this has been wasted for the last two or three decades. This law provides hope for the people of West Nile and I want to pray that at the time of passing this law, we vote so that the world knows who has voted for and against mairungi. 

I do not want us to waste a lot of time debating whether miraa or mairungi should be included in the second schedule as one of the crops that is banned. People have eaten mairungi and even gone to the extent of mixing it with groundnut leaves, mixing it with marijuana and what we call “goro” from South Sudan. If you trace all the cases of rape in the region, whether of marital rape or defilement, all of them have been associated with people who have been consuming miraa, smoking marijuana and eating goro. So, by including mairungi in the second schedule, you will be doing a great service to the people of West Nile and this country, particularly the youth, and I am speaking as Shadow Minister for the Youth. 

I pray that whoever is going to stand up pursues the path of ensuring that mairungi is included on the list. I also want to add goro as another substance that should be added to the second schedule. Madam Speaker, I submit.

4.56
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the person who has brought the Bill. 

I support the motion and I do not concur with hon. Muwanga Kivumbi’s proposal because the fact is that marijuana and miraa have affected productivity and families. We should not legislate because other countries are doing the same. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi made reference to America, that they have accepted this in some areas and in the East African Legislative Assembly, and that we should also do things the way they are doing them. 

As a member of the committee, I would like to inform hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that we only compromise on common issues; on issues where a country’s sovereignty is being tested, we do not compromise. So, I would like you to get on board with us so that miraa and marijuana are included in the schedule. 

I would like to clarify that much as you visited Meru, Britain last month had to cut down on the importation of miraa. It was highly exported to Britain but they said they no longer needed miraa. The information you got may have gone stale over time. The recent information is that miraa importation has reduced. 

Madam Speaker, there is what we call selection of enterprises. We should not accept people to do what is wrong because they are poor. Government should decide and promote things like coffee by marketing it and also find market for other crops like matooke. We should not legislate for something that can increase crime because we want money. I feel, as legislators, we would really be doing a disservice to our people.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, most of the people who take miraa have caused an increase in the crime rate and a reduction in productivity. Aside from that, they are the idlers and sometimes they become zombies. Countries which want to promote such practices because of money can always get other alternatives. 

I do not concur with the point where hon. Muwanga Kivumbi said because Butambala is promoting miraa growing, Government should take charge of the people -(Interruption)- I am concluding. The Members of Parliament for Butambala, I think we will help you -(Member timed out.)

5.00
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the committee for the good job and go further to specifically address myself to the last paragraph on point 5.1, which says that the Bill will go a long way in stemming the possession and trafficking of these dangerous drugs. It will also go a long way to prohibit the cultivation. 

I do not agree with my colleagues who have quoted America and China because definitely, you know America is promoting homosexuality and lesbianism and therefore, America is not a good example. Secondly, our cultures and morals are at stake right now because of this laisse faire liberalisation without regulation because we are copying other countries. If we support this minority report of my colleague from Butambala, I think we will be going the wrong way; we will not be protecting our children.  

Therefore, I would like to propose that as leaders, we should suggest an alternative that is phased so that in some period of time, we phase out the growing of this dangerous drug, which is giving some people income. It would be a good alternative as leaders to give a timeframe of two years or five years. We cannot at least encourage it forever because it is dangerous for our children, it is dangerous for our cultures, morals and it is anti-Christian if we go on promoting these drugs. 

I would like to therefore propose that this Bill be enacted but with some more amendments, which give some period for phasing out the growing of these drugs and at the same time give an alternative. I cannot agree with hon. Muwanga that coffee and maize cannot do well in Butambala. All these crops can do well in Butambala. Why are you trying to confuse us that they cannot do well? I do not agree with you as a leader that coffee cannot do well in Butambala yet I know there is coffee in Butambala. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. I want to support them and disagree with the minority report that miraa should not be included. It should be included in the second schedule and I also want to say that mairungi should be included too. 

I come from West Nile and as my brother has said, the destruction mairungi has caused in West Nile region is so grave and it has now extended up to the other regions. This is because it is sold in Kampala at Arua Park. That is where you can get mairungi. There is a very high school dropout rate in West Nile and this is because children are used as labourers to pick mairungi, and we all know the benefits of education. The dropout rate is 70 per cent! One time with the children’s forum, we visited Maracha District and we found over 30 children in the field picking mairungi at around 10.00 a.m. So, do we really support such kinds of things? 

There are arguments that there are economic benefits to mairungi and these other substances. Those benefits are to the individuals. An individual who has one acre can get millions of shillings, but what about the destruction it causes the people who consume it. We should think of the majority rather than the minority. These other people can always find other means of getting income apart from growing mairungi or these other substances. 

Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the increase of the jail term for those who are caught with these substances. The committee has proposed it should be more than 10 years. I want to readily support that because giving a jail term of two years is not really enough. Thank you very much.

5.05
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for doing good work. 

Consumption of narcotics has destroyed our people, especially the youth. Some of them have run mad and some are in Butabika - children of important people. So, we have no alternative on this; we must pass this Bill into law so that we assist the security agencies to fight it decisively. 

On the minority report, I would like to inform hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that in his constituency, people have been killed, and yesterday people were crying on TV blaming these drugs for the killings. Somewhere in Butambala, a man called Kaweesa was killed just like that. When there are discos and the people who consume mairungi run berserk, they end up killing others anyhow. These killings we have been lamenting about this afternoon are because of marijuana, mairungi, kuber and other narcotics. So, this is the time that we must be counted to have done something to save this nation and our people.

I support the motion; let us enact this law and save our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MS MARGARET BADA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report they have given very extensively. 

Indeed, narcotic drugs are very dangerous. They have made our young men and women run mad. If you study carefully, you will find that about 90 per cent of the people who are lunatics and mad are like that because of drugs; so it is good that this law has come in time and we must support it.

Regarding the minority report, I do not support it. I remember my people of Koboko asking me, “When shall we ban this mairungi; when shall we have a law against this miraa?” This is the time. 

You people do not know how bad miraa is and the effect it has on people’s health. Look carefully at those who are eating miraa or mairungi; how do they look like health wise? I think when you eat this, you lose appetite; as a result, people who consume this miraa are very thin and lean. If we really study carefully, we will discover that they can even become mad. 

What effect do you think this thing has on one’s brain? We need a scientific study. It must have an effect, even internally in the digestive system. How can you become an animal to eat leaves instead of real food? (Laughter) Surely, is that normal? What will that chlorophyll do to your intestines? I am sure it damages your internal organs. Externally, you will observe that those people who eat miraa or mairungi have cracked lips with blood because of the effect of miraa. 

I am extremely happy that we have included this mairungi on the list and it will be banned. If you look at those who eat miraa, their teeth are green and the mouth is not healthy. So, let us save our people. For us in Koboko, it is grown mostly in Maracha and exported to Koboko. Our people are being destroyed; so, please support the committee and let us stop this eating of mairungi. Thank you very much.

5.10
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I greatly support the report and the motion, and actually I think we needed this Bill yesterday. It was long overdue.
I represent an island community - fisherpersons. This type of employment is engaged in by mainly the youth. As I talk, the majority of these youth are using narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. This has not only increased crime in Kalangala but nationally. This is the reason why, my fellow brothers and sisters, we should make sure that we stop the vice in the country. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, on the principles laid down by the Bill, there is principle No. 4 which is about rehabilitation of the affected people. I look at it as a dicey situation because I think a person who has been affected by the drugs is diverted from the normal health trend and therefore, he is a sick person. Do we need a narcotics law to put in place a structure to treat these people? We already have in place a lot of infrastructure, and not in Butabika alone, to make sure that we rehabilitate these people even before the law is put in place. 

I also have a problem because we have passed a number of laws here, like this one we are going to pass, and we have referred to a number of international legislations and conventions, many of which we have not even domesticated. However, we should remember that this time, we are under the East African Community and we shall face a problem in the future if we do not review the laws and regulations that are made in the East African Legislative Assembly. We shall end up moving back and forth and down up to- (Member timed out.)

5.16
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for making us appreciate that narcotics are a dangerous substance. You are all aware that for decades, most countries have restricted miraa or marijuana use and most of them may be allowing it for medical purposes. There are some that use it for medical purposes, but you will appreciate that marijuana use correlates with worse brain development and lower I.Q. Of course when you take this, you know that it will affect your I.Q and also brain development, and it also acts as a gateway to other drugs. If you take marijuana, be sure that you are going to also take other drugs. 

Those who are advocating for marijuana because it gives you sexual arousal, you will realise that the moment you start taking it, you will take more of it and you will even forget that you are performing. (Laughter) So, at the end of it all you will be a non-performer. This also sends a wrong message to the kids and the youth that drugs are okay; so we must legislate against the drugs, we must legislate against marijuana.

My sister and brothers from Butambala are saying that it is for profit businesses, but letting this pass for profit businesses - marketing and selling marijuana - encourages them to sell to minors –(Interruption) 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: The impression that I have got here, the claim that chewing miraa increases your sexual libido, is a myth. Instead, evidence suggests that actually the libido goes down. The more dangerous one actually, is that the sperms ooze out unconditionally from a man -(Laughter)- Yes, it is here! In extreme cases, men are forced to wear nappies. Do you want that condition, gentlemen? Thank you very much.

MS KAABULE: Thank you for that information and I hope members have taken note.  

I was talking about the profit that my colleague from Butambala talked about. You realise that if we go for profit businesses, this will encourage minors – of course, the business will go to the minors and the youth and these make the biggest demand for marijuana. It is also similar to the tobacco industry because they are targeting the youth and kids. So, for purposes of having a better generation - we may not be legislating for ourselves but for the future - let us support this legislation but considering that – (Member timed out.)

5.17
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good report. However, I want to support the minority report. 

We should control and not ban miraa because it is not only used by human beings but also in poultry and animals. I will give some examples; if you are a serious poultry farmer here in Uganda - I have been interacting with so many poultry farmers, especially those who raise kroilers, and for one to succeed you must have miraa. It is even used as a feed and it is medicinal in poultry. So, if you ban it completely, you will be eliminating the poultry farmers. 

Secondly, in the villages, it is not grown but it is something that grows on its own; it is wild grass. So, I do not know how you will ban it.  

The other reason why it should be controlled - The chairperson has talked about Meru in Kenya where it is being grown on a large scale. Indeed, that large scale production has a bad impact on the community; it is being exported to Somalia and Sudan. Where it is being exported, you can see the side effects it brings on those communities, especially in Sudan and Somalia. 

I, therefore, support the proposal that it should be controlled and not banned because of its importance, especially to poultry and animals. I thank you.

5.20
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their elaborate report. I support the committee and I totally disagree with the minority report. 

For those of us who have not felt the effect of some of these drugs, it is very unfortunate; I think that is why we are speaking in that manner. In my district, there are so many people who are addicted to these drugs. They say that whenever they take these drugs, it takes away any kind of fear; that is why one time we had several murders in my district and all the suspects that were arrested were drug addicts. I, therefore, support the banning of these drugs.  

The committee report also clearly stated “except for medicinal purposes”. The scientists will know how to modernise or extract medicine to give to the chicks. Therefore, hon. Veronica Babirye, do not get scared; I think your issue of medicinal content is catered for within the report. 

I also want to allay the fears of other members. Uganda is really the Pearl of Africa and we have two seasons within a year; if one crop fails, let us try another. As leaders, we should always try to sensitise our people to diversify the economy, not to invest only in one thing. Let the Butambala people advise their people that they should not only cultivate miraa year in and out; they will even lack food to eat. 

You have seen increased reports of strikes in secondary schools and everywhere there is increased moral decadence in our society. You find a parent raping his own child and a child raping his own parent due to the influence of drugs. I therefore support that this Bill be passed and enacted into a law. I beg to submit. 

5.22
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the committee’s position and disagree with the position in the minority report. However, to comfort the minority view, we have seen this position before in this House; when we were dealing with the enactment of the anti FGM law we saw the dilemma of the legislators from those areas. So, I am not even sure that they are speaking from the very depth of their hearts (Laughter). So we might as well leave them at that and concentrate on what safeguards this country. 

I strongly believe that it is time for us as a country to make our laws as punitive and as deterrent as possible, like all our colleagues have said, so that we protect the generation that is ahead of us. There is a whole humanist agenda out there and that is why for me America has stopped being my example - legalising the illegal, decriminalizing the criminal. They have legalized homosexuality, abortion, drugs, incest, prostitution; that is no example to go by. I think Uganda must set standards to protect our values and to protect our young people.
 
Madam Speaker, because of our weak laws, in this House we have had to debate bringing people who are sentenced to death in China. In this very House they have been asking us for money. We had better put deterrent measures and we stop the fact that Uganda has become a hub for narcotics. (Applause)

For those who argue, my good friends, about sources of income; even robbery is a source of income, should we legalise it? (Laughter) I think that we need to save our people and encourage our people to go into means of production that are legal, that have values and protect the rest of the community. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

5.25
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and I must confess that the hon. Alaso has really nailed it for me. However, allow me just add something. 

Sitting here, I just did quick research using my iPad and some very telling evidence that we can use against the use of miraa can be traced to a publication of the New Vision of 5 March 2005. They did a very thorough research and I am going to pick a few excerpts from there. 

The headline was “Mairungi linked to mental illness”. One of the statements reads, “One of my patients suffered a stroke and became paralysed for months because he was addicted to mairungi. It took him several months of counselling and psychiatric treatment to recover…” This is according to Dr Natalie Okelle of the Hope Recovery Centre in Bweyogerere. 

This is actually from the Police and the Minister of Internal Affairs needs to tell us if the position has probably changed. But at that time, they said mairungi is not illegal in Uganda and people trade in it freely and that the government would come up with the Bill that would make it illegal. Although khat is not illegal in many countries, its use is frowned upon because of its narcotic effects. Mairungi also has ingredients of a narcotic drug. This was according to a police officer called Michael Were in 2004. 

Another person called Simon Nantamu, a Psychology Professor at Makerere said, there is no doubt that mairungi, like any other narcotic, can cause mental illness. 

There is this statement that I find so telling. It says, the United States Drug Enforcement Agency, Wikipedia encyclopaedia and various researchers have proved that the common side effects of consuming khat include, anorexia, tahycardia and doctors could help us, hypertension, insomnia, gastric disorders, physical exhaustion, violence and suicidal depression.

Finally and this is another important one, it says, for that reason, khat was not listed under the single convention on narcotics. In 1980, the WHO classified it as a drug of abuse that can produce mild to moderate psychic dependence and has not been approved for medical use in the United States. 

Scientists have proved that extracts from fresh leaves of khat contain cathinone, which breaks down to produce casine and norisodrine. Its consumption induces mild euphoria and excitement and may cause constipation, dilated pupils and hynogogic hallucinations. Its withdrawal symptoms include lethargy, mild depression, nightmares and slight traumas. For this reason, there is enough cause for us to say no to khat. Thank you.



5.29
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the report of the committee. The effects of these drugs especially to the youth are common knowledge. When I was listening to colleagues, I reflected back home that maybe so many rapists are coming up because of all this. 

On the other hand, I looked at it from another angle. As a Parliament, we can be excited and pass this much needed law but my worry which, I want to share with you, colleagues, is, how shall we ensure that implementation is put in place and is effective? If you go to Arua Park, you will find all these people; just go, sit and trade in it and it is not a secret, but an open thing. 

Even the law enforcers knew it was not a good thing to do from way back but nobody had the courtesy to bring them to book. So even if we put this law in place – I have another example of the issue of kaveera where there is lack of implementation and people are just going about their business. We have seen the bad effects of acid, which have destroyed our people. How can it – (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Anywar for accepting the information. The information I want to give very briefly is that let us do our job of making a good law. The Executive will handle the implementation. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, what I am trying to emphasise is that we should not stop at putting in place a law, which will remain on the shelf because it is not easily implemented. We should help the committee report go a long way so that what is passed here is implemented. This is because by going underground, you will see the effects without seeing where these drugs are being used. So once they are allowed to go underground, we shall not be able to control that.

Madam Speaker, I also wanted to bring to your notice that there are other drugs and plants in Acholi sub region - Actually as I was coming here, the other day, I had information that we have a funny grass grown in Acholi sub region with white flowers. Whenever it is used or touched, it makes the youth daring. I want to use this opportunity to ask that it should be investigated. The name is unknown but the areas are there. If I am allowed, I could bring it here. My take would be that the government takes interest in this because it is already a common thing in Acholi sub region –Member timed out.)

5.34
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and members for the convergent debate I have listened to in the last one and a half hours. 

I want to congratulate those who have spoken before me in support of the committee’s position and hon. Alaso for counselling our colleagues who hail from Butambala and who I know very well consider this an artery of their economy. It is an artery of their economy because they benefit from it at the expense of the rest of the Ugandans whose lives have been destroyed by the use of this psychotropic agent.

It is very expensive to treat the after effects of the people who have been using these substances. Go to Mulago hospital and see how many accidents have occurred. Those people are consuming theatre time during which other people with other tumours would have been treated because they come as emergencies. 

I used to use taxis and see how people continued to chew khat and mairungi like goats. The stench of their breath is so nauseating that you do not want to travel with them. Those who have never been near these people should ask us. Those who are arguing for mairungi should try to use it. I have chewed it and I know the side effects. It alters judgement, it makes you daring like hon. Anywar has said, and that is why when the cognitive functions of the brain have been curtailed, people become daring; they over speed and do all sorts of things. I wonder why people do not want to involve themselves in this kind research, which can help them – (Interruption) – No, the Speaker is going to give you a chance to speak. 

Madam Speaker, I can see that there is convergence on both sides of this House and those who have used this substance just for curiosity purposes, can be able to explain what happens. I know hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Mariam have never chewed this mairungi so they do not know what they are talking about. We know what we are talking about because out of curiosity, we have chewed it and we can tell you with a lot of authority. (Laughter) 

It is not less than alcohol; it is something similar or even worse. You establish an artificial high and you think that you can fly like a bird. So the sooner we bar this kind of substance, the better. It is the best thing to do and will be like a Christmas package for Uganda when we legislate on this bad substance. 

However Madam Speaker, let me seek for your indulgence so that you visit Butambala District for the sake of our brothers and sisters and -(Member timed out.)


5.38
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee for their report and recommendations and I support the banning of narcotics 100 per cent. We needed this law sooner than later. If it had been passed earlier, I would not have lost money educating some of my relatives who later on turned into drug addicts and the money and their brains went. One of them is in Mbale Hospital, another one is in Butabika. It is very unfortunate. 

We would like to pass this law and probably if it had been passed earlier, we would have pleaded with the Chinese and maybe they would have had mercy on our people who are in China. This is because the reason as to why they do not want us to plead with them is that we do not have a law and if it is there, it is not stringent enough. So if we pass this law, maybe it will help us to hasten the process of talking to the Chinese to forgive the Ugandans who are there now. Maybe it will be timely for their rescue. 

I would like to refute what hon. Kivumbi said in his minority report. I was RDC of Mpigi for three years and when he says coffee has refused to grow in Butambala, I think he is just seeking support from his voters and not speaking seriously. There is coffee, matooke and many other crops in Butambala. So please advise them so that they leave mairungi and turn to these valuable crops for their livelihood instead of being convinced or even convincing them that they are doing the right thing. 

Madam Speaker, I submit that we pass this law as quickly as we can so that we save our young boys and girls, especially the boys. Thank you very much.

5.41
MR	PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. I want to remind the advocates of the minority report that illicit activities are a high source of income and poaching is an example. You have just been reading this morning in the papers about the ivory that has left the stores and the armoury of Uganda Wildlife Authority because trade in endangered species is outlawed internationally. 

Somebody also talked about cattle rustling, which is high value and illegal. Prostitution is also high value and illegal. Dealing in the sale or trade of guns is similarly high value but illegal.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to relate the issue of miraa to the disarmament in Karamoja because the Karimojong tried as much as possible to defend their guns because they made a life out of criminality. It took Government and this House to say, guns must leave Karamoja for the good of the people of Uganda and for the good of the people of Karamoja. I want to inform you that if you go to Karamoja today or if you came to Kotido, you do not even need to ask for somebody to help you. You can sleep in any part of town even outside and nobody will disturb you.

However you will witness one thing; you will see people who are talking the whole night while eating miraa. (Laughter) They are there. Disarmament had to be done because of the killings, poverty, violence and rape. All the bad things associated with the gun are the same bad things associated with miraa, including the spread of HIV. The people in Karamoja who were serious gun dealers were actually the people who were feeding on miraa, because these activities that are illicit are done at night while covering long distances. So when you hear hon. Anywar talking about giving courage and what have you, the courage to do the most dangerous things that cannot even be mentioned- 

So Madam Speaker, as other people were trying to relate to the question of enterprise selection and so forth, I heard the hon. Kivumbi saying that one acre of miraa is equivalent to 10 acres of coffee and I was asking myself, where has the President been to remind us about this? If it is true that it is of high value and that the money you raise in 20 acres –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an interesting argument, you can complete it. You have a half a minute to conclude.

MR LOKII: That if in enterprise selection you can raise 20 acres of coffee in one acre of miraa then what has NAADS been doing? This should have been the direction for our people to take in order to safeguard them. 

Above all, Madam Speaker, miraa dealing is not even reflected in any district or sub county as a revenue source. So what is this that we are discussing? We are basically safeguarding the interest of individuals who are exploiting the lives of other people and I want to propose that as we pass this law to save Ugandans, we should also consider distribution of mental health services across the country so that we can be able to rehabilitate our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.45
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM,   Kooki County,	Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee and differ from the opinion of the minority report. We have heard a lot from hon. Obua and hon. Lulume because some of the terms that were mentioned in the report are too medical but at least we have heard enough especially regarding complications. 

Madam Speaker, psychiatric treatment is very expensive and therefore, we should avoid setting precedents, which we shall not be able to sustain. This is because we have some people who are politically motivated and want to drive their interests. If we base on that to make a law thereby differing from opinions, which will benefit the majority of Ugandans, this will not be good.

I do not see why the people of Kooki should pay their taxes for people who choose to fall sick or have such complications as we have heard because issues to do with hallucinations and others are very nasty and not good for our youth. Therefore, I support the committee’s recommendation and I rest my case. Thank you.

5.46
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much right, Rt hon. Speaker. Having made an in-depth analysis of this subject matter by the committee, I would like to benefit from the wisdom of the committee and probably through the chairperson concerning the complex scenario of using narcotics for medicinal purposes especially for pain relief.

You are bound to agree with me that narcotics are used for pain relief; to stop pain signals from reaching their destination. Science has demonstrated that with severe pain experiences, effective pain management necessitates the use of narcotic drugs especially when you have severe injuries, cancer or when you have a terminal condition. 

However, the use of these narcotic drugs poses dangers and has negative effects to users. The drugs induce drowsiness and make the user mentally dull. A user may not even remember that he or she has taken the drug only to take another dose. The drowsiness and dizziness affects the physical functionality of the user and makes the user unable to make sound decisions. These are the reasons why you see some of these people who have taken drugs driving and causing accidents because of their inability to make sound decisions. In fact death may even occur from any of these effects when long term or chronic use exists.

Strange enough, once used, withdrawal becomes more severe and painful and some doctors prescribe additional medicine to offset the symptoms. However, some of the treatments that are prescribed by the doctors are also equally addictive. So how does this Bill help us in such a scenario? This is the clarification I am seeking from the honourable chairperson. 

I want to thank the committee for proposing that persons suffering from narcotic addiction -(Member timed out.)

5.50
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I support the committee’s report and I reject the minority report.

I want to emphasise the fact that the use of drugs has increased poverty levels in our communities. The dependency in our communities is very high because the youth who are married with children cannot look after their own families and they have relegated these families to their old parents who are now looking after them. This makes our communities very poor and we cannot support ourselves meaningfully.

I also want to observe that the people who are engaged in drug abuse are both mentally and physical sick. If you look at them, they are a burden to the society and I want to support the object of the Bill, which is looking at the mechanisms for the rehabilitation of the drug addicts.

I also want to observe that even the government is overwhelmed in the treatment of these addicts. There are so many centres, which have opened up and very expensive ones. I know of Serenity Centre in Bwebajja and others in Gaba and Kireka. There are so many centres in Kampala here but they are very expensive because maybe even the government hospitals are not doing enough counselling and treatment of those addicts. They take time and you can be in those centres for more than three months. I had some patients in 2005 and at that time they were costing treatment for such a person at Shs 1.5 million a month. I am sure the price has increased. Where does a rural family get such an amount of money to treat an addict? That is where I am appealing to the government to come quickly with those centres to treat these people.

I also want to say that the number, which the committee has given of drug abusers, is very small because we are using a narrow base. We are using Butabika only but in our villages, these people are there and if we leave this to go and we do not come up with a law, we are going to get overwhelmed and we are not going to handle it. It will defeat us. So, I support this Bill and I would like to support the law in advance so that we can remedy our youth and our society. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to support the report and I do not support the minority report.

The report, as has been presented to us, is well balanced and talks about stemming the supply as well as the rehabilitation of those who are affected. To me it is balanced. So colleagues, when we are here debating, we are sent here to make good laws for Ugandans. I do not want us to refer to USA or to Kenya or any other country because we have to make good laws for Ugandans. 

These drugs are very dangerous to the individual, the family and to the nation. Already colleagues who have talked before me have mentioned the various victims of road accidents who are lying in hospitals. At the individual level, they have affected the individual but at the national level, they have affected the nation economically and socially. Equally, they have affected their families because those people are lying there as a result the accidents they got after consuming those drugs.

When you consider these people who consume these drugs, in the initial stages somebody looks very excited but gradually, he forgets. He gets into a situation where he does not know what he is doing and that is how they get to commit these crimes very boldly as if they are not hurting anybody. So these drugs are not good at all. 

One colleague was talking about the use of these drugs in medical care setting. Yes, we use these drugs in medical care to treat or to manage pain particularly in chronic conditions like cancer and so forth. But this is on prescription of these drugs by a doctor who knows exactly what dosage to give to these people in a controlled situation. We should not leave these drugs to be consumed by our youths on the streets and they forget to work because they are in general happiness when they consume these drugs. We should control them -(Member timed out.)

5.56
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I agree with the report and I would like this Parliament to look into the problems associated with drug abuse. 

Last week, I was in the constituency and my people are very bitter. They want to know where things like marijuana and mairungi come from because of high rates of school dropouts. You will find even a primary seven child imitating a driver he or she has seen driving while taking miraa.

Last month, two people lost their lives; a lady and a man; because we were bitter, we deployed the Army and Police to see that we get these people and when we got them, we found that they were drug abusers. They are the people who spend the whole day taking marijuana and miraa. I wanted to know what miraa is because I did not know it and I saw it that day. When we got the culprits, they confessed.

I request people from Butambala not to spoil the whole country. In fact, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to convince hon. Kivumbi to go and preach to his people that they can do something else apart from this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this moment. I sympathise with the people of Butambala, I know the harsh conditions they stay in.  It is a dry place, rocky, they have minimal food but this is not the way to go. 

Generally on the law, I am one of those people who have a relative and a voter in China on death row. She is a woman who was lured by a business woman in Kampala here that if she delivered her package and a ticket, she would have a good life thereafter but as you know, there is no good life in China. She is waiting for death and because we do not have a law, I have nothing to say. Even when they say you are an MP, I am powerless because we do not have this law. 
When the Chinese hear that we have a law and we can bring our people back and incarcerate them here or put them in prison using this law, that would be a positive idea.

These days the Japanese and Chinese call the brain ‘our software’ or ‘their software’. I do not know how we can use our software and control it on leaves and then think we are in control. When you put that brain under the influence with whatever reason you put, may be enhancement- Even when you enhance yourself, the other parts must know that you are really in control. But when after enhancement you are causing damage, I do not know what enhancement you want.

One time I was at one of the boda-boda  stages and they were telling a story about one of their friends. They said this boda boda man parks in the morning, hands over his boda boda to somebody else and then stays drinking the whole day and chewing these leaves. In the afternoon, he begins work. They were saying that this man is going to kill so many people. He had killed a few and yet he is continuing to kill under the influence of these leaves. 

, we ask Parliament to expedite this law, let us not delay but pass this law. At least we will have some fall-back position. These people who ride boda bodas as well as thieves take these drugs and somewhere within our parks - It is illegal so they keep it somewhere. They give their taxis away to be driven by other people and in the evening, they are the ones who drive these taxis back home full of people and dangerously drive our passengers. 

Regarding death of people, we find people being killed day in, day out. Our television sets are almost like birango sets - (Member timed out.) 

6.02
MS EVERLINE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I stand to support the committee for the report best presented. 

As leaders of day, we must legislate issues that will move the country forward. This report is timely and like other colleagues have said, the consumers of these drugs are the useful youth of the nation aged 18 to 40 years. If you went to Butabika today - prisons, say Luzira, it is so sad. If you went to Kenya in a place called Kitale because I happen to be a neighbour or to Northern Somalia or to the suburbs of Kampala, you will agree that we need to ban this drug.

As a country, we should stand firm and protect our image as Uganda, the Pearl of Africa. Moreover this is a country that fears God and the lyrics of our National Anthem are known worldwide. We cannot legislate on criminality and neither should we support it for the sake of supporting. 

Madam Speaker, these substances have driven people away from God. Such people never go to places of worship. We need to support and thank our Bishops, pastors and all religious leaders in the fight against this. Madam Speaker, thank you so much.

6.04
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to request you to allow me read from a book called, The Police and Modern Society. This book was written by August Vollmer, the founder of the School of Criminology and the President of the International Association of Chiefs of Police. 


He said drug addiction like prostitution and liquor is not a police problem. It has never been and never can it be solved by policemen. It is first and last a medical problem and if there is a solution, it will not be discovered by policemen but by scientific and competently trained medical experts whose sole objective will be the reduction and possible eradication of this devastating appetite. There should be intelligent treatment of the incurable in the outpatient clinics, hospitalisation of those who are not too far gone to respond to the treatment and application of principles, which medicine has always provided to mankind.

Madam Speaker, this is an expert in criminology. I would therefore wish to see a law that emphasises more of prevention of taking of these drugs and the rehabilitation of addicts. I call for sober analysis of this problem and the victims.

It is not good of us to be dishonest. Just recently, all of us were here cursing China for their punitive laws. If we really believe in punitive action against drug users, we would be celebrating that China is going to hang 100 of our people. But why are we not celebrating? We are saying these people need to be given a chance, these youth need to be rehabilitated and it would not be wise of us, in this modern era, to act so emotionally and come up with a law that calls for a bigger punishment of victims of drugs. 

These are our children and we need to treat them. We need to rehabilitate them and we should give it to them through a law made by Parliament. Clearly analysing the problem before us, it is not enough to come up with­ -(Member timed out.)

6.07
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to make it right that I am not a consumer. Having listened to members and all the good deliberations and having deeply registered the side effects of marijuana and as I compare it to alcohol and tobacco, they have the same side effects. Having looked at the listed drugs on the UN list where alcohol comes at number five and tobacco is number nine, I was of the view that when you go to second schedule, we include tobacco and alcohol under these narcotic drugs so that we ban all of them. This will be good for this country. 

As members have been deliberating, all of them are dangerous to our families, our nation and our children and if we do so, Uganda will be a better country for all of us to live in. I beg to submit.

6.09
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank and support the committee for its wonderful findings. I also want to comment on some suggestions that people who practice farming like me use these drugs to control diseases in poultry. These days, we have modern drugs and we should not continue doing what our parents used to do. We should go modern. So I do not support that.

Secondly, I was wondering why people who rape also kill. The intention of rape has an element of love but killing is a different thing. This is until I came to know that it is love that forces you to do something. (Interjections) I am saying, it is an element but when it comes to - I want you to get me properly. I said, it is extreme love that forces you to do something illegally but after taking miraa, people tend to go for a fight and in the process of raping, these people who have taken miraa feel like fighting until they kill- (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a lady, I am really set aback by the submission of my honourable colleague who is saying that rape has an element of love. Madam Speaker, you are aware of the effects of rape on all the women who have been forced into something that is violent, degrading and dehumanising. Is the honourable member in order to allude that even if one person is forced against his/her own will, to be raped, there is an element of love? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we should ask hon. Lubega to explain to us how love is related to rape before I leave. (Laughter)

MR LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, I want to be understood clearly that love comes first. There is need and because you have taken miraa -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubega, now I understand you. You are mixing lust with love. I think what you mean is lust not love.

MR LUBEGA: It is after the failure to convince that you - okay, let me be clear. After taking miraa, you go for rape. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like the committee to investigate some huge pipes that are used when drinking at night. I wonder what is inside there and I wonder why people drink up to day break? Don’t you think this is also harmful? So I want the same committee to intervene because people are drinking too much and in the morning they cannot work. That is my suggestion. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You guided us and directed that the honourable colleague holding the Floor had to explain the element of love in a person who is raping another. The honourable member has not even alluded to your direction and yet this has an effect on our children who are going to be encouraged that whenever I am raping somebody, there is some love and yet this is lust. Is the honourable member in order to ignore the guidance you have given to explain or withdraw and apologise? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know it is possible for someone to be raped even when someone has never met you. He can find you walking on the road and rape you. That is not love; so love is different from lust. So can you withdraw the word love in relation to rape?

MR LUBEGA: I am sorry, maybe the way it was interpreted is not the right way. So I am saying the element of love is not there but after taking miraa, these people lose control over their love. 

6.15
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By passing this law, this Parliament would have played their role of parenting because I want to relate it to my culture. 

In Acholi, when you give birth to children, you are supposed to provide leadership, parenting and so forth to make sure they are guided and grow up properly. That is why when a child grows up and becomes a serial thief for example - I will give an example of a man who was killed about 10 years ago because he was a serial thief in Gulu. After his arrest and before he was killed, he requested that his mother be called because he wanted to speak his last words to her. 

Before he was shot dead in the firing squad, he decided to pick a knife and chop off one side of his mother’s ears. He said, these ears of yours refused to listen to your parents who taught you that stealing is bad and so you did not teach me that stealing is bad. Today I am dying because you did not teach me. 

So I am trying to say that we should have some ears and love for Ugandans by passing this law and when we do it, our children will grow upright and they will not make mistakes that will come out of these drugs. 

With due respect to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, I would like to request that you provide some bit of leadership to your people so that they understand that economically, this country and especially Butambala, could derive means of livelihood from other economic activities not only miraa. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the effects of the drugs, especially miraa and marijuana, are real. I want to say that having been somebody who drinks some local drinks that my people prepare- There is a local brew, which is made out of passion juice. When it is kept to ferment for a week, we call it wine in my local language. Currently people who are making wine have decided to put a lot of marijuana in the wine to get you drunk quickly and that is already very dangerous. If we do not control the usage of these kinds of drugs, it will go deep down, even including getting them into our local brews that people drink. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the committee’s position. Uganda is increasingly becoming a transit route for consumers of drugs. It is a fact that 42 per cent of youth in sub Saharan Africa, where Uganda belongs- Honestly, is this a worry to this country? 

To our colleagues who are supporting the issue of miraa, which cumulatively leads to health hazards, we honestly plead that you accept our position that this should not be accepted. We have been told that roughly 10 per cent of drug abusers in Uganda are within our communities. This is a very big threat to this country. So let us unanimously agree with the position that we have these drugs controlled and we can only control them by having them banned and illegalised. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda ratified the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Convention on Psychotropic Substance in 1971. In 1990, it went ahead to ratify a Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Now the government is trying to bring a law to regulate this and we are complaining and giving excuses. When Government acts, we try to stop them. When they do not act- Let us be honest with ourselves and this country once in a while. 

We have gone ahead to make statements in conventions and now we are trying to move a step further to try to regulate and again we are complaining that hold a bit, wait a moment. What should Government do? So on this one particularly, I support the view that we move head on to try to regulate the consumption of these narcotic drugs. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the case of unemployment in Uganda should be a worry. We take the good example that hon. Lokii gave about the mairungi users who talk the whole night. As we move towards this, I think it should also be the question of unemployment. Let us look towards seeing that we have more factories built in this country. Otherwise, stopping this without alternatives will still endanger these idlers. 

So, as we make this law, let us also prepare and move progressively towards having more factories and employment to accommodate the idle youth so that we solve very many problems with this law.

6.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think colleagues have concentrated on miraa and left other aspects or types of drugs. I am happy that hon. Hilary Onek is here. He was a former Minister of Internal Affairs and he knows the gravity of the problems that drugs have caused this country. Let hon. Kivumbi not look only at the side of those who earn a living out of it. What about those who are punished as a result of trafficking? What about those who have got health hazards as a result of this? And whoever is dealing in drugs is mainly doing so for economic gain but that should not override the people who have suffered as a result of this. 

I happen to have worked in a place where we were arresting people who were smuggling. If you saw what people go through because of the economic gain, especially drug trafficking - Madam Speaker, there is a lady we arrested on Luwum Street in 1998 who had had her thigh dissected in order to plant drugs in the thigh. We have had to arrest people who would pretend like ladies in their periods by having pads in order to protect their drugs. This is what people go through. 

We have seen how Ugandans are suffering in the countries where they have been arrested because of trafficking drugs. If you go to Sri Lanka and as you fill in the immigration landing card, below the place where you sign it is written that in Sri Lanka, the punishment for drug trafficking is death. They made sure it is at the last point where you sign. 

So, it sends a message to you that if you are declaring in that immigration form that you are not carrying drugs yet you are, they will not even waste time with you. The punishment is death without shortcuts. So we should be looking at what people go through and not only the economic aspect of it. Whoever deals in drugs, whether the drug lords in South America, in Uganda or in Afghanistan, it is for economic gain but what impact is it to those who consume these drugs? What does it bring to the world? Is it gain or punishment only to a few individuals? We should be able to pass this -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mulindwa, your name is on the main report but you did not sign. You also did not sign the minority report. So I do not know where you belong. You are in both places but I do not know where you belong.


6.24
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I was part of the group that arranged the minority report except that I failed to get time to sign it -(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mulindwa is a member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee and he fully participated in the proceedings of the committee including benchmarking. Is it in order for a senior member like hon. Mulindwa, who even kept the committee behind for three months by saying that he intends to move a minority report and he failed to come up with a single statement, to come and begin keeping the House behind that he has a special statement to make on the Floor of Parliament? Madam Speaker, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should not abuse the rules of this House. The rules are clear, if you do not agree with the position, you write a minority report and sign it. This report was done in May 2014 and this is November. I must decline your request to speak. 

Honourable members, 34 members have contributed on this matter. I think that is sufficient debate, so we shall proceed to the Committee Stage tomorrow. Minister, did you want to respond? 

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (MS SARAH OPENDI): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank members. The support for this Bill is overwhelming. I have listened attentively and the majority of the members do support this Bill and those who do not support it are doing so because of a reason that is not substantive. Indicating that this is a cash crop vis-a-vis the health-(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the debate since it started and I have not heard any member saying that they do not support this Bill. In fact, the minority report and those who supported it said they do not want miraa included in the second schedule. I can understand because we had ministers of Internal Affairs- Maybe the holder of the portfolio thinks the Bill is about the Second Schedule. Is the minister therefore in order to insinuate that there are members of this Parliament who do not support a Bill on drugs yet there are none?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the mover of the minority report said that he supports the bulk of the Bill except the inclusion of miraa in the Second Schedule. I think that is what he said. So there is general support except where to locate miraa in the schedule.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to correct- I think a statement was made earlier that we are not in harmony with other countries within the East African region. I want to inform the House that I am aware there are tough laws against the growing of marijuana in Kenya and quite a number of Kenyans hire gardens in most of the border districts in Uganda. They hire these gardens in Uganda, grow marijuana and then try to smuggle it to some parts of Kenya and outside Kenya. 

I was standing in for the Minister of Internal Affairs and I want to propose that we proceed and go to the Second Reading of the Bill tomorrow. I hope my colleague, the Minister of State, will be available tomorrow. Otherwise even if he is not here, we have been working together with the Ministry of Health because this Bill also affects the health of the population and it is from that angle that we come in as the Ministry of Health. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, I put the question that the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

So honourable members, this is an appropriate time to adjourn. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m. and if the minister is here, we should be able to conclude on this Bill. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 November 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
							



