

Tuesday, 15 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, honourable Leader of the Opposition, Members of Parliament and Cabinet, I welcome you back from recess. I would like to thank the committees that remained here to process business for Parliament. 

I would also like to thank you for the difficult duty you had last week of bidding farewell to hon. Oketta. We shall miss him but I thank you for the support. A number of colleagues also lost their dear ones during that period and many other Ugandans died. We would like to pay condolences to the families of the 15 passengers who were knocked dead a few days ago on the Mbale-Tororo Road. We offer our condolences.

I would also like to inform Members that one of the former Speakers of the Tanzania Parliament, Mr Samuel John Sitta, passed on last week. I sent a message to the Speaker of the Tanzania Parliament, Rt Hon. Ndugai, on your behalf. I would also like to pass on our condolences to the parliamentarians of Tanzania upon that loss.

Honourable members, during the First Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament, the House held 30 sittings. We were able to transact a lot of business. However, no Bills were handled at that time; only 10 of them had been read for the first time and these came towards the end of the meeting. We adopted 18 motions; two petitions were presented but not concluded; 13 ministerial statements were presented and debated; and 98 questions were answered by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

During this meeting, some of the Bills which were saved from the previous Parliament have been published and circulated to Members. We now invite the committees to proceed and consider them. Please note that the 45 days’ deadline is still in force. Therefore, please act expeditiously and report back to the House. I will also operationalise Rule 118 so that committees, which will not have accomplished their tasks by the deadline, will be named. 

Honourable members, I, therefore, urge you to find time to attend committee meetings, in order to handle business before committees because this is where all our work comes from. In the past, Parliament concentrated more on legislation and representation, but we also have the important role of oversight and we expect committees to carry out oversight visits in their sectors and present reports to this House. The Business Committee will find space and time for oversight reports to be considered by Parliament. 

During the last meeting, there were times when ministers were not available to assist Parliament to carry out its work. I have a list in the report on attendance of ministers during the last meeting. In some ways, it is sad but I will not publish it for today although I have it. There are those who came many times, those who came some of the time and those who did not come, but I will not publish their names today. I am just alerting you that we have the data on their performance. Therefore, I direct the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to call his ministers to order, so that we can do some work.

On office space and equipment, the Parliamentary Commission is aware that some Members do not have office space to carry out their work and in some places, equipment is missing. The process of procurement of office space in Quality Chambers on Parliamentary Avenue is in its final stages. I, therefore, request Members to be patient as the matter is being handled. We are doing everything we can to secure and equip the offices so that Members can have somewhere to sit.

I would like to inform the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of committees that we are organising a retreat on the management of effective committees. You will be taken through the aspects of committee operations. This activity will commence on Friday, 18 November 2016. Please, make efforts to attend.

Honourable members, there are several matters, but the one that I would like to bring to your attention concerns some of the work that we did in the Ninth Parliament. There is a matter concerning the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill. The Ninth Parliament, on 6 May 2015, passed the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill, 2015. On 6 July 2015, the Clerk sent copies of that Bill, as required under Article 91(2) of the Constitution, to His Excellency the President. 

Honourable members, whereas the President is empowered under Article 91(3) of the Constitution to either assent to a Bill or to reject it but in any case, to notify the Speaker in writing of his refusal to assent to a Bill, the President has not communicated any decision to the Speaker within the time prescribed under the Constitution, which is 30 days. As you will note, honourable members, July to November is more than four months. 

I am aware that Article 91(7) of the Constitution empowers the Speaker, where the President fails to act within such a time prescribed for that act, to cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and for the Bill to become law without presidential assent. Honourable members, before I take that step, which is actually unprecedented in this country, I would like to put the Prime Minister on notice about this inordinate delay by the President in taking a decision on the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill. 

As you know, the issues of cancer are in the public domain and that law was enacted to facilitate treatment, management and research on cancer issues. This delay has affected the operations in the institute. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am directing you to bring a statement tomorrow on this matter, so that it can inform my next course of action. Thank you very much. 

3.05
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance with a lot of pain. 

Kenneth Akena, a young man at a prime age, who was diligently working for this country, was shot and died a few hours thereafter. Can we get an explanation from Government about this kind of audacity?

For the last two or three days since this incident occurred on Saturday, the media has been awash with different versions of what could have happened. However, as leaders from Acholi sub-region, we would like to put this on record: We appeal to people to give time to the police to do their work. Those who are trying to fabricate stories to cause diversion must stop it. Let us give the police time to do thorough investigations. We do not want them to be diverted from the truth of the matter.

Madam Speaker, we appeal to everyone that there should be no tribal sentiments. We know that this killer is an individual. We do not want to see people being incited by tribal sentiments.

Madam Speaker, we also do not want to see anybody using their position or status to try to interfere with police investigations. We want an explanation from Government on the issue of illegal possession of firearms. On Saturday, it was Kenneth Akena but today it might be me or any of us. I think the trend is worrying. Are we sure of our security? 

Madam Speaker, we are in pain. Akena’s body has just left Kampala for Kitgum. He hails from Pader District, which is my district, but he is going to be buried in Kitgum where, for a number of years, his parents had settled. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Lowila for raising this very important matter. She mentioned the name of the person who was killed, Kenneth Akena, but she did not mention the name of the suspect. The suspect is called Matthew Kanyamunyu, Chief Executive Officer at Quantum Express Logistics, Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda registered all people with small firearms. Therefore, when I witnessed on national television the police trying to explain that they did not discover any weapon at that man’s premises -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know that if this matter is under investigation, we cannot discuss all those details.

MR OLANYA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I thought about giving information and mentioning the name of that person. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oketayot, have you finished? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, obviously this matter is in the public domain and I think the country wants answers. If you could take it up -

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the death of our son and brother, Akena, is a big national loss. We mourn with the family. Government, and indeed the police, have already embarked on investigations. The Minister of Internal Affairs will, at an appropriate time, brief this House on the progress of the investigations. 

However, the critical point is that the law will definitely take its course and those responsible will, without any doubt, be found out and will face the law. Therefore, this House should remain united in mourning the loss of our brother and compatriot. We should remain united in insisting that the law must take its course and united in mourning with the family, relatives and friends for the loss of this brother, Akena.

3.12
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance regarding the brutality that is being unleashed on street vendors in Kampala Capital City. 

Madam Speaker, a number of vendors have been brutally arrested and their property confiscated from the very streets that Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) gazetted for street vending about three weeks ago. Many have been arraigned before a kind of summary court at City Hall, convicted and sent to Luzira before their relatives and lawyers could access them.

Madam Speaker, a resolution by KCCA gazetted particular streets in Kampala Capital City and particular days and times in which street vendors could come and do their business. Today, the police and enforcement officers from KCCA are brutally harassing vendors. They are meting out torture, confiscating their property and doing a lot of evil. 

The resolution I am talking about has not been vetoed by any person, including the minister. When you try to talk to these officers who are harassing vendors, they tell you that they are acting on the orders of the minister who has not vetoed the resolutions of KCCA –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Kasibante, for giving way. We were all shocked to see the KCCA enforcement officers harassing vendors. While we know that it is their duty to keep law and order in the city and maybe to deal with the vendors and make sure that they carry out their trade in a proper manner, it was shocking to see the enforcement officers lift a woman, expose her underskirts and throw her on a pickup. They then lifted her children and dumped them on the pickup.

Madam Speaker, it is necessary and of paramount importance that as our law enforcement officers are carrying out their work, they must be mindful of the dignity and wellbeing of Ugandans. Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much for the good information. Actually, it was men who were harassing the woman and the way they dragged the child was very annoying. 

Madam Speaker, we demand that Government clarifies its position regarding the KCCA resolution that has not been vetoed. Secondly, Government should tell us whether street vending is criminal. Otherwise, as far as we know, there are laws protecting street vending in Uganda and elsewhere in the world. Thank you very much.

3.16
MS ANNA EBAJU (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on this occasion to discuss something that has been happening to one of the higher institutions of learning that we have in our country. It is very reputable; unfortunately, it has been embattled by the same disease and this time round, Makerere University has been closed indefinitely.

I am aware that there are some efforts towards ensuring that it is reopened. However, the purpose of making this issue something of national importance is in light of the students’ plight and what they are losing. Students who study law, for instance, have to go to Law Development Centre (LDC) in September and it is going to affect them. We risk having lawyers who are half baked and have not grasped enough because we are going to hurry to beat the time limit. Patients in Mulago do not have interns to take care of them and most of our regional referral hospitals depend on interns –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. She is a former guild president. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of Makerere University should be taken seriously. It is almost a month now and other than the closure, there is no statement that has come from Government. These lecturers of Makerere University were assured by the Minister of Education that they would be paid. 

We need to carry out a forensic audit on the university. This is our mother university, which has helped to generate other universities, and it is now closed. Parents paid money, people carrying out businesses in Wandegeya are stuck; Madam Speaker, why is Government keeping quiet up to now?

MS EBAJU: Madam Speaker, we demand for the immediate opening of Makerere University, because regardless of the way it is being managed, students have their future at stake. The university is still trying its best. Just two weeks ago, they performed better than Michigan in the USA in some innovations. Therefore, I think we need to treat this issue with urgency and –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. From the way you see people wanting to talk about Makerere University, - and I would like to thank hon. Anna Ebaju for bringing up this issue – it means that it is so dear to everybody. It also means that many people would like to get all the information surrounding the closure of the university.

I have looked at the Order Paper and I thought that we would find space for a statement from the Minister of Education and Sports, so that she can inform the peoples’ representatives about what happened and what is being done. Out there, many parents are telling us that they got loans to educate their children. Some of these children are in their final semester and the university is closed. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for the Minister of Education to be given time to brief the House on what exactly happened and what is being done, so that we can have a common message to take out to the population? 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition. The problems in Makerere University have a ripple effect in the health sector, particularly, because of Mulago Hospital. Mulago Hospital is the national referral hospital of this republic. If you consider the professional doctors and the senior consultants of Mulago, the doctor to patient ratio is terrible; it is one to 8000 plus. However, with the interns from Makerere University, particularly the Masters’ degree students, the ratio comes down to one to 3000. The ratio recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO) is one to 1000. 

Today, many patients are suffering because the Masters’ students are students of Makerere University, therefore, when Makerere closes, they are also closed. Therefore, we need to look at the issue of the closure of Makerere University vis-à-vis the effect on Mulago, particularly the doctors. Secondly, these intern doctors, especially the Masters’ students, work day and night but they are not paid allowances. 

There is a double question here for the Minister of Education and the Minister of Health and above all, to the Prime Minister, a doctor moreover; what has happened to you? Have you forgotten your background? You used to be a very caring person. People are dying in Mulago Hospital when you are here as a Prime Minister. Why don’t you prevail on these ministers who are not taking their responsibilities seriously? 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, I was touched when I discovered that a majority of our international students who came to study from Makerere University are meandering all over Kampala because of the closure of Makerere University. You do not close a university as if it is a market. It is a market, which you can close overnight.

My stand is: I want to see Makerere University opened immediately without any delay to ensure that at least - We have three arms of Government and one of them is Parliament; let our word be taken to ensure that Makerere University is opened to stop the suffering of innocent students, especially international students who had paid their dues to come and study in Makerere University. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members who have submitted on this matter. I am just coming from Kyambogo and I stopped around a car bond. You cannot imagine the number of car dealers who confronted me saying, “Please, can you go to Parliament and tell the Speaker to bring up this matter for debate? We want an answer about Makerere University.” 

If the car dealers in those bonds are so concerned, Madam Speaker, I think it is paramount that you allow a debate on this matter today; otherwise, people keep confronting us wherever we go. Please allow Members to air out their views before the minister responds because it is a concern to all of us. 

When I went to my house, I found eight students from Makerere University there because they do not know when they are going back. They are camped in my house. They cannot go back to the village because there might be an announcement tomorrow for them to resume studies. That is a challenge that may not be limited to me alone but to a number of colleagues who are here. That is how grave the matter is. We are all affected in a way. 

In regard to Mulago Hospital, our colleagues have talked about this here. We have heard a statement demanding that the intern doctors, the Masters’ students, should go back. However, they are taught by lecturers from Makerere University who are on strike; how can they continue? People are dying. We must be serious, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I plead that you allow a fully-fledged debate on this matter by amending the Order Paper and the minister can respond later. 

We are even worried because we thought that a statement from the Minister of Education should have been the first thing to come so that Ugandans understand what is happening. We demand of our elder, the President, to reconsider his position and open Makerere University. They can continue with the discussions about the payment. Even if it were you, if for eight months you have not been paid your allowances, what would you do?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the indefinite closure of Makerere University is unprecedented. Makerere University is among the foremost universities on the continent. Therefore, Prime Minister, I do not know what you have to say. Okay, Minister of State for Higher Education, please say something.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that on 1 November 2016, Makerere University was indefinitely closed by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and visitor of all public universities in Uganda. He was exercising his powers as a visitor under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 (as amended in 2003 and 2006). The Act empowers the President to have overall supervisory powers over all public universities. 

This closure followed a strike where students were demonstrating violently, property was being destroyed and we were not very sure about the safety of life and property. You will recall that the teaching staff went on strike on 25th October over the delay to pay their incentives and the students joined. 

We have come up with a number of steps to enforce the closure and one of them is to put in place a visitation committee to thoroughly investigate the problems surrounding the – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, we all know the circumstances under which Makerere University was eventually closed. Lecturers demanded for eight months’ pay and when they were not paid, they went on strike. Students demanded to learn and when there were no lecturers, they went on strike. This means that there is nothing to inquire about. What is clear is that people demanded for what was due to them and they never got it. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to tell us that there is something to be inquired into? Inquiring into what? You do not pay lecturers for eight months, students are there and are not learning and when they go on strike, you begin to talk of an inquiry! Is he in order to mislead Parliament that there is any necessity to inquire into why students and lecturers had to go on strike? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: He is in order because one needs to find out who is holding that money for eight months. I think they should investigate that and get the lecturers paid. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to tell my colleagues and the entire country that a visitation committee of very highly competent Ugandans, under the chairmanship of Dr Abel Rwendeire, has been put in place –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought you wanted to hear what the Government is saying about the strike. Proceed.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the other members of the committee are: hon. Tim Lwanga, Dr Florence Muranga, Dr Proscovia Namubiru Ssentamu, Mr John F.S. Muwanga, Dr Paul Musasizi, Dr Kisolo and engineer Lumu. This visitation committee has already started its work and it has been asked to make sure that the work is concluded within three months. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Government has a right to appoint a visitation committee but I do not think that we can wait for the report of that committee. Therefore, I will arrange for time so that we debate the matter on education.

Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Quality Education Nursery School from Bududa. They are there. They are represented by hon. Watenga and hon. Khainza. You are welcome.

I also want you to join me in welcoming district, municipality and subcounty councillors from Kamuli District. (Laughter) You are welcome. They have come to see us work but they also came with a message to the Minister of Local Government that as we are starting the budget process, they want us to consider their remuneration, transport and a SACCO. I think they are speaking for the councillors in the whole country. Therefore, we shall be formalising the request to the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

I will give Members more time tomorrow for matters of national importance. I know you have been away and there are many matters.

Honourable members, I will amend the Order Paper to make room for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness who wants to talk about food security a little bit later in the day. Let us go to item No.3.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE BIOFUELS BILL, 2016

3.34
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I rise to move that the Bill entitled, “The Biofuels Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Where is the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications was issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is available.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has it been laid on the Table?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for this Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources and you have 45 days in which to consider it and report back.

Honourable members, we have some bad news from the family of hon. Mike Mukula who has lost his mother, Mrs Irene Engulu. Today and tomorrow, there will be a vigil at his home in Bugolobi. On Thursday, there will be a funeral service at All Saints Church, Nakasero at 9.00 o’clock. She will be buried on Saturday at Omodoi Village in Soroti District. Let us stand up for a minute of silence in honour of a senior citizen, Mrs Engulu.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Mathias Kasaija): Madam Speaker, this statement provides an update on the state of the national economy and the recent macroeconomic developments. Above all, it seeks to provide the measures we are undertaking to boost the pace of growth in economic activities. 

Madam Speaker, the difficult global environment, geo-political conditions like the civil strife we have in  neighbouring South Sudan, lower international commodity prices, a deceleration in the execution of public infrastructure investments, election and post-election related uncertainty, and the recent actions by the World Bank in cancelling and suspending two loans, all combined to impact on the domestic economy. 

Despite these unfavourable conditions, the domestic economy has remained resilient. Macroeconomic stability has been maintained with reasonable rates of growth, low inflation and adequate international reserves. 

Nonetheless, the inherent risks in the global environment call for coherent domestic policies in order to manage market expectations and avoid erosion of confidence in our economy. A recent review of our economic and financial policies by the International Monetary Fund noted that the economy is not in a crisis at all. However, there exist risks and if well mitigated, the economy will rebound.

Global Economic Developments and Implications for Uganda
Madam Speaker, the state of the global economy remains fragile. The pace of recovery in the global economy remains uncertain and uneven, with some countries expected to fall back into recession. In particular, the global economy has been affected by a number factors:

1. 	Falling commodity prices, which have contributed to a deterioration of the terms of trade.

2. 	Geopolitical uncertainties, which I have already mentioned.

3. 	Slow progress in structural reforms, which dented investor confidence.

4. 	Domestic policy tightening measures to contain credit growth or inflation and improve fiscal stability.

More recently, the developments surrounding the mode and timing of Brexit and the results of the just concluded USA elections, we believe, will add to uncertainty and will have implications for the recovery of the global economic growth. 

Madam Speaker, these developments have implications on our domestic growth prospects and in particular, on the performance of our exports sector, which in turn affects the exchange rate. Furthermore, the continued strengthening of the US dollar has led to nominal depreciation of our shilling and other trading partners’ currencies. While this is favourable for the competiveness of our economy, it nonetheless indicates the need to manage market expectations to avoid erosion of confidence in domestic policies.

Domestic Developments and Prospects 

GDP Growth 

The economy continues to register positive growth rates. Over the last five years, the real GDP growth is averaged at 4.5 per cent. In the last financial year, the economy expanded by 4.8 per cent in real terms and by 8.5 per cent in nominal terms, driven by strong performance of services particularly information and communication services, agriculture and construction, while the manufacturing sector experienced a notable slowdown because of the loss of market in the region.

Going forward, the economy is projected to be stronger by the end of this current financial year and over the medium-term, driven by the anticipated recovery in private sector credit and public infrastructure investments. Recent business perception surveys indicate an improvement in consumer and business perceptions since March 2016. 

Madam Speaker, the downside risks of the growth prospects include the slower than previously assessed growth in our major trading partner economies, delayed implementation of  public infrastructure investment projects and impact of adverse weather conditions on our agricultural production.

Inflation

Annual inflation rose in the first half of last financial year, driven mainly by the effects of the shilling depreciation pressures on the prices of other goods and services. The pressures prompted the tightening of monetary policy by Bank of Uganda, resulting in an increase in the Central Bank Rate (CBR) from 12.0 per cent in April 2015 to 17.0 per cent in October 2015. Consequently, inflation pressures receded, with headline inflation declining from a peak of 7.5 per cent in December 2015 to 4.1 per cent in October 2016.

Madam Speaker, since April 2016, Bank of Uganda has cut its benchmark rate, that is, the CBR, by 400 basis points to 13 per cent in October 2016. The easing of monetary policy is premised on the Bank of Uganda’s judgement that the risks to the projected inflation trajectory are largely tilted to the downside. 

Inflation, therefore, is expected to remain within the target. However, this is premised on the changes in domestic food prices, stability of the exchange rate and international commodity prices. We shall continue to keep track of the inflation developments and ensure it remains within single digits. Keeping inflation under control is a relevant economic objective that we all need to preserve.

Balance of Payments and Exchange Rate Developments

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s current account remains fragile due to weaker than expected global demand and lower global commodity prices, which have continued to negatively affect our exports performance while import growth has remained buoyant, especially for capital and intermediate capital purchases. The weak performance of the current account is offset by better performances on the financial and capital account. 

Preliminary estimates for the first two months of this financial year indicate the current account deficit amounted to US$ 217.8 million, largely driven by poor export sector performance. On the other hand, the capital account balance recorded a surplus of US$ 12.9 million over this period due to higher official grants received for capital projects. 

The financial account recorded net inflows amounting to US$ 165 million. The stock of international reserves at the end of October 2016 was estimated at US$ 2.92 billion, which is equivalent to 4.3 months of import cover. Going forward, the current account deficit is expected to remain fragile on account of increased private sector imports for the festive season, which you all know very well. This may, however, be moderated by increased personal transfers. 

Given the external imbalance and other domestic shocks, the exchange rate continues to face severe bouts of depreciation pressures. During the first half of last financial year, the shilling depreciated by 17.2 per cent, largely on account of a weak current account balance, which I have talked about above, global strengthening of the US dollar and speculative behaviour in the foreign exchange market associated with the 2016 general elections. 

The shilling, however, remained relatively stable in the second half of that financial year, depreciating by only 2.7 per cent. Depreciation pressures, however, ensued in October 2016, driven by the pick-up in corporate demand, which continued to outweigh the available supply.

Madam Speaker, while a weak shilling would encourage- (Mr Guma rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to finish his statement? I believe I supplied you with an iPad. Honourable members, do you have the statement? Proceed, honourable minister.

MR KASAIJA: Hon. Guma, you better become “dotcom” quickly. Can I proceed, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Before you proceed, I would like you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Najjanankumbi Young Christian School, Rubaga Division. They are represented by hon. Kato Lubwama and hon. Nabilah Sempala. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KASAIJA: While a weaker shilling would encourage more exports, the downside risk would be in form of an increase in domestic prices, and consequently inflation, of imported goods and services. 

Furthermore, the increasing foreign exchange requirements to meet public infrastructure expenditure needs, increases the vulnerability of the external balance and has implications for Bank of Uganda’s efforts to meet its foreign exchange reserves target for the financial year that we are running. The borrowing required would have been lower if the domestic revenue effort - I beg your pardon, domestic revenue mobilisation –(Interjections)- Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister, but in an orderly manner. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you for bringing this to mind. The key to improving our external balance lies with increasing our export performance. I have to say that we are importing too much in value and exporting less in value. We are focusing efforts on facilitating mechanisation, efficient access to inputs and appropriate technologies, increased storage and market access. In order to reduce farm related risks and attract investment in agriculture, the Agricultural Insurance Scheme has been operationalised and additional resources are to be provided in the next financial year.

Domestic Resource Mobilisation

Madam Speaker, domestic revenue mobilisation has improved over the last decade. Revenue collections have increased by an average of 17 per cent per annum during this period. However, our revenue effort remains below our peers in the region and is attributed to the large subsistence agricultural sector and informal sector in business.

To enhance revenue collection, therefore, we are in the process of developing and implementing a domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. That strategy will focus on improving tax administration and expanding the tax base. 

Public Debt

Madam Speaker, the fiscal policy objective to develop infrastructure in the critical areas of energy and transport as well as other priority investments in order to remove the constraints to private sector growth has necessitated increased external and domestic borrowing. The borrowing requirement would have been lower if the domestic revenue efforts, as measured by the tax revenue/GDP ratio, were about 15 to 18 per cent compared to the current level of 13 per cent. 

As at the end of June this year, the stock of public debt stood at US$ 8.6 billion, of which external debt disbursed and outstanding (external debt stock) amounted to US$ 5.2 billion and the domestic debt stood at US$ 3.4 billion. This represents 34.9 per cent of GDP in nominal terms and estimated at 27 per cent of GDP in Present Value (PV) terms. Global comparisons in terms of sustainability is in PV terms. 

Based on this measurement, Madam Speaker, Uganda’s debt remains sustainable at 24 per cent of GDP compared to a threshold of 50 per cent of GDP beyond which debt becomes unsustainable. This question has been raised so many times and I thought I should read it very slowly so that we all appreciate it. This is also the benchmark for macroeconomic convergence within the East African Community. 

Sustainability of our debt will depend on improving efficiency of utilisation in terms of intended purpose, improving speed of implementation and ensuring value for money in terms of quality and quantity. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for the speed at which you are handling these bank request loans. I have been with the committee and they are all working hard to ensure things move very fast. We shall, on the Executive side, ensure that we do our bit as well.

There is also need to sequence these projects in a manner that will ensure that sustainability is maintained over the long term. Improving public investment management is an area, which my ministry is working to improve, together with other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).

World Bank Financing

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the House about the suspension in budget financing by the World Bank. It all started in December 2015 when the International Development Association (IDA) financing for the upgrading of the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road was cancelled due to inadequate social and environmental management. This was followed by the suspension of funding for two road projects, Kyenjojo-Kabwoya and the North-Eastern Road Corridor, due to project implementation delays. 

To address these challenges, we are working closely with the World Bank and are taking a number of social safeguard measures including completion of the outstanding resettlement action plans for the affected projects and adopting a policy on gender-based violence and child abuse. We are also developing an emergency protection response to provide holistic services to those already affected.

Interest Rates and Private Sector Credit

Madam Speaker, domestic commercial lending rates remain high. This is due to –

1. 	The current mismatch between lending products, which are of a short-term nature, and long term investments, which require financing of longer maturity, largely due to limited availability of long term capital in our economy;

2. 	High overhead costs contributed about seven per cent of the lending spread in 2015 and increased to 13 per cent by September 2016;

3. 	The high risk profile of borrowers. 

Whilst remaining relatively high - maybe including for ourselves - commercial bank lending rates have declined somewhat, following the easing of monetary policy and the decline in yields on Government securities. The weighted average lending rate for shilling dominated loans declined to 23.7 per cent in September this year from a peak of 25.2 per cent in February the same year. 

Since October 2015, growth in private sector credit has slowed markedly. Indeed, credit to the private sector grew by an average of 9.1 per cent in the year to September 2016, down from 18.1 per cent in the period to September 2015. The slowdown in credit growth was reflected across all sectors with the exception of electricity, water and personal and household loans. This slowdown was largely driven by provisioning for bad loans, which has heightened risk aversion in banks.

Available banking data shows that while demand for credit - measured by the number and value of loan applications - has remained relatively robust in recent months, the supply of credit - measured by the number and value of loan approvals - has remained subdued. This is an indication that the subdued growth of private sector credit could be driven by tightening credit standards.

Madam Speaker, the availability of affordable and long-term credit is crucial to private investment. Presently, the sources for long-term finance remain very limited. Pension funds can be important sources of domestic long-term capital, which if structured properly, can help meet the growing demand for capital. We will, therefore, continue with our efforts to reform the pensions sector in order to increase supply of pension assets that can safely fund long-term investment.

Performance of the Banking Sector

Madam Speaker, the banking system remains very sound, with bank liquidity and capital buffers remaining well above the minimum requirement. The banking sector, as a whole, is adequately capitalised to withstand shocks. As at the end of June this year, all commercial banks, save for Crane Bank, met the minimum regulatory capital adequacy requirement.

By the end of September 2016, the total capital to risk weighted assets stood at 22.5 per cent, compared to 20.1 per cent in September last year. The non-performing loans to gross loans rose from 3.8 per cent in September 2015 to 8.3 per cent in June 2016, but declined to 7.7 per cent in September 2016. The average return on equity and return on assets declined from 17.1 per cent and 2.7 per cent to 11.5 per cent and 1.9 per cent respectively.

Bank funding conditions remain stable, with deposits contributing to 81.5 per cent of the total funding of the banking sector as at the end of June this year. Banks’ annual after tax profits during the first half of 2016 are estimated at Shs 214.2 billion, slightly below the Shs 269.8 billion realised during the corresponding period in 2015.

Madam Speaker, the Bank of Uganda recently took over management of Crane Bank and appointed a statutory manager to oversee its operations. This was necessitated by the fact that the bank was significantly undercapitalised and posed a big risk to the stability of our financial system, if it had been allowed to continue before the takeover. 

I am happy to report that Crane Bank remains open and has continued to operate normally while under the management of Bank of Uganda. I will come back with a comprehensive report after the Bank of Uganda concludes the audit process of the bank. Furthermore, the Central Bank will continue with strict monitoring of the entire financial sector to ensure that all financial institutions meet the regulatory requirements in order to protect the depositors’ money. 

Looking Forward 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate that the economy is not in recession as people are saying, although it is not growing as anticipated in light of recent drought since this year’s budget was presented. 

In addition, the external environment has not improved. Also, the economy growth is not including each and everybody. There are sectors, which are growing very well and those, which are not doing so well. That is why you hear of lack of money here and there. Therefore, the growth is not inclusive, if I may say. 

However, Government will ensure that the following interventions are implemented to support economic growth:

    1. Enhance project implementation, especially for infrastructure projects in roads and energy.

    2. Improve efficiency in budget implementation in order to obtain greater value for money for resources, while achieving meaningful results.

    3. Clear domestic arrears to enable private sector firms to meet their obligations.

    4. Reduce Government domestic borrowing to reduce crowding out of the private sector from the money market, and also bring down pressure on interest rates.

    5. Expand export markets for which I have provided funds for value addition and export promotion.

    6. Continue providing support towards the regional peace initiatives, which we all need.

Lastly, coordination of fiscal and monetary policies will continue to ensure maintenance of macroeconomic stability while ensuring the necessary resources to address the structural constraints to growth. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I do not see the Shadow Minister of Finance. Let me invite the shadow Attorney-General and honourable chair of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

4.03
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a subject where both sides of this House should be speaking one language, because all of us are interested in having bread and butter on our tables and not only for ourselves but even for the people we represent. 

Listening carefully to the minister, there is something that has come to my mind - that we should tighten our belts. Make no mistake, that is what he was saying. He may have used flowery language like “the situation is fragile” and others say that we are in recess, but it is the same thing. 

However, the reasons that the minister is giving do not offer an explanation and let me tell you why. Madam Speaker, 60 per cent of our national budget is now a development budget, where we are undertaking big projects like roads, dams, mention it. However, who are the contractors taking up this 60 per cent? One hundred per cent of them are foreigners. How do you expect to have money in the economy when 60 per cent of your national budget is being undertaken by foreigners? 

Do not ask anybody why there is no money in the economy. This Government has taken a deliberate decision to have the money go to the foreigners. We do not have a policy, which makes this money trickle down to our own people. Therefore, the money is eventually taken back to Beijing, South Africa and other places.

This also includes employers; look at these contractors undertaking big projects and you will see that 70 per cent of the workforce is foreigners. Look at the materials they are purchasing. One of the biggest items being purchased today, which is steel, is all being imported. Why can’t we, therefore, tighten our belts because there will be no money in the economy. 

The minister is talking about bank interest rates and yet Government is the biggest borrower. From the figures that you have given us, Shs 3.4 billion is domestic borrowing by Government. Therefore, as individuals, we are now competing with Government. 

The interest rates of the bank must remain high because the banks will be more comfortable to lend to Government other than lending to us. If they lend to us, because they think that we are high risk, the interest rate goes up –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in one minute.

MR KATUNTU: This should be what we call basic economics. The honourable minister has explained why the interest rates are high and has mentioned what to me is the most crucial reason - that he is the one borrowing domestically and, therefore, the bank interest rates rise. He has deliberately forgotten to say that because he knew that it will come back to him. 

All countries rely on what they can do best. We are advantaged because we have been having fair weather, good soils and agriculture is our comparative advantage, as we call it in economics. However, Madam Speaker, there is something that I saw the other day and I have not yet woken up from it; I still think that it is a dream. We are still thinking about going to the well to collect water in jerry cans to irrigate – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Musasizi comes up, I think the Mbulambuti ferry is working well today; I would like to introduce another delegation of teachers and pupils from Kisozi Seventh Day Adventist Primary School in Kamuli. Please, stand up. They are represented by hon. Isaac Musumba and the Speaker. They are from Kisozi. You are welcome. 

4.08
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda East County, Kabale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for coming up with this summarised statement. Madam Speaker, the entire population out there is worried. There is a lot of uncertainty about our economy and I am happy that Government has come up with a statement, notwithstanding the gaps that ought to be emphasised. 

If we are to treat our economy, there are fundamentals that are core. The first fundamental is: “Where do we invest?” The biggest investment by Government is in infrastructure and most of this money is borrowed. Therefore, the question is, where are these borrowed funds going? If we are to cause reasonable adjustments, these funds must be invested in initiatives that stimulate private sector growth and that is critical.

Two, on exports, you are not involved much in any initiative that improves our exports. This has an impact on our current account position and therefore the exchange rate. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time that Government walked the talk. When you look at the prayers and the commitments that the minister is making, the commitments are very good but where there are gaps, the minister does not give timelines. Who is supposed to do what, when and where? 

I recently met one of the new MPs and we were exchanging ideas. This MP interested me by telling me that she thinks it is normal for people to come here and make generic statements like “as we are aware”. Even when you look at these recommendations, they are very good commitments but they lack something. We cannot tell who will do what, when and where. This is what the minister ought to emphasise so that we come out of this with –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues that I would like to bring to the attention of the minister as we debate the state of the economy. 

One of the pertinent issues is corruption. If we want to stabilise our economy, we need to tackle corruption. We have some cases like the Shs 72 billion scam payment to 1,000 former staff of the Internal Security Organisation (ISO); the Shs 500 billion scam payment to ghost claimants of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA); and then the famous Shs 24 billion lost on the Katosi road project. If we do not address such issues, they will continue impacting on our economy. 

We should ensure that these funds are recovered and reinvested into the economy. The minister talked about road projects. How shall we have passable roads and realise our targets if the monies are misappropriated and used for individual benefit?

Secondly, I would like to talk about quality. As a nation, we import more than we export but even that which we import has wanting quality. Today, 40 per cent of imports into Uganda do not meet the official national standards. These imports range from cosmetics, building materials to medicine. 

Therefore, as we talk about the state of the economy, those are the two areas of focus that I think we should concentrate on as leaders. I thank you. 

4.13
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement on the state of the economy. 

My take is on World Bank financing. The minister has ably informed the House that among the factors that culminated into the suspension of funding by the World Bank was the poor handling of the two road projects. However, we are reliably informed that besides the huge domestic and external economic shocks that our economy is grappling with, the major reason as to why the World Bank suspended funding was because of poor absorption capacity on the part of ministries like Ministry of Education and Sports. 

They have huge funds lying idle, and disorderly if I may add. When they are disorderly, that is when they are misappropriated. There were also issues of weaknesses and deficiencies in monitoring and execution of the same projects. The minister’s statement falls far short of mentioning these salient issues.

As I conclude, if this kind of indiscipline is still with the holders of our ministries, all this good jargon that has been mentioned, that the economy is resilient and that by end of this financial year it will have picked up, will be idle talk. I beg to submit.

4.15
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru North County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to sympathise with the minister because the statements that he is making are the same statements that we have been receiving over several years with nothing serious happening.

The problem in this country’s economy is structural and we have failed to address this structural problem. These monetary policies we have been pursuing over the years are artificial measures to address a short-term problem, but the real problem has not been addressed. We have always been talking about the supply problems in this economy but very little has been done. Take the example of the key sectors this economy has been relying on for export; we have been relying on fish but fish supply is dwindling and it is not because the water where the fish breeds is not there. Why is the number of fish going down? How have you addressed the problems in that sector? 

Coffee exports are going down. All these things that we used to export are going down. We now have a crisis because the shilling has been depreciating. In 1987, the value of the shilling was one dollar to Shs 60; today, the currency has depreciated to one dollar to Shs 3,600 and this is appalling. 

Honourable minister, you are presiding over an economy that is not producing and you have known this problem for a long time. Unless you fix this problem of no production in this economy, you are going to run into a very serious crisis. There are sectors that do not produce; education and health are dependant sectors and they depend on the sectors that produce, which are agriculture, tourism, industry, mining and others. However, these are the least funded sectors in this economy. 

There is total lack of coordination in these sectors. If I asked you who coordinates export production in this country, there will definitely be no answer. Despite the existence of the National Export Development Strategy, I think the last time that document was opened was the day it was commissioned. Since then, it has been lying on the shelves. Who is coordinating export production in this country? The institutions are there but they are not coordinated at all -(Member timed out.)

4.18
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I think the minister should have realised that during his presentation, we did not clap because we either did not understand him or he did not hit the point. It was like he was giving the Budget Speech where he bombarded us with a lot of words about the economy. 

Recession is simple; money is hoarded, there is no money, people are clamouring and asking where the money is. That is a recession, period. Now, what takes the money away? Hon. Katuntu was bringing the point home. What I need to add is that when you go to Ethiopia, if you do not have 30 per cent component as a foreigner, you will not be given any business – the 70 per cent must be local. However, here, we go privatisation 100 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, the minister spoke about the depreciation of the shilling; it has been at 33.6 per cent for the last six years – that is the depreciation rate. The percentage GDP of exports has been falling by US$ 2.5 billion from 2009 up to date. 

When you talk about the issue of the Central Bank lending rate, there is no magic economics there; this is simple. Bank of Uganda is using their Central Bank lending rate as a monetary instrument to control inflation sometimes. What do they do in a situation where Government is the big borrower? They increase the lending rate to discourage people from borrowing. At the end of the day, they worsen business. 

In Kenya, they switched their lending rate by close to six per cent. The problem here is some of the Bank of Uganda officials are also managing the exchange market. They want the exchange rate to be extremely high to affect even the interest rate in Bank of Uganda. At the end of the day, you cannot have a stable economy. 

Madam Speaker, this is simple logic. You have a situation where you give a contract to a foreigner but even cement is imported from abroad, as if we do not have Tororo cement. Something is chronically wrong here. What we need is microeconomics to correct Uganda’s economy. Do not go to your macro, we should go micro; as the Chairperson for the Budget Committee was saying, address the issues in health and education – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude

MR ANYWARACH: I went to an international school where Ugandans are paying US$ 10,000 for kids in nursery. People are paying US$ 10,000 because our education system has collapsed. That money goes to the owner of that foreign school. 

When you come to health, for any small problem you have to go to India. The machine to carry out a nerve conduction test would cost Uganda only US$ 60,000 and yet we have to go abroad for it. So, once you leave the micro approach, the macro cannot work. 

Agriculture is end to end; in other words, we are producing but we must go up to the end of the value chain. Please, introduce the farmers to the value chain so that they are able to produce products that can be consumed around the region. 

Here, we are pretending. Iraq has the best roads but they threw out their President; look at Libya - When presidents over stay in power, they begin pretending that they are doing the major projects –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for attempting to bring a statement. 

I know it is such a painful moment for all of us across the divide and even the independents. We all accept that wherever you go, you encounter people who ask you for money. That means that there is a fundamental problem in the economy that we need to address in a bi-partisan manner. 

The biggest indicator that there is a problem, which may cause a recession, is how many jobs you have. Since 2015 I have looked at your statements and you show that the economy is very stable and growing. You showed the indicators in form of figures but you did not show us the job indexes. The question is: how many jobs have been created since 2015 vis-à-vis the companies that have wound-up, both private and Government? 

Since 2015, the National Bank of Commerce was closed, Crane Bank is now closed, about 15 factories have closed down, big supermarkets like Uchumi and Nakumatt are closing – those are indicators. How can you tell us that strong economic players are closing down and leaving and yet you say that we are going to grow? That is impossible! Insurance companies are winding up and leaving the country. There must be a fundamental problem.

Information from hon. Mafabi is clear, that people’s houses are being advertised by banks every day. That means people cannot pay their debts any more. What is the biggest indicator? Even their own Government that is borrowing internally can no longer pay back. If the Government cannot pay, how can mere proprietors of small businesses pay back in order to sustain employment in this economy?

There is no economy that can grow without the small businesses performing well. We need to hold on to the small businesses and promote them, and the only way to do that is through interest rates. You came here and told us clearly that the interest rates have been volatile since 2015. In April, it was 12 per cent, then 17 per cent, then 16 per cent and then 20 per cent. Who can invest in such an unpredictable economy? 

You talked about Crane Bank; none of us wants banks that do not perform. Imagine, you are telling us that investors are coming. Which investor can come into an economy where the biggest player has collapsed? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for Kampala Central.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. He talked about exports. Our exports portfolio is very poor because we do not have a good transportation platform. The railway network has not been worked on. In Kenya, they have already started the standard gauge railway while in Uganda we do not even know how far we have gone.

The airlines are very expensive. I have tried to export fruits myself; a kilogramme is US$ 1.5 while in Kenya it is only 30 cents. So, how do you compete with someone from Kenya who is exporting the same pineapples that you want to export to the UK? You will definitely collapse. 

Therefore, the value chain that he has talked about for the farmers is not catered for. In Rwanda, they give out free fertilisers. Here, we brought a budget with increased taxes on fertilisers. So, how will you stimulate production –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, BULAMOGI COUNTY, KALIRO): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you for the statement that you have presented to the House. 

You have noted that our current account deficit has been worsening, currently standing at about US$ 217 million. You also said that it is actually expected to worsen as we go into December, meaning that we do not expect to export more. Instead, we expect to import a lot into the country. My question here is: How do we expect to turn around this export trend, to make sure that Uganda exports more while importing less? Is it going to be by miracle? Are we waiting for God’s hand or is it going to be deliberate? How are we going to do it? 

We have agencies of Government here which are mandated to perform duties surrounding export promotion like the Uganda Export Promotions Board. Honourable minister, do you know how much you have crippled that agency in the performance of its mandate? We have got the Uganda Tourism Board, which is mandated to promote tourism in order to try to correct this imbalance. Do you know how much you have crippled Uganda Tourism Board in the performance of its duties?

Madam Speaker, of course, in order to correct this imbalance, it means that we must export more, as Members have observed, or we must actually consume a lot that is locally produced here. However, there are some indicators here that we are not serious as a country. There are some things here that we must be producing internally to substitute for the imports that we are getting into the country.

Members, you may all be aware that all the salt that we consume here is imported; Uganda is not able to produce salt for its citizens. Who does not consume salt in this country? If anything, it is less than one per cent. The paper that we use, probably even in Parliament here, is actually imported from South Africa and other places. Madam Speaker, even the foods; go to the supermarkets and check the different juices and so on, they are imported. How do we expect this to turn around?

While we address these issues to Government, I believe that the mind-set of Ugandans must change -(Member timed out.)

4.28
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you might get angry, but the economy is the heart of this country and while Members are trying to debate, in three minutes they are not making a point. People are crying because of unemployment and so on. 

I rise on a procedural issue. Would it be very bad if you allowed Members to use at least five minutes so that we bring out information? This is because some of us have data that contradicts what the minister has presented and it is in a tabular form.

THE SPEAKER: Let us keep the three minutes. I know those who have good information and I will give them five minutes. (Laughter)

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for coming up clearly on the economy. As we speak today, the problem is obvious. I am not here to criticise but to advise on how we can move this economy.

First, there must be a policy review of Government programmes. The 	imbalance of trade will keep the Uganda shilling weak all the time unless this matter is addressed. How do we address the balance of trade? We can address it by promoting non-traditional agricultural exports through value addition. How do we achieve this? We achieve it by giving a rebate on exports of non-traditional agricultural exports; rebates of 10 to 15 per cent can be given. 

Government should do away with indirect borrowing through domestic arrears. Why borrow from the public and you do not pay interest? Government should address this matter as soon as possible. We heard it in the first round of the budget speech; from the first quarter up to date, domestic arrears are still existing.

The other issue is capital flight by foreign companies. This is a very important matter. This must be regulated. You find companies like MTN, Ugandan Breweries and others repatriating a lot of funds from Uganda. They must be regulated.

Madam Speaker, we need to protect farmers because some of them are currently planting and the price of maize is about Shs 2,000. By the time of harvest, when there is a bumper harvest the price will drop to almost Shs 400. So, we need to protect the farmers so that their prices remain constant. Otherwise, we cannot do away with the poverty that has resulted into people dying of hunger -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bategeka, five minutes.

4.32
MR LAWRENCE BATEGEKA (NRM, Hoima Municipality, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, I am the vice-chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. I thank the minister for his statement but I would like to make some observations. 

The minister is aware - I think we had discussed with him informally – that as a committee, we are required to prepare a report on the economy and present it to Parliament at the beginning of this session. I am sure that the minister was aware about this because we shared it with him. We requested for a discussion on the economy, before we come to Parliament, with key players like Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, civil society, among others.

Actually, I am surprised, because our report is ready. Before I could even present it - because this is the first day of the opening of this session, now we get this statement. It is like pre-empting what the committee was planning to do. We already have a report and all these issues are very important. My prayer to you is that, this matter be handled by the committee and we come back to the plenary. That is my submission. Thank you. 

4.33
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity you have given me to respond to this statement on the state of the economy. 

I would also like to thank our Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the effort done and for rightly stating that although the economy is not in recession, it is not growing as anticipated. He has also indicated that the cause is the recent drought. Unfortunately, when he came to how the Government is fixing the problem, he said nothing about how we are going to fix the environmental issues. 

In point No.12, he said, “Government will ensure the following interventions…”  However, he has not talked about how we are going to fix the drought issues. At least he would have convinced us, as a House, on how the “jerry can technology” is going to work. We would probably debate our Government’s “jerry can technology” plan and then as Members of Parliament, we would suggest other options. 

I am very sure I heard the Speaker talking about putting the issue of hunger in today’s discussion. Everybody will come up and tell you what the drought caused in their respective constituencies. However, you never gave a solution to the most important thing, which was drought. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to reconsider that very important issue and give us which interventions they have come up with. If it is the “jerry can technology”, he should let the House know and we see how to handle it. Thank you very much. 

4.37
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to speak on two issues. The first one is food security. You cannot talk about a good economy when your citizens are starving. We have been told that many parts of Uganda have experienced a lot of drought and the Government has to come to the rescue of the citizens by providing them with food. How do you boast of an economy when you have got to feed your people because they do not have enough food to eat? 

While I appreciate Operation Wealth Creation, I think there is something wrong with it, because our people are starving. In places where there is a bit of rain, the first step should be to give people bean seeds, for example, so that they can plant beans. Beans grow within 70 days only, so we should let the people plant them and have food to eat. However, they are giving out mango and orange plantlets. That is a good idea but then why don’t you work on something that can solve the problem immediately?

Secondly, how can you have a growing economy when many of your people are unemployed? How much labour force are you wasting? Many of our people are idle; they are not doing anything. Can’t you work out agricultural programmes whereby we employ these young men so that they become productive? Thereafter, we shall stimulate the economy.  

Madam Speaker, if the honourable minister would accept, I would propose that we hold a workshop for two or three days and talk about the economy. Let us quarrel and abuse one another but in the end, we should come up with solutions that will help this nation to go forward. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.39
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the former speaker; there is no country that can grow without food. When you critically analyse the present situation, you realise that the economy is going to be even more affected than it is now. According to the change in the environment and climate, even the food we have grown is not going to sustain us. Soon, every Member is going to bring here a request that we should give food to every district and family. How can the economy move like that? 

Production of coffee and other agricultural products has gone down because the Government policy encouraged that. The World Bank came up with a project aimed at helping municipalities. What they do is to give money to municipalities according to the people who live in them, but this has encouraged rural urban migration. The energetic youth who would have stayed in the villages to provide food are now migrating to town because the World Bank has advised the local leaders to encourage them to move to town. However, there are no industries in town and the youth are unemployed. Therefore, our economy is going to worsen. Unless we get back to the drawing table and change our policies, it is going to affect us. 

Madam Speaker, when you move on the streets of Kampala here and the suburbs, the so-called foreign investors are investing in jobs that would have been done by our local people. The poor people are dealing in “kikomando”. We have given a lot of chances to the Chinese who produce products from China. They bring them here, flood our markets here and yet all the money they make eventually goes back to China. This has really affected our economy. 

I request that the ministers with their people, sit down and have better planning policies for our economy. Otherwise, something might happen. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.42
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for reading this statement. Many of us know the minister for being very eloquent and energetic. 

The problem with the economy is the model of economies that we have been pursuing over the last period of time. It is not very clear, when you look at the economic model that Uganda is pursuing, to understand it clearly. On one hand, we have been claiming that we have a private sector led economy but we do not see how the private sector is playing its role in developing this economy. 

We have moved from the basics. We used to know this entity called “enterprises” but now we invented something called “tender-prises”; once there is something somewhere, people sit and even somebody who does not know how to run a business is called in and they are told “form a company, because there is a tender somewhere” and they go and do business. I think that at this time, we need to re-think completely what model of economic growth we are pursuing as a country, to be able to go back to the basics. 

Secondly, there are statistics that keep coming up in this country- 4.7 rate of growth, but this growth is not reflected anywhere. We need to pay particular attention to how we collect, analyse and interpret it. There is a problem somewhere because you cannot say that the economy is growing very fast, we are doing very well and yet you cannot see it translated on the ground. 

In fact, the minister recognised that the economy is fragile. You could see the fragility when he was actually reading the statement; he himself was also fragile. (Laughter) Once you are an authority and you have statistics that you know very well that you do not believe in, it becomes very difficult. What has been presented here, some of us who are economists know is absolutely wrong and it cannot add up. 

Lastly, we need to see how to address the cost of administration in this country. If we do not tackle it in this country, we are not going to solve this problem. We are putting in too much to deliver too little. 

Operation Wealth Creation has just been mentioned here. We are spending too much to transport dry cassava stems and even create waste. When I went to the constituency, the people were saying, “Is it operation waste creation or Operation Wealth Creation?” If you take things that cannot be planted and people dump them, you are disturbing people and you are creating waste. So, these are the things that I think we need to pay attention to and ensure that we address them once and for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.45
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this statement by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to thank him also for having endeavoured to bring this statement. When he was reading it, I could sense that he expected these sentiments that have been put forward.

The economy of Uganda has been subjected to depending on some unnecessary mockery statements like “hakuna mchezo”, “operation wealth creation”, among others. Those are the statements on which our economy is now based. We are not trying to align these statements to what is actually needed to transform this economy. We need to appreciate this in good faith because if it continues, it will not come from the Opposition; it needs to come from Ugandans. 

The economy has deliberately sacrificed agriculture, and yet in our cosmetic statements, we say that agriculture is the backbone of our economy. What have we done in agriculture to ensure that it brings up that good that we need to transform this economy? Can you tell us what we are doing in agriculture? 

I was talking about tea, but Madam Speaker, it is evident that some agencies that are supposed to manage tea and coffee are deliberately being killed under our watch. We cannot even pursue this. The other day, the Prime Minister held three meetings. Madam Speaker, I am yet to bring a statement here, and I request your office to ensure that we bring out this issue clearly. Government is intentionally killing the would-be vehicles to take the economy higher to where –(Member timed out.)

4.48
MR RICHARD OKOTH (NRM, West Budama Country North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the minister but I have come to the conclusion that our economy is actually suffering from policy reversals. When this country got independence, efforts were made to reduce on importation. Today, the industries that were set up to do that have all been privatised. 

Along the way, some efforts were made to indigenise this economy. Today as we talk, our economy is basically in the hands of foreigners. This GDP we talk about is largely driven by foreign actors. These are people who basically come and repatriate the little foreign exchange we earn.

There was an effort to promote productive sectors in the economy but today, we are only promoting non-productive sectors. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is only interested in revenue mobilisation. You can even see that it is dominating the paper of the minister. If you look at much of the generated revenue, they have sectors like the telecommunication industry but these are largely non-productive sectors; they do not contribute towards the productivity of the economy. So, the economy cannot have anything to sell outside to earn foreign exchange. 

Besides, these sectors are only draining money from the public, from Ugandans. If you look at MTN, it does not pay any taxes. It is actually the Ugandan who uses the mobile telephone who pays these taxes and not these companies. They are simply collectors; they charge you this money and then they remit it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What they get themselves is taken back to South Africa or wherever they come from. This is what we have in this country.

We need to get back to the fundamentals. We need to start re-prioritising our productive sectors and encourage indigenous production so that Ugandans can produce –(Member timed out.)

4.51
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement he has made on this Floor. 

I would like to start on the question of privatisation of this country. I for one, as Nyakecho, feel that we went wrong somewhere. We over privatised our economy, to the extent that we lost most of the Government parastatals, the industries that were –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I need some clarification from hon. Nyakecho. I just heard her say that there is a problem with the privatisation of this country. Have we privatised the country, Uganda? That is the clarification I would like to find out from her. Is that what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has done? (Laughter) 

MS NYAKECHO: Okay, let me say the privatisation policy of Uganda - the policy that was used to privatise most of the parastatals in the country. Is that okay for you? I know that you are teasing me. 

We went wrong somewhere. I think we needed to have a backbone somewhere in terms of some assets that would keep the economy moving. That is why you see that today, we are having these challenges that we are lamenting about. 

I was in Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) this afternoon and I had a chat with some people about tax collection. I asked them how much they have made and how they are performing in that sector. They were telling me, “Honourable, let us tell you the truth; we are failing to hit the target.” 

The reason is that if you look at our importers, - because Uganda now depends more on importers than exporters - somebody who used to import 30 containers is now importing one, two or three. The state of the economy is in shambles -(Interruption)

MR TWINAMASIKO: Thank you, hon. Nyakecho, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have some information about Uganda Revenue Authority. Uganda Revenue Authority is one of the major sources of funds that finance this country’s budget. Uganda Revenue Authority is at the level of financing the budget of this country alone.

However, I have names of some staff in URA that are willing to provide information about theft in URA. They are trying to ask COSASE to investigate URA, the way they did with UNRA, because there is theft. I have the contacts of those people who are willing to give information. Uganda Revenue Authority is at the level of financing the whole budget of this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I will give you some two more minutes. Hon. Twinamasiko, what you are saying is extremely serious. You are suggesting that we have capacity and ability to collect but they are under-declaring what they are collecting. Is that what you are saying?

MR TWINAMASIKO: Yes, Madam Speaker. I have names of people who are working there.

THE SPEAKER: Come down and lay this on the Table.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, there should be an investigation. I will avail the names to whichever committee you entrust with this obligation. If it is the Public Accounts Committee or COSASE or any other committee, they are willing to give out information. Madam Speaker, the country shall know that we are able to finance this country’s budget as Ugandans.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues the honourable member is raising are pertinent. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask him to present a petition before this House so that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is responsible for overseeing URA, takes up the matter? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will give you an answer later. I will need to think which committee can take this up, between COSASE and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have to discuss with hon. Twinamasiko and find out the nature of his information, so that we know whether it goes to finance or COSASE. However, we welcome the information.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude on this matter by raising one more point. In 1993, you remember International Monitory Fund (IMF) and World Bank cancelled all Uganda’s debts. For the first time in this country’s history, Uganda became debt free. However, currently, just 24 years down the road, Uganda has again become heavily indebted that we cannot even afford to pay our own debt to some extent. In fact, the economy is largely dependent on loans and we have very little injection from our own domestic financing.

I pray, on my behalf and on behalf of my people in Tororo, that God saves us. I want to thank the minister once again and everybody for this. Finally, just look at the state of Parliamentary affairs right now; that is a very big indicator that the economy is not doing well- the clouds are not uniform. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Five minutes, hon. Nandala.

4.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the report. However, I have to give these figures so that I can make my case.

The current account balance of Uganda in dollars – I will give it in billions, over a period - in 2011 was negative US$ 2.1 billion; 2012, it was negative US$ 1.7 billion; 2013, it was negative US$ 1.8 billion; in 2014, it was negative US$ 2.6 billion; in 2015, it was negative US$ 2.3 billion; and in 2016, it is negative US$ 2.7 billion and it is expected to go beyond this. Therefore, when the minister comes and tells me –(Interjections)- This is economic data; if you want, you can go to Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and you will have it. Even the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows it. The minister tells us that the current account is US$ 217 million; I do not think you are being fair to us.

I want to give the figures on trade balance now. To get the trade balance, you get the exports minus imports.  I will leave you to subtract but I will give you the imports and exports. This is also in dollars and in billions. In 2011, the exports were at US$ 2.5 billion and imports were US$ 5 billion; that means a negative of US$ 2.5 billion. In 2012, exports were US$ 2.8 billion and imports were US$ 5.3 billion. 

If you want to know the exact value, you start getting the negative of the other period and add onto the negative of the current period; that is what we call cumulative. In 2013, it was negative US$ 2.1 billion for exports and imports US$ 2.8 billion. In 2014, exports were US$ 2.7 billion and imports US$ 5.1 billion. In 2015, exports were at US$ 2.4 billion and imports US$ 5.6 billion. In 2016, exports are expected to be at US$ 5.2 billion and imports at US$ 1.9 billion. That means that our trade balance is negative. 

Now, you can see how the accounts come out to be negative but the minister says we are doing well. It means that we need more money in dollars to import. In addition, if you need more money to import, it means there will be pressure on the exchange rate. You can see how it is coming out, because this year’s exports are going to be lower than the imports. 

Madam Speaker, the country is in problems. The GDP is about US$ 25 billion. Of this, 78 per cent of the population is dealing in agriculture but contributing only 23 per cent. The service sector, which consists of telecoms, banks and employs one per cent is contributing 44 per cent. When this money comes in, it goes out to South Africa, India, China, Libya and that is the reason there is an outcry. The minister is not telling the truth. 

The unemployment rate is on the rise; 83 per cent of the youth are unemployed - educated, energetic and ready to fight. We are sitting on a time bomb and unless we resolve it -(Interjections)- You can laugh because maybe you know you are aged and you are going, but we know there is a problem in this country.

Madam Speaker, given all these, there is need for the leadership of this country to sit down and start seeing how to format it. If they do not, we are in problems; for example, you cannot capitalise a private bank like Crane Bank, because they got our money, and leave out Uganda Development Bank which could have been an engine for local investors.

You cannot allow in everything in, like allowing contractors who come here to build roads, dams to import even labour, cement, steel when we have it here. When they do that, if we borrowed from Exim Bank US $100, for example, US$ 97 goes back and US$ 3 is what remains here and yet when we are paying back, we do so even with interest. That is why we, Ugandans, are becoming smaller and they are becoming bigger. It is only a few individuals who are fattening but the majority of Ugandans are dying.

I can tell you about coffee because I know about it. Currently, it is doing well in the world market but a farmer is not getting the right price because middlemen, who are even multinationals, are buying coffee directly from farmers’ trees. They come and buy it at a cheaper price and then process and export it and all the money goes to their countries.

No Government intervention has come in to even find out what is happening. Why shouldn’t there be a mechanism to make sure that this farmer must not be cheated and be given a fair price other than the middleman -(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, in basic economics, we use the phrase “keeping other factors constant”. The game changer in any economy is access to credit and business finance and how affordable that access is. 

I will bring the point home in order not to be theoretical. I went to a commercial bank with my meagre salary from here to borrow Shs 160 million to do a small project. The payment was supposed to be spread over 50 months, possibly my term of stay here, and I was supposed to pay back Shs 4.6 million per month. If I borrow Shs 160 million and I am paying Shs 4.6 million, per month I have borrowed Shs 3.2 million. 

The interest over 50 months was supposed to be Shs 77 million. If you include the cost of borrowing, it was Shs 80 million. That means I am borrowing Shs 160 million at a profit margin of Shs 80 million. If I am to break even in simple business, I would be operating at a profit of 50 per cent. Which business is that, even if you are going to do rocket science? I am not so sure even if Government borrows at 17 per cent, that it would be bogus business at that rate and good economics. 

For me, that is the basic reason as to why this economy is limping. You do not even need to have SACCOs- the things where we are putting a lot of emphasis. You do not need to go into wealth creation. You only work on the cost of accessing finance. In other economies they work on taxes; I am not tackling that sector and that is why I have kept other factors constant. 

That is why for me, the statement from the minister simply does not add up. This economy cannot be stimulated with that rate of cost to access to business. Any other genuine developer of our economy needs to work on that one single factor. Imagine, elsewhere in the world, on average access to finance is averaging at six per cent but commercially here, you are doing 23 per cent.

Madam Speaker, of course, when people are poor, my business of miraa does well, because when they are poor, idle and disorderly they consume a lot. Honourable minister, do everything else but work on the cost of access to finance. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I raise my issues, I would like clarification from the minister on the issue of Crane Bank. The minister said in his submission, point No.10, “This was necessitated by the fact that the bank was significantly undercapitalised and posed a risk to the stability of the financial system if it had been allowed to continue before the takeover.” You have not given us a clear explanation about this bank, whether it is under liquidation or under receivership, under the Insolvency Act. It is not clear. 

However, that aside, you do not need to talk about a stable economy of a country; you just look at the citizens. When you find an economy where people who were taking Bell Lager and Nile Beer have created another type of beer, which is less expensive - Eagle, you just study the situation. From there, they rush to kaveera. Who would not wish to take a Bell or Club beer in a bottle made from Jinja? Someone has run away from this and they say, “let us give this one which is a bit crude and has not gone through distillation.”

Madam Speaker, let us look at these four statements here - “entandikwa”, from there to “bona bagagawale”, then to “prosperity for all”, “operation wealth creation” and “hakuna mchezo”; where are the results? Madam Speaker, when you paid for my trip to India under the Committee of Education- (Interjections)- I am not under duress here. 

Madam Speaker, in India, even those who have not got enough qualifications are skilled. You cannot find a foreigner from Kenya, Tanzania or Sudan in India making toilet paper when students are there. Today, Kenya has over 2,000 businesses here and Uganda has less than 20 in Kenya. Rwanda has taken course and they are making soap and everything. Now, how do you expect to run your economy when all the profits are taken by other people? 

Mr Minister, you just look at the situation in front of you, behind you and here and you just know that the economy is doing badly. Even someone who is not an economist can tell. The moment people go back home without money, it means they are poor. 

You have talked about agriculture here, how do you improve it? This Government removed VAT from agricultural inputs but the costs remained high. I do not know whether Members have taken interest in their constituencies. The major complaint from these people is about farm inputs, which are very expensive. 

As I conclude, when I was teaching about Commonwealth countries in primary, we would say that one of the major factors in agriculture is that if a country grows crops such as coffee or maize and the market goes down, it is up to the Government to buy those goods and keep them until the market has become stable. However, today, where is the Lint Marketing Board? Where is Coffee Marketing Board? 

Government is supposed to buy this produce from the farmers instead of people buying them at lower prices and our people suffer. That is why the economy is doing badly. I am saying, ensure that people get food. When people have food, they can work and make the economy move. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.14
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. The honourable minister, Matia Kasaija, has earned a reputation for being very realistic and consistent; he calls a spade a spade. I am sure the statement he has given to the House is very realistic. 

Let us just look at the fundamentals. I agree with hon. Katuntu; this is a debate in which we should speak with one voice because we are all affected in the market. The performance of the economy is very fundamental that we need to be very clear and focused. The fundamentals are sound because the economy is achieving positive growth and there is no doubt about it. The rate could be higher and the minister does not hide it. 

Similarly, you have to have two things; you have to have policies in place and the implementation capacity. The minister has not shied away from these. The policies are in place but what is challenging is the implementation. 

Let me take a few things of major interest as raised by our colleagues. Let us take hon. Katuntu’s point on borrowing. When you borrow externally, the issue you really want to ask is: Where are you investing it? Does it give you a return that would pay the loan plus the interest? If the answer is yes, there is no harm in borrowing. This is because you can borrow, have a higher return, pay the principal and interest and still remain with a benefit. 

This is precisely why when any loan is being contracted, it comes to this House and we look at the debt strategy. We look at the interest, the present value of the loan and the projected value of the loan. If all these are below the ceiling that has been set on borrowing, you do not borrow that money. You have been consistent in this House.

Honourable minister, as long as money borrowed is invested in the primary engine growth of this economy, and we know them – hon. Lugoloobi, the chairperson of the Committee on Budget, knows this very well. If I borrow, I should invest in agriculture to expand and modernise it. By modernisation, you have to move away from rain-fed and go to irrigation; you have to move from the hand hoe into mechanisation. You have to transform agriculture because that is the engine of growth. They are known. 

We must accelerate the implementation of the oil and gas projects because it is a primary growth sector and we know it. Others are manufacturing, tourism, forestry and Information and Communication Technology (ICT). We must tackle this issue of growth. 

For Uganda to become a middle-income economy by 2020, I can debate with anybody that there is nobody who doubts the challenge that you need to grow in double digits. The single-digit growth is not sufficient –(Interjection)- I need to be guided because the debate is very fundamental.

MR FUNGAROO: The growth in double digits and the borrowing you are talking about has been said here over and over again. However, why is the country crying if it is good? 

Secondly, are there no Ugandans who have employed foreigners as “curtains”, working in Uganda under business names of foreigners and shifting money outside? Why are you people in Government not arresting people carrying money from the airport when they are taking the money out? Is this money really not for you people in Government? It appears people who are taking money from Uganda are actually taking money of Government officials and that is why Government officials are not bothered.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, at this time, I am not interested in defence. If there is something illegal, there is no one to defend it. If there is any repatriation of any amount illegally, then the enforcement agents of the state must act. 

What I am talking about is something which we must face squarely for this country to become a middle-income economy. It is not just Government against the Opposition. It is not defiance or alarmist. I am talking about facts and the facts are that when we borrow money from abroad, we must address the fundamental question whether we are investing it in the engine of growth of this economy for us to borrow and pay and still retain, as normally is the principle of borrowing.

Furthermore –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Kamuntu sits in Cabinet and hon. Matia Kasaija sits in Cabinet. This Parliament has been asserting itself, as you have heard Members, saying we do not want Government to compete with the private sector in internal borrowing. It is 10 years now and these policies he is talking about come from Cabinet. When they sit in Cabinet, don’t they discuss them? What do they do? Unless we are saying that people who are in Cabinet have a problem.

Parliament asserts itself and sometimes they go against our resolutions here. What he is stating is what Parliament has been saying. Is it procedurally right for hon. Kamuntu to continue? Why doesn’t he advise his colleagues in Cabinet instead of lamenting, and he has been there for long? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. All I am saying is that it is my understanding that Parliament is supreme when it comes to the budget. The policies of Government come on this Floor. If I did not dialogue with Members of Parliament on the Floor of the House, what would I be doing? This is a dialogue to get an understanding that the challenge the minister has raised is what we must all confront without having defiance or Opposition or Government, because we all go to the same market and growth touches all of us. 

All I am saying, as a matter of sharing information, is that hon. Katuntu and hon. Lugoloobi raised very fundamental questions and you need to tie them together. You must be very careful with borrowing and you must be very careful with capital flight. Retention of money in the economy when you have borrowed is very key. That is what I have told the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, that you are very consistent, honest, realistic and there is no defiance. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been advised by the Committee on National Economy that their report is ready. So, I would like to defer the completion of this debate until they have brought their report on Thursday.  

I have seen Members who would like to speak - hon. Kiwanuka, hon. Aol, hon. Gutomoi, hon. Waira and the others. They will be the first to speak on Thursday after the chairperson of the committee has presented his report. We cannot conclude, honourable minister; we have to hear from the Committee on National Economy – 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank this House –(Interjection)- I am waiting for the ruling of the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Leader of the Opposition speak and then you can come in.

5.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We will wait to make substantial contributions, as you have guided, when the committee has brought its report. However, I would like the minister to take note of the following:

The minister is carrying a critically ill patient in his hands and he does not want to scare those who are attending to the patient. He is just telling them to continue buying pain killers when the patient needs immediate surgery.

Madam Speaker, before you go into the broader discussion of the economy, you have people who are starving. Uganda, which receives the highest amount of rainfall in the world, with good soils, now cannot feed itself. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, is moving from one place to another, or his department, distributing food handouts. 

The minister comes to Parliament and says that the only reason he has brought a statement on the state of the economy – on page 9 of his statement – is because he has heard people say that we are in a recession. Therefore, he has come to tell Parliament, “No, we are not; we are doing fairly okay.” The patient is fragile but he does not need surgery. 

Madam Speaker, as we prepare for that debate, let the minister brief this Parliament on the immediate solutions. You have companies that are no longer finding Uganda profitable and they are closing and going away. You have Ugandans that cannot feed themselves. Even before you discuss broader policy issues, this matter should have been addressed yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, once companies begin pulling out, the others – it is like a bank; I was in High Court when they announced that Bank of Uganda was taking over Crane Bank. You needed to have seen the stampede once the announcement was made. So, once you have bigger companies closing shop in Uganda either because the production costs are higher than those in the region or the economy is no longer profitable for them, then you do not come to tell Parliament that the reason you have given a statement is because there is a talk that we are in recession. These are issues you must address.

Madam Speaker, as I said, we will make substantial contributions when the committee presents their report. However, for now, the minister should be candid and tell those who are attending to the patient that this patient is critically ill and he needs surgery. Whether they are crying or falling on each other, it is a message he must give but not ask them to buy more pain killers because he fears to scare them.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, as I said, I would like to thank this Parliament. The reason why I came to give this statement was partly to stimulate you –(Laughter)- It was partly to give you the status quo as it is so that from within, you can also come up with opinions and ideas. I am very glad some of you have given us ideas; for example, a colleague suggested having a seminar to discuss the economy of Uganda. That is spot-on and I am taking that advice.

Secondly, the idea of the cost and accessibility of credit to those who would like to borrow is spot-on and we are working on that in the ministry. If you want to be told, yes every country around the world borrows. There is no single Government in the world that does not borrow. Even the American Government borrows. The issue is when you borrow and how you use that money. That is the issue. 

Hon. Kamuntu was asking, when you borrow, where do you put the money? I am borrowing in order to do infrastructure - your roads, electricity, ICT, standard gauge railway - so that doing business in Uganda becomes easier.

Madam Speaker, let us be serious on this issue. Let us not give ourselves Panadol. I heard my brother here saying that the patient is sick. I say the patient is not sick. The right word to use is that the patient requires more energy. When I need more energy, it does not mean that I am sick. 

I am sorry my friends there said that I am fragile. I am not fragile. Kasaija cannot be fragile, I can tell you that. I am the Kasaija that you know very well and I have no pain at my age of 72 years, and I can run even faster than you. So, I am not fragile at all. I am very sound. 

Madam Speaker, the economy is not sick. It has slowed down for reasons which I have given you. I would like to tell you, and listen to me carefully honourable members, we are not the worst. In this region, I have travelled across Africa and we are not the worst. I would like to assure you of that. You may wish to accept or refuse that fact.

When we have our seminar, I will tell you what is happening in other economies. I do not have the time now. You people are blaming me saying that I gave you very little information. Yes, I cannot give you all the details, otherwise we shall sit here for two or three hours as I deliver my speech. 

I am very grateful for the suggestions you have given. Since the committee is also coming with its report on the same – You will excuse me; I did not intend to pre-empt you but this House has been demanding this from me. Therefore, I am responding to the request of Parliament. They said, “Please, come and tell us how the economy stands” and that is precisely what I have done. I am sure much of what the committee will report on Thursday has been highlighted in my statement and you will be able to come and present a comprehensive position so that we move forward. This growth I am talking about is not even. There are individuals in towns and rural areas who are doing extremely well. People in some places are doing very well. 

However, my biggest worry, which should be the worry of everybody, is this weather and we should address this. It has nothing to do with parties or individuals. This is our nation and the economy in which we are all living. If this weather does not deteriorate more than what it has done already, I am sure we shall record positive growth at the end of this financial year. However, if it continues the way it is in some areas, then things will not be nice for this country. 

Therefore, I would like you to join Government and come up with suggestions. I am very happy with the person who said that he knows where there is leakage of revenue. I am willing to receive you so that you show me the leakage, so that we plug it. I was in Mbale yesterday, Madam Speaker, addressing the taxpayers and I told them we are not a monopoly of information. If you can give us information that can make things better for this country, we shall all be very happy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I would like to also thank my colleagues for the beautiful and wonderful suggestions they have made. This will enrich our thinking and help us find the way forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The debate on the report of the Committee on National Economy will continue on Thursday. I have noted the Members who wanted to speak. They will be the ones to start.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Fiscal Performance Report for the year ended June 2016. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Anti-money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Anti-money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these Bills are just being reprinted for the benefit of Members of the Tenth Parliament. Otherwise, the Bills and the reports are here. It is sent to the committee to conclude and report back expeditiously.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

5.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Insurance Bill, 2016 be read for the first time.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR LIBERALISATION BILL, 2011

5.38
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Those Bills are sent to the relevant committee for expeditious perusal and report back.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, before we left for recess, there was an issue raised about Uganda Telecom. The minister promised that as soon as we sit the next day he would bring the report. We have since sat twice and he has not delivered as promised.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to continue without bringing the report while Uganda Telecom is being exploited by a few individuals?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House also requested him to reprint the Bills and bring them back and that is what he is doing. However, since we are now back, we are going to demand that he brings that report this week. Proceed, honourable minister.

LAYING OF PAPERS

A) REPORT ON THE PUBLIC DEBT (DOMESTIC AND EXTERNAL LOANS), GUARANTEES AND OTHER FINANCIAL LIABILITIES AND GRANTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

5.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay before Parliament the report on loans and grants for the Financial Year 2015/2016. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back.

B) THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012

5.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I presented this Bill in the previous Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: You are laying the Bill on the Table because Members of the Tenth Parliament do not have those copies.

MR KASAIJA: I wish to lay before this Parliament the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The committee will report back to us expeditiously. 

C) THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the committee for expeditious handling and report back.

D) THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS REGULATIONS

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, for the information of hon. Katuntu, I am the acting Government Chief Whip. I wish to lay on the Table the Registration of Persons Regulations before Parliament.

E) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT TO THE FIRST BUSOGA OLWEKOBANO HELD IN LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM ON 17 TO 18 SEPTEMBER 2016

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether any member of the delegation is here. Let us go to the next one. Let Commissioner Ogwang lay it on the Table and then we shall come back to that one. 

F) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT TO THE 28TH UGANDA NORTH AMERICA ASSOCIATION CONVENTION HELD IN BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, USA FROM 2 – 4 SEPTEMBER 2016

5.43
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County Katakwi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of Parliament, which attended the 28th Uganda North America Association Convention in Boston, Massachusetts, USA from 2 to 4 September 2016. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: A time will be appointed to debate this.

G) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT TO THE 6TH UGANDA CONVENTION UK – A TRADE AND INVESTMENT FORUM HELD IN LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM FROM 10–12 SEPTEMBER 2016

5.44
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of Parliament which attended the Sixth Uganda Convention UK - A Trade and Investment Forum, in London, United Kingdom, from 10 to 12 September 2016. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a date will be appointed for its discussion.

H) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT TO LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM TO ATTEND THE FIRST BUSOGA OLWEKOBANO; 17 – 18 SEPTEMBER 2016

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of Parliament to London, United Kingdom, to attend the First Busoga Olwekobano held on 17 to 18 September 2016. (Laughter)
 
THE SPEAKER: A date will be appointed for its discussion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RECONSIDER THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 was passed by this House in May and sent back by the President for reconsideration. The committee has reconsidered the Bill and we are ready to report back. 

I would like to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker; in the interest of time, I do not know whether it is necessary to read the introduction-

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR MUSASIZI: I will straight away go to our major observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed the following:

There is a misconception in the public that Members of Parliament do not pay taxes. Members noted that they pay taxes on their salaries. Each Member pays an amount in excess of Shs 3.3 million per month in terms of taxes and this is an approximation of about Shs 40.4 million per annum. 

Additionally, Members of Parliament earn different allowances that attract taxes. These include committee sitting allowances, responsibility allowance for chairpersons and vice-chairpersons, and gratuity that is paid to Members of Parliament attracts a tax of 40 per cent.

Madam Speaker, our committee recommends that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be passed by the House in its current form and be returned to His Excellency the President for assent. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. Honourable members, this matter has been with us for some time. Can I put the question that the -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings that reconsidered the Bill. Here is a copy of the minutes together with a copy of the original report. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, the matter was debated substantively over time. I now put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 21

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with no amendments. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should report that we have reconsidered.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has reconsidered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with no amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 
5.56
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, the country is facing a severe shortage of food and scarcity of water and pasture as a result of a prolonged dry spell. 

The first season rains for this year, 2016, which normally begin during the month of March, were more than three weeks late and below average in the north-western, central and eastern parts of the country. Households that had planted crops according to the usual first season calendar of March never witnessed germination. Much of the crop planted later, after the rains arrived, was also scorched by the sun due to below average rainfall.

The second season rains between August and October also came late, therefore the harvest at that time in most parts of the country was not possible. There was also a dry spell during the period of May to June, which heavily damaged crops in many parts of the country. All this happened after a very long period of drought in the previous year, 2015, in most parts of the country.

Our biggest fear now is the current La Nina conditions (extended dry spell) in some parts of the country, which is forecasted by the National Meteorological Authority to last between September 2016 and March 2017. The sub regions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bukedi, West Nile, parts of Busoga and most districts along the cattle corridor have witnessed massive crop failure, leading to little or no harvest that has now resulted into the severe food crisis.

There are five standard phases of food insecurity ranging from minimal, represented in light green in the map; stressed in yellow; crisis in orange; emergency in red; and famine in dark red as indicated on the map. The current food security situation in the country ranges between minimal and crisis. No part of the country is in an emergency or famine phase of food insecurity. However, there is fear that if individuals and families do not manage the available food stocks at household level well, the situation can quickly deteriorate to the emergency and famine stages of food insecurity within the next two months.

Twenty-five per cent of the population in Isingiro District are in an emergency phase of food insecurity, meaning they access half a meal or nothing at all in a day. Sixty-five per cent of the population in Karamoja sub region are in a crisis phase of food insecurity, meaning they access one meal or half a meal in a day. Thirty-five per cent of the population in the districts of Katakwi, Amuria, Kumi, Bukedea, parts of Serere and Kaberamaido are in the same phase with Karamoja sub region (crisis), meaning they access one meal or half a meal in a day.

The standard dietary consumption in Uganda is three meals in a day composed of breakfast, lunch and supper. Fifty per cent of the people of Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo, Maracha, Arua, Zombo, Nebbi, Adjumani, Amuru, Nwoya, Gulu, Pader, Lamwo, Kitgum, Agago, Soroti, Ngora, Amolatar, Pallisa, Butaleja, Rakai, Isingiro and Tororo are in a stressed phase of food insecurity, meaning they access one and a half meals in a day.

The districts of Oyam, Apac, Kiryandongo, Masindi, Buliisa, Kyankwanzi, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Mubende, Luwero, Kyegegwa, Sembabule, Kiruhura, Lwengo, Ntungamo, Kamuli and Kibuku are in a minimal phase of food insecurity. This means the people can still afford all meals though stocks are running low.

The following districts are fairly food secure: Kisoro, Kabale, Kanungu, Rukungiri, Mitooma, Bushenyi, Rubirizi, Ibanda, Kasese, Kabarole, Bundibugyo, Kyenjojo, Ntoroko, Kibaale, Hoima, Masaka, Lyantonde, Kalungu, Butambala, Mityana, Wakiso, Gomba, Luuka, Iganga, Buikwe, Mukono, Kayunga, Buyende, Kampala, Jinja, Mayuge, Bugiri, Busia, Namayingo, Buvuma and Kalangala.

The total population in need of urgent relief food, as of now, stands at about 1,300,000 people. The sub regions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bukedi, West Nile, parts of Busoga and some districts along the cattle corridor are the most stressed.

Water Scarcity Situation

The following sub regions and districts are facing severe shortage of water for both domestic use and livestock rearing: Karamoja, Teso, Bukedi, West Nile and most districts along the cattle corridor.

Pasture Situation

The same districts facing water crisis are also facing pasture shortage. Therefore, the districts mentioned above are also facing pasture shortage. In other words, their animals are in trouble. 

Action Expected of Individual Families

It is recommended - individuals and families are strongly advised to desist from selling their harvest inspite of the current good prices being offered for food items, especially by traders from neighbouring countries. This happens normally in the border districts where people come from across the border to buy food. 

Individuals and families are advised to save money by spending much less over the coming festive season and avoid unnecessary feasting. This will have to be propagated. Individuals and families are advised to save money by spending much less over the coming festive season on luxury items like clothes, parties, buying extra materials or goods for the home or smart phones. Also, drink less if possible or scale down on the quality of the drinks. 

Individuals and families are encouraged to plant leafy vegetables, taking advantage of the little ongoing rains. Vegetables such as cowpeas leaves, ggobe or boo as they are locally known should be dried and stored. Planting of sweet potatoes and cassava should be scaled up because these normally survive the dry spell. Those who still have cassava and sweet potatoes should harvest it, dry it and store it for the lean period because these foodstuffs can be dried and stored. The banana types like Kivuvu and Kayinja varieties common in central Uganda, which withstand the dry season, should be promoted and those who already have them should not harvest until the situation gets harder. 

Individuals and families are encouraged to harvest, store and use water sparingly for both domestic use and livestock. Animals should be restrained from wandering, which results in damaging crops and water facilities or sources. 

Individuals and families should be restrained from bush burning, which results in further loss of pasture, destruction of vegetables and drying of wells. This normally happens in northern Uganda where I come from; they burn all the grass looking for bush rats. Individuals and families are encouraged to harvest available grass for their livestock should the conditions get leaner. 

Government Interventions

Currently, those in severe food insecurity situations, like the case in Isingiro, Teso and Karamoja, are receiving relief food from Government. However, such supplies are not sustainable if individuals do not play their part. 

In any case, they are not sufficient because recently, we procured 24 trailers of food but there are over 80 districts which are in distress. The 24 trailers were supposed to feed 80 districts but we have reduced it to the emergency areas. We are also working with the Ministry of Finance to see if we can procure more food so that other areas can also be covered. 

Government has issued a food aid appeal, which I find shameful, to a number of development partners - the World Bank, DFID, USAID, People’s Republic of China and Government of Egypt, among others. All of them have promised to consult their headquarters and return with a response as soon as possible. 

Government is running radio and television food security awareness messages in English, Ateso, Luo, Luganda and Runyatikara. These messages advise individuals and families to sparingly use the limited stock of food in their custody and actually, some of the messages are mentioned here. 

The Prime Minister and a team of Government ministers have begun countrywide food security meetings with the people. Government will continue monitoring and informing the population of the changing situation. In my department, we are all moving out of Kampala; I will be moving out to the northern and eastern regions to follow up on sensitisation and to assess the situation at hand, meanwhile my colleagues have moved to the west and the south. 

There is other action that we have taken; we have drawn the attention of other ministries to the issue of conservation of the environment. This must be intensified to mitigate the impact of desertification. The desert is moving southward towards Uganda and it is moving because of climate change. We need to make sure that we protect our environment and plant more trees.

We also need to move into a comprehensive irrigation drive around the country, to improve on agriculture yields and at the same time withstand climate change. We are in dialogue with the Ministry of Agriculture.  His Excellency the President has actually taken the lead to see that irrigation is developed maximally at different levels so as to battle these challenges. 

On the settlement strategies, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development must develop strategies that prioritise the use of land towards maximising agriculture. If you drive around this country, you will find mabati everywhere and yet the land should have been for agriculture. People have spread all over instead of settling together so that most land is left for agricultural purposes. That leaves little land for agriculture, particularly in the fertile wet areas around Lake Victoria. Therefore, a policy has to be adopted and our population sensitised to rearrange their settlement pattern. This should be done through the National Planning Authority. 

The use of land and natural resources must be rationalised for the future. At the moment, we are reckless with our environment and our natural resources. We need to develop policies and focus on these limited resources we have because they do not expand; we are the ones multiplying. We produce 10 children each and yet the land and the environment do not expand. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will start with hon. Aol. However, before she comes up, honourable minister, we have talked about drought and famine almost every year. We are now talking about storage; I want to know what Government has done to facilitate storage in people’s homes. What are we doing about it? I hope you will be able to answer that. 

6.12
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for this statement. 

The Speaker has already asked you a question about storage or silos. We once went to Zambia and we saw a Government initiative to have stores in all parishes where maize is stocked. Here, when we have bumper harvests, we just sell off everything because Government has not sensitised people and given them a good policy. Every time we have a disaster, we always say, “We should be disaster prepared”. How can we be disaster prepared without taking action on what we produce? 

Honourable minister, while your report is very good, it lacks a proposal to ensure that we store whenever we have good harvests. These good harvests do not only help during disaster periods. Sometimes we have a bit of scarcity and at times we need to stabilise the market. Government can actually empty the stores into the market to stabilise the market in times of scarcity. 

Honourable minister, we are not happy with how disaster preparedness is managed in this country. Even the structures are not there. For some of us from the north, during the war we at least tried to put up something rudimentary; instead of you trying to strengthen this to work better, it is now almost dead. We used to have, even at sub-county level, disaster preparedness committees but now they are no more. Even the ones for the district are not there. Honourable minister, we need to do more.

You talked about irrigation. The President demonstrated drip irrigation but I do not think that it works well for us during this dry spell. We had better prepare a proper budget for irrigation.

There is the issue of population growth in Uganda. Unless we all go out to sensitise our people, right now I think we are heading to the 40 million mark. Moreover, the population is a young one; the young people are more than the adults and older persons. It is such a problem for us. We need to plan better in the area of disaster preparedness for this population growth, which is very high.

Right now in the north, we have an influx of Sudanese coming into Uganda to compete for the little food that we have. The indigenous people compete with the South Sudanese. There should have been better preparedness in this area but we do not have it. 

Vegetables alone are not enough, honourable minister. You know for us, the Acholi, when we say that there is no food, it is not about vegetables or any other sauce but it is about kwon or millet bread. You need cassava, millet –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Aol, for giving way. I would like to give you information concerning the competition for food between the refugees from South Sudan and the indigenous people within Uganda.

As I speak, in my district, Amuru, at the border point, the locals have decided to join the refugees. The refugee camp is located in Adjumani District and for the whole of this term, parents moved with their children to join the refugees. They are competing for the little food that is being given to the refugees. Madam Speaker, the situation is that serious, just because of famine. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report on the severe food shortage and scarcity of water and pasture due to the prolonged dry spell in the country. I would also like to thank him for his advice to Ugandans on how to avoid extravagance when there is a bumper harvest as well as pointing out Government’s intervention. 

However, I am not satisfied with the interventions that the minister has told us about. I think the minister should have consulted other ministries like that of agriculture and trade, so that he is in a position to tell us the Government’s long-term intervention plan. 

He talks about the poor harvest or the extravagance of the people as implied in the report, but this is partly due to the poor handling during harvest. The people do not have stores and they do not know how to preserve food when it is in plenty.

There is also the issue of irrigation. He should have been in a position to tell us about the long-term plan of the Government. In Amudat District, for example, all our rivers flow to Kenya and the water ends up in Lake Turkana. I do not see how we are benefiting from that water when it goes to Kenya.

Madam Speaker, I request the Government to plan for irrigation for the country as a long-term solution, so that when God gives us enough rain, we are able to harvest the water and use it when there is no rain. We could as well plan for silos so that when we have plenty of food, we are able to store it so that in times of scarcity, we have a fall-back position. This will help us avoid going to beg other countries to provide relief food. I beg to submit.

6.20
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. 

The alarming situation in the country regarding food insecurity is really serious, like the minister has stated. In Acholi sub region, for instance, we used not to have severe famine. I think the last time we had severe famine – I stand to be corrected if I am wrong – was around the 1980s when I was a few years old. 

What I am trying to say is that the people of Acholi work very hard. In our tradition, you would find a home rated by the number of granaries it had. You would find granaries meant to take care of famine – maybe two or three of them for millet, sorghum and other food stuff. 

When a man intended to marry or if his son was marrying, the in-laws would come and count the number of granaries in his home in order to determine the number of cattle to be demanded as dowry. Also, the bride’s parents wanted assurance that their daughter would be comfortable when she eventually gets married in that home. However, all that vanished just because of the war. The Acholi are now suffering this famine partly because war has affected the traditional way of doing things.

Secondly, there is the issue of climate change in the country; the rainy season has totally changed. We used to have a very good wet season and we would plant crops accordingly. The people of Acholi still have that traditional planting season; during the months between March and July, people are planting and the months of November, December and January is when they are harvesting. However, all that has changed due to the changes in the rain pattern.

Therefore, I would like to request that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness works together with other line ministries to help come up with disaster policies that would guide the population in storage facilities. They should also come up with policies that will guide people on the issues that the minister has mentioned; for example, that people should try to avoid over spending during the festive season. Such guidelines given by a ministry would be taken seriously by the population. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, as leaders, Members of Parliament have a key role to play in guiding the population, especially on issues of climate change. They can also advise them on how to change their planting patterns accordingly. 

Finally, I would like to request the Ministry of Water and Environment to work together with the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness because there is a whole department in the Ministry of Water and Environment that is in charge of water for production. This department in the ministry receives money. 

Members of Parliament have talked of drip irrigation systems and we have seen them being used in the countries we have visited. My senior colleague, hon. Betty Aol, said they do not work but I think she is wrong, because you do not need a lot of land to apply drip irrigation. Therefore, if people could be guided, it would help them have something to eat during the dry season as -(Member timed out.) 

6.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report. 

I expected to hear immediate interventions but the minister concentrated on long-term interventions. Some few months ago while on a visit to a place in Kitgum District, we found that 14 people had died of hunger. In Kitgum and Amuru District where I come from, people are still suffering. I, therefore, would like to find out from the minister what immediate interventions they will put in place to help those people who are suffering. 

As I mentioned earlier, the parents and pupils who have joined the refugee camps are competing for the little food that is being given to refugees. What interventions do you have in your office to bring those parents back to Amuru District?  

Madam Speaker, it is a very nasty situation. It was in the middle of the term and the school was almost empty; the pupils had joined their parents and the refugees. They were all taken to Adjumani District. I, therefore, appeal to the honourable minister to come up with immediate interventions so that the children are brought back to Amuru District to get proper education.

As we speak, there are so many people who are suffering. I think it may not be easy to practice the drip irrigation that the honourable minister was talking about in some areas.  There are places that are naturally dry, for example Karamoja, where it might be very expensive. The Government needs to identify other techniques because irrigation cannot be practised in each and every area; it depends on the environment of that particular place. 

Otherwise, I would like to appreciate those long-term interventions you have given. I think as leaders, we shall advise and sensitise our people to have them implemented. Thank you so much. 

6.27
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro South County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the minister for this report. 

In the Ninth Parliament, we put in place a Contingency Fund. However, as we talk, there is no money. I have met the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Bahati, and everybody that matters in finance including the permanent secretary and they all said there was no money on that account.  

We have talked about modern agricultural practices like irrigation in all our policy statements from the agricultural sector, but there is nothing. Food security – there were traditional practices we used to call in Runyakitara “ebitara” (granaries), like my colleague said. We even used to have those at the subcounty headquarters and everybody had to make a contribution, but there is nothing now. 

Even as I talk today, there is no policy and Government has not come out to ban the export of cereals. Tanzania has already come out clearly on this because they are going to have a 65 per cent shortfall on food. Kenya and South Sudan have done the same. What about us? What is our policy now on that? At least as a short-term measure, you can stop people from selling and whatever they have, they bring it to the Government and they buy it. You can support our people in the short-term, like my colleague alluded. 

We have a tendency to concentrate on single crops. In western Uganda, particularly Isingiro District, we have hitherto been the only and single largest producer of matooke in the whole country, actually in the whole world, by the way.-(Interjections)- That is very true and it is on record. However, not anymore. 

This drip irrigation business may work if you are irrigating one, 10 or 20 plantlets of orange seedlings but it is simply not practical for a banana plantation. I think we need to consider a different option. 

As a short-term measure, I would have loved to hear the minister say that they are preparing to take at least cassava cuttings to that part of the country. I would have loved to hear him say that they are trying to get sweet potato vines to that part of the country so that within three months, people could have some food security of sorts. 

Madam Speaker, you did mention the silos. At one time, we had them in Jinja, Lwengo, in Kyazanga -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much. This is something that we should embark on this time round during the budgeting process. Let us insist and invest some money in agriculture. Let us make them work at least for the time being. Let us see something being done about this. 

Finally, we have a problem of water. I would like to appeal to you all like I have always done. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker because she always tries to help although everything falls on deaf ears. This time round I intend to demonstrate here together with my colleague -(Interjections)- I will not undress but I will put up a very big show that everybody will have to stop and say “enough is enough”. 

You cannot talk of the national average of water coverage being at 67 or 68 per cent and Isingiro is still operating at 21 per cent. Mayuge –(Member timed out.) 

6.32
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the honourable minister for the presentation. 

I note that the minister’s statement is addressing emergencies. The disaster cycle has different stages of management but he has concentrated more on emergencies, and yet there is also preparedness. I needed to hear the interventions on producing food crops. The Government, in liaison with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, should have included a strategy of buying seeds for the farmers so that they can be planted for more food. It is a strategy that we should consider so that it can be worked on. 

Another issue that I noted is that Bugisu region has not been mentioned anywhere and yet it is equally food stressed. I do not know whether my friends from Manafwa and Bududa are okay, but to me the whole of Bugisu region – (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is that the minister’s statement has categorised the food insecure districts into minimal and crisis. However, Bugisu sub region, which experiences natural calamities that have devastated crops and livestock, does not feature anywhere. It should have been categorised as “minimal”. This is a serious concern.

Also with the cracks that have emerged, these people have been evacuated from those fields and they are looking for hand-outs. Therefore, if there are emergency foods and non-food items, the whole of Bugisu sub region, including Bududa, should be considered.

MR WOBOYA: Thank you for that information. I would like to expound on that. In the lower zone of Sironko, food was scorched in the gardens by the sun whereas in the upper zone, in the mountain areas, we were affected by hailstorms and landslides. We presented a report here about the same. People actually do not have food.

The other issue that I would like the minister to think about is what I refer to as risk transfer. When these farmers have been affected by these effects of climate change, where do they go? Should they just cry? Can’t we work out a mechanism of some modalities, say with some form of insurance, so that farmers have a fall-back position? 

I think the ministry needs to think beyond just addressing the emergencies. One of the strategies would be how we can empower farmers to manage amidst the challenges of weather and natural calamities. 

My last issue is on the Contingency Fund, which my colleague talked about. I think we all need to support it because the ministry has a lot to do but they are incapacitated. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Byarugaba talked about our traditional societies. I do not know why we denigrate the efforts of our kingdoms. 

In Busoga, when I was growing up, every home had three granaries. The first one would only be opened following the instruction of the head of the home. The second one was following the instruction of the county chief; you could not touch it until the county chief had said so. For the third one, if the Kyabazinga did not instruct you to touch it, you would leave it there even if it meant for five years, and it was very effective. 

Those chiefs had no shoes on their feet but they were very effective. However, here we are now, you cannot touch people because of the votes. (Laughter)

6.37
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin with what you have just talked about. The reason we do not have those granaries that we used to have in the days of our grandfathers, is because of the deterioration of morals of many people due to despair and so many other factors. Many Ugandans would have wished to have granaries even in this generation, but if you put up one and somebody finds out that it is fully loaded, thugs come at night and rob you. So, even the morals of Ugandans have deteriorated so much that they do not respect the property of others.

Secondly, there are some districts that are beneficiaries of the silos programme; for instance, in Butaleja I am a beneficiary of this programme. However, the silos are empty; there is nothing. It is on record that Butaleja District is the biggest grower of rice in eastern Uganda, but at the moment, people cannot even afford to buy a kilo of rice that is at Shs 2500. This is beyond what we are thinking about right now.

Secondly, I think we need to empower the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. I really sympathise with the ministers for disaster preparedness, because if this was a patient, this patient would be in a coma. They also need assistance. They have nothing to give out and yet we are talking about preparedness. They cannot distribute food to all Ugandans.

Thirdly, there is no regulation on the sale of food. When Government came up with the policy of privatisation, I think even food was privatised; so anybody can sell food anywhere, at any cost without caring about the future. 

I think we need to come up with a policy where Government should intervene before disaster strikes. We must buy food during the buffer season so that when it comes to such conditions that we are going through, we have something to give out. Why should we buy food from other countries when we are well known as the food basket of East Africa?

Lastly, there are some areas that are blessed with water sources. In my district, Butaleja, for instance, we have so many swamps; the biggest area is covered by swamps. This programme of irrigation would work very well in Butaleja. In fact, I have a very bright team of Banyole that have come up with their innovation for irrigation but they do not have financial support. Why can’t we support such people that have come up with new technologies – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps, hon. Milly Mugeni, you should write to the Minister for Science and Technology - the new ministry. I think they should be able to do something. Let us start from there.

6.40
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this elaborate report in regard to food security in this country. 

Food shortage in Uganda is not caused by laziness of Ugandans, but by the weather which has become unpredictable. In my district, people try very hard to work; they planted crops like cassava and others but the rains failed them. The prolonged drought destroyed everything.

In my view, since we have water sources like the River Nile, why don’t we get some funds, for instance from the World Bank, to ensure we have water for production? When we have water for production, our people will produce a lot of food and we will not face such problems. 

It is very embarrassing because we have water here - we have the Nile on our own land - but we do not have food. My prayer is that the Minister of Agriculture comes up with a strategy so that we have water for production in all the districts of Uganda.

Secondly, let us have by-laws in the local councils where people produce and keep food at the subcounty headquarters. If we did this, when such a shortage like this one arises, food can be given out to the people.

Madam Speaker, I have discovered that in Uganda, we have no manpower. In my constituency, we have no tractors. If you gave a tractor to each constituency to start with, we would expand on our agriculture. What do you expect people to do? Let us produce more food so that we avert this situation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.42
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of food insecurity is becoming a mime in Uganda. This issue began way back when we were in Kyankwanzi. We met the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness and hon. Moses Ali on the same issue. We also met with the First Lady over the same issue, as Members of Parliament from Karamoja sub-region. 

When we came back from Kyankwanzi, we met with officials from Office of the Prime Minister and our minister then, the First Lady, wrote a letter asking the Minister of Finance to release money but nothing happened. Now, the issue has spread all over the country. It was better to mitigate it before it escalated.

As we speak, many of the Ik people are in north-western Kenya in a refugee camp in Kakuma. Some have joined political rallies – they are in an electoral period in Kenya - so that they can survive alongside the Kenyans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the minister because he said that Karamoja and Teso are receiving food. I just returned from Karamoja on Friday but I did not see food being given anywhere. Maybe it is in the process or it is going to happen. Thank you.

6.44
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

I would like to talk about the storage infrastructure. Earlier on in Uganda, the storage infrastructure was constructed and managed by Government. However, during privatisation, all these warehouses, including the silos, were privatised. 

We recently came up with an innovation in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; we introduced the Uganda National Commodity Exchange, whereby the private sector would take about 80 per cent and manage their warehouses and we take 20 per cent. Therefore, the private sector started building warehouses. We have 36 in the country built by the Grain Council, which they use for marketing and processing. We also have a warehouse receipt system to regulate them.

However, I would like to appeal to you, Madam Speaker and the honourable members, to support me in presenting a paper to allow us use the silos. The silos that were privatized are underutilized; some of them are empty while others are just used as stores. They are supposed to do processing and all that. 

I would like to present a paper but the Ministry of Finance has to present a paper on privatisation first, to tell us where some of these silos are or who is managing them. Unfortunately, there is no one from the Ministry of Finance. 

However, during this period in which we have this state of emergency, we could get together with the honourable ministers and request that we utilise these silos for the time being to store our cereals. That is why it has been very difficult to block our cereals from going out because we do not have sufficient storage infrastructure.

We have also requested for the repair of 164 warehouses that used to belong to Produce Marketing Board. We have inspected and identified them and we have applied for some funds. I will come back and seek your support so that we can repair them for utilisation by the districts. We could fast-track that, Madam Speaker.

6.47
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his presentation. 

Food shortage is now a big problem in the whole country and I agree that it is worse in some districts. Government planned to help people that are experiencing severe food shortages. In the minister’s presentation, he said that they have started giving food to some districts but some have been left out.

Madam Speaker, Yumbe District is now hosting refugees. From reliable sources, the refugee population in Yumbe is now the second largest population in the country. These refugees get tired of the food that UNHCR provides and they prefer to go for cassava and yet drought has affected production in the district and people are struggling for the little food that there is. I am afraid of what is going to happen in the next one month. 

Honourable minister, you are proposing that people should have storage for the food they have; these people do not have money and even food to store. If you go down to the villages right now and see the people’s situation, the children do not go to school because they do not have what to eat.

My appeal to Government is that we should plan for enough money to help the districts that are really affected. I do not know what criterion you use to categorise districts but when you move to individual households, you will really find out how people are suffering, even if you checked in the media.

Madam Speaker, about refugees, water is a very big problem. The Yumbe water level was at 38 per cent. However, with the influx of refugees, the water level has come down to 20 per cent and that is a very big problem. The current water level is a very big threat to health. I will join my colleague who said that he is going to stage a protest in this House. We shall stage it together to express the gravity of the problem we are facing.

All the water sources have dried up and boreholes are not yielding enough. The UNHCR goes to look for water in Yumbe to give refugees. The UNHCR policy says that every individual must use on average 15 litres of water per day. However, when you go to people’s homes, they use less than four litres per day. That is a very serious issue. The issue of water must be addressed with immediate effect. 

On the issue of production of water for agriculture, we have a water source called Agbinika that can give water year in, year out. It can generate electricity to pump water for agriculture. The UNHCR is planning to give the district tractors but they will lie idle if we do not plan for them.

Uganda has been hosting refugees and I think we were recognised for our good policies on refugees. We want that system to go on. Uganda’s name must go on record for its good hospitality towards refugees. Therefore, if we want to host them well and have them repatriated without problems, we must look into their problems and those of the communities around that are hosting these refugees.

The UNHCR is employing people there. You cannot believe that they ferry people in buses and they go there without being shortlisted for work. You find an advertisement put up but the local people are not employed. Yesterday, people in Yumbe wanted to riot but we said no -(Member timed out.)

6.53
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to speak on behalf of Ugandans who are suffering.

First, allow me appreciate the Minister and his team for the tireless effort that they have put into trying to know what is happening in the country. Teso has suffered most; although the figures are saying that 35 per cent of the population is suffering, I think it is beyond that. However, I would not like to blame you because you have tried your best.

On Friday, I visited my constituency and I happened to meet a group of elders, but the women and the children joined us. They were excited to see me. They thought I had come with food to give them. Unfortunately, I had nothing to give.

Honourable minister, you said you gave food to some districts; unfortunately, despite speaking on the Floor of this House for long, Kumi has not gotten anything. If you supplied the food, it was supplied without my notice. Otherwise, you have tried your best.

Madam Speaker, famine has affected us so badly. The elderly people and children are the worst hit. People who are married have decided to stay with their wives in their houses and ignore the elders. It is also unfortunate that our elders are not receiving the Shs 25,000 that is meant to be paid to the elderly. 

The business community is crying out in the little town of Kumi; they sit in their shops with no buyers. They used to benefit from people who would come and sell their agricultural produce and come and shop from them, but the trend has totally changed.

I visited the police cells just yesterday; they are full of thieves. People have resorted to steal in order to survive because they have nothing to eat. They steal whatever they can get, be it a radio or foodstuffs, and then sell them so cheaply. If you bought something at Shs 100,000, they will sell it at Shs 20,000 to survive for a day. 

Madam Speaker, this is the centre of decision-making in this country. We cannot lament when we have the power to make decisions that can help. Resource allocation comes from this House; we need to re-direct our budgeting towards the right course. Why should we budget for roads? Are we budgeting for roads to carry dead bodies? Our people are dying, but they say, “Let us first put up roads”. 

The best thing to do is to re-plan together with the concerned ministries. Let us first get our priorities right; if it is about irrigation, let us - (Member timed out.)

6.56
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I have a problem with your presentation. The objectives of disaster preparedness, in my understanding, are three. One is prevention - that is to avoid damage; two is mitigation of damage - even if you tried to prevent it, it has come to pass, so we have to minimise it; and three is rehabilitation - that is to restore what has been damaged. 

Much of your presentation concentrates on mitigation and, therefore, the sense of preparedness to prevent is lost. In preparedness to prevent, I expected the minister to talk about risk identification, risk reduction and early warning systems so that this talk of disaster and hunger year in and year out is stopped. 

Madam Speaker, in the financial year 2014/2015, I wrote a concept paper to prevent a problem like this in Obongi County - to avoid hunger after the floods besetting us every year. Hon. Musa Ecweru, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, went to Moyo with me to deliver food there and I asked him, “Are you going to carry food here every time this happens?” My opinion was that we needed to stop the flooding because I knew its cause. 

For us in the Nile Valley, whether it rains or not, we can have floods. When it rains up in the highlands in West Nile, at the border of Uganda with Congo, all the rivers which go into the River Nile bring the water this way. Because of the broken banks of the river, sometimes you even find floods when it is dry in Obongi. 

I came up with an idea that we must repair the banks of River Kochi, River Ovoso, and River Nyawa so that when the water comes from Yumbe, Koboko and the Democratic Republic of Congo, it goes straight to the River Nile. I copied my concept paper to the Prime Minister and to the Speaker but I have been disappointed up to date. 

We asked for only hand tools, empty sacks and tree seedlings. I mobilised the people of Obongi - Madam Speaker, you are a witness because you went to Obongi a number of times. These materials were not given to me because I belong to the Opposition. However, when we went for the campaigns, we saw the same ministry - the Office of the Prime Minister- distributing hoes for election purposes. However, when we needed them for work, you refused to give them to us. 

Do not come to Obongi to bring for us food because when we asked you to prevent the hunger, you refused. Let us die because you want us dead, but do not come to fool us with one kilogramme of posho and sugar; it will not be enough -(Member timed out.) 

7.00
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us this report concerning one of the major issues disturbing the country. However, I would like to get some clarification from the honourable minister. 

On page 4, the honourable minister mentioned that no part of the country is in an emergency or famine phase of food insecurity. However, in the following paragraph, he went on to say that 25 per cent of the population in Isingiro District is in an emergency phase of food insecurity. To me, it looks like a contradiction.

Secondly, when we were sitting as a committee - this issue was brought before this Parliament by hon. Amongin Jacquiline - I remember that so many Members of Parliament came before us. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for example, representing Dokolo District, was here talking about her district but I do not see it being mentioned here. Two Members of Parliament representing Lira District came before us, but I do not see Lira District featuring here. There were many others that I cannot mention now. So, honourable minister, can you clarify on this?

Madam Speaker, we made some recommendations as a committee about the storage facilities, irrigation and so many other issues like water for production. It is unfortunate that when you look at this report, it appears that the input of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water and Environment were not factored in. I would have loved to see how the Government is addressing some of these issues.

Madam Speaker, from the way things are, it appears that we are only addressing the symptoms and not the problem. When you talk of famine and you do not talk about how we are going to get water, then we are just wasting time treating the symptoms. 

Madam Speaker, Egypt, which is here in Africa, is a dry country but you will never hear that its people are dying of hunger. We have the source of the Nile, so why are we failing as a government? Honourable minister, I think you will need to do a lot more if your ministry is to provide relief and disaster preparedness. What are you doing as far as preparedness is concerned? What are your interventions? 

We have been talking about the traditional leaders not playing their role as far as the traditional system of storage facilities is concerned. We used to call it “dero” - the granary. My mother used to have one, but the last time I visited her, the granary was down.

Therefore, honourable minister, you need to do serious mobilisation of these stakeholders. Bring the traditional leaders on board. Sit down with them and let them go back and talk to their people about the issue of food insecurity. Meet with Members of Parliament and bring them on board. They have a role to play in this. Have a meeting with religious leaders and sensitise them –(Member timed out.)

7.04
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, District Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report he has given. 

I was wondering whether the minister actually consulted the report that we made as Members of Parliament from the affected districts. Pallisa was among those districts but in the entire report, I did not see Bukedi come up clearly as a region that is affected by food shortage.

I have reports that people are food-stressed. There are people surviving on a cup of porridge a day and others who have had to do with one meal a day. The only hope they had was the second season crops. However, as I talk, the rains are failing the second season crops. Therefore, if we are looking at any relief, it may be for mid or end of next year. 

I would like to beg you to consider this issue a critical one because it also borders on insecurity. You have been a Minister of Internal Affairs before and you know that a restless population can cause an uprising and destabilise governance.

I would also request you to work with the line ministries to institute lasting solutions to this issue of food shortage as Members have echoed, especially on the issue of storage of reserve food after harvests. The LC systems cannot deliver that to us. There has to be another mechanism. The sub county chiefs cannot do it alone. Perhaps we need parish chiefs to supervise this. Thank you.

7.16
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for his statement. 

In his statement, the minister pointed out those districts that have got rains now. I had expected the minister to tell us that these districts that have got rains should immediately be supplied with beans, banana suckers, cassava cuttings and potato cuttings so that they can plant. If they can plant, these areas will be the ones to salvage those areas that are facing famine.

Madam Speaker, I also pointed out that this arrangement by Operation Wealth Creation is a bit disappointing. When you have a country that is starving, you do not give out mangoes and oranges; you should give out bean seeds or cassava cuttings, so that people can plant and have more food in this country.

Madam Speaker, the Government disbanded the Produce Marketing Board and I think that was a very big mistake. I think time has come for us to swallow our pride and reinstate the Produce Marketing Board. The board was a mechanism of storing food. They would buy off the bumper harvest and in times of need, offload these foods to the population. They could also sell it outside whenever the need arose. Now, we are just here with nothing taking place. 

Madam Speaker, this idea of leaving food storage to private operators will not help us much because these are people looking for profit. Government should come in because it has interest in its own people. The minister in charge of trade was talking about this arrangement of leaving the stores to private operators, but I disagree with the idea because their interest is profit. They will not care for you when there is hunger. In fact, when there is hunger, these people will be happy to overcharge you so that they can make more profit.

The third point I would like to dwell on is the issue of adverse weather – that the rains have failed and the desert is moving towards us. What is the cause of this? We have been planting in the wetlands, we have destroyed all the forests and as Government, we are looking on and doing nothing. What is even annoying is that the forests are given away to private operators –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR KALULE-SSENGO: They give away these forests to private operators who cut all the trees for timber and just plant eucalyptus. This does not really help us. We need to preserve even the natural forests if we are to fight the desert that is running towards us. I will stop here, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am still waiting for the Government to declare a national tree planting day. We have been waiting since the Sixth Parliament.

7.10
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the minister. I will just comment on some of the actions that have been given as part of the way forward. The minister talked more about actions expected of individuals and I was wondering how he expects to have them implemented. He is just saying, “People should be advised not to sell. People should be advised to save what they have”. 

We are seeing a situation where people do not even have what to save. Therefore, what are they going to save since there is nothing? Which water are we saying they should save? I think it is in Rakai where the water they use to wash is what they use for cooking –(Interjections)- Yes! It was reported. Therefore, the water you are saying people should save is not there. 


When you look at the actions of Government, you find them a bit wanting. What I thought the minister would give us, as one Member said, is some proactive measures because most of these are reactive. They only wait and say “Government is giving out food”. In addition, when they talk of giving out, someone said it is just one kilogramme and you wonder for how long that will go on and to what impact. 

I think we needed to hear more proactive measures like some people have talked of irrigation. We want to hear, “In three months, this is what we intend to do and this is what we are doing”. We want to hear, “In three months or 100 days, we shall be distributing cassava or Kivuvu – the improved banana variety”.

Madam Speaker, the other thing I would like us to talk about is the authority we have to change the trend. You realise that the population is not conditioned to work anymore. They have left the idea of working, especially in the villages. They think that under Operation Wealth Creation, they are going to be given things. 

There is Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE), but there is no graduated tax or anything. They no longer think of working; they move from drinking to gambling. I am just appealing to you, Members, since we have the authority to change the trend, let us find a way to make these people think of working again - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude your statement. 

CAPT. LAKOT: That is the clarification I am seeking. I do not know whether it is allowed to have a combined statement of line ministries because this issue is crosscutting among different ministries. Therefore, I do know whether we could have a combined statement where we have disaster preparedness, environmental issues and finance present one statement on how they are going to handle this situation. This cannot be a one-ministry solution; it cuts across. I thank you.

7.15
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru North County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I will start from that very point where she stopped. Government departments are not talking to one another. I would like to provide some information here. The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) in this very financial year has money for irrigation, value addition and storage –(Interjections)- It is in their budget – 

THE SPEAKER: Irrigation, value addition and - 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Value addition and storage. That money is with them but they are not talking to one another. On the issue of agriculture, whereas NAADS is under the Ministry of Agriculture, they are actually not talking; NAADS is also not talking to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. This is a real crisis and that problem must be addressed.

Secondly, on the issue of irrigation, surely Uganda should not be in this kind of crisis given the water bodies we have like the rivers and underground water, among others. We should treat irrigation infrastructure as national priority infrastructure. The moment we agree, then we can begin investing in bulk water supply, pipes across the roads and people get water wherever they need it, especially when they are planting and digging. When it becomes a national priority, we can solve this problem. This country can produce all year round.

We invest a lot of money in these roads but what is their return on investment without agriculture? The return on investment on most of these roads is actually zero because there are no goods moving on them. When you put your investment in irrigation infrastructure, you get a very heavy return on investment; you get the cereals -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the chairperson of the budget committee.

MR LUGOLOOBI: You get all these crops and it is very important. I do not know whether we should have a resolution on this matter, that in doing an economic remodelling, irrigation should receive funds. We should create an irrigation fund - let it be a trillion shillings - and we start putting in place infrastructure to irrigate this country. 

How can countries in a desert be producing when we are here very idle with all these water resources around us doing nothing? We should not be lamenting. This should never be a disaster. Famine should not be a disaster in this country. It should be elsewhere, not in Uganda. 

I am at pains because we are experiencing this problem when we have solutions around us. It is only a question of taking a bold decision. It pays a lot of dividends to invest in irrigation infrastructure; you get a lot of money. Our reserves would not be the way they are today. (Member timed out)

7.18
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I would like to put it on record. Page 4 portrays Kanungu as one of the districts that are fairly food secure. However, honourable minister, it is not true because out of the 17 subcounties that I have, five need food. If you still have food, please give us some. The subcounties of Nyamirama, Kambuga, Nyanga, Kayonza and Kanyantorogo also need food. They are doing very badly. It is very serious like it is in other places.

Secondly, we have a great challenge like all other Members have submitted. Recently, I was in the east and I found out that when our people have had a good harvest, the Kenyans come to buy their food and they buy at different prices. You find that one has bought a kilogramme of rice at Shs 1200 and another is buying at Shs 900. I found out that there is disorganisation among our farmers especially in the east. 

Therefore, I am begging colleagues that we take this up and encourage our people to form groups. When they have planted their crops and the harvests are very good, they should come together in groups, so that when these people come to buy the food, they find them organised and have strong bargaining power to get a good price. On that note, therefore, we need to come together -(Member timed out.)

7.21
MR WILLIAM BEIJUKYE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank Parliament for your prayers. I was in India for three months for a liver operation but I am now okay. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the disaster has reached far. My district borders Isingiro and recently, a lady hanged herself because she could not feed her kids. She cooked the empty pan for many hours and when the kids asked whether the food was ready, she said, “Let me go inside and serve you”. The lady instead hanged herself. Some families have even reached the extent of throwing away cooking spoons because they do not expect to cook again. 

To make matters worse, in my constituency, businessmen have taken the opportunity of supplying 30 kilogrammes of posho in exchange for 70 kilogrammes of beans after harvest. This is not only a disaster but there will be increased cases in courts. You find that someone who has taken 30 kilogrammes does not have the garden to produce 70 kilogrammes of beans after harvest and there is more disaster. 

Members of Parliament should also blame themselves. In most cases, we have engaged in planting trees in swamps or purchased land and planted trees in swamps. This means we are also affecting the environment. I would like to appeal to the whole House that we need to fight for this so that our swamps are left –(Member timed out.)

7.23
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

The biggest problem we have is wastage. I would like to give an example of my district, Amuru. The fact that we are bordering South Sudan is not good because right now, the gardens are being bought off before harvest. They just go, see if the gardens of cassava are good and they buy them off. So, how will we not have famine?

Secondly, on Sunday, I was in Lakang, Kololo and Bana villages in Amuru sub-county. I was told there is a very big problem of grasshoppers destroying the good yields of rice. People are burning grass around the gardens so that the smoke chases away the grasshoppers. They are crying and wondering why they should labour so much and then when they are supposed to reap, the plants are destroyed by grasshoppers 

Another problem is the elephants. I have always stated this in this House, but no solution has been found. For the case of the people of Bibia in Atiak Subcounty, when their crops are about to mature, ready for harvest, the elephants cross from South Sudan and some come from as far as Ethiopia to destroy their crops. Year in and year out, we have food shortage in Atiak Subcounty especially in the villages of Pacilo and Bibia because of the elephants - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to confirm that in the Ninth Parliament she raised the issues of those elephants destroying their crops.

7.26
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. 

Madam Speaker, I am disappointed a bit with the Government’s interventions. The minister says they are approaching development partners like World Bank, - which suspended some projects in our country because of low absorption of loans - the People’s Republic of China, and even Egypt where River Nile ends. This is where they are going to appeal for some food aid for our country. This is ashaming and disappointing. As the country where the source of River Nile is, we now go where it ends for food aid. We should pray to God to take away this curse. This is a curse to our nation. How can we do this?

Madam Speaker, a mere individual like myself has been able to provide storage for food in my constituency. I have about 50 tons of maize flour and it is not being stolen. I would like to differ from the honourable minister’s submission that some hungry people can attack these storage facilities and steal the food. It is not true because mine is intact. If I can do this as a local farmer, why can’t Government store some food for this nation? 

Hon. Lugoloobi, as the chairperson of the Committee on Budget, what do these ministers submit in the budget frameworks? Do they simply submit salaries for the staff of the ministries? (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko.

7.28
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are very serious matters, but I am so disappointed that the key ministers who should be picking points here are absent. The ministers of the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development finished with their business here and left, and yet there are issues that are raised here which need money. They are not here to listen to the concerns of Members and know the gravity of the problem. That is why when the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness submits their budget, they ignore it. I am so disappointed that they walked away.

I am grateful to Gen. Moses Ali because despite his age, he has been here up to this moment and we can excuse him for having just left. However, where are the young people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? If an old man like that can sit here up to this time, how about them? They have four or six ministers; where have they gone? There were issues of silos raised here by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; they should have been here to tell us what happened to them, who bought them and what they are being used for. 

The Minister of Disaster Preparedness would not be asking for money here. Last time when hon. Monica Amoding raised the issue of raising money, they were only able to give a meagre Shs 3 billion; what can that do? I am very disappointed with the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for lack of seriousness when it comes to the business that affects the local people. We talked about hepatitis B last time and we have talked about disaster now but they are dragging their feet in providing the necessary finances. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of irrigation has been talked about here. This again goes back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide money. Irrigation is not very expensive. I am doing a project on citrus fruits on seven acres in my place and I am only spending US$ 4000 to have the whole seven acres of citrus fruits of about 3000 trees irrigated. Why can’t Government provide money for irrigation?

When we were coming back from the Pan-African Parliament in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, together with Prof. Latigo we stopped over in Cairo to meet their Minister of Agriculture. He was asking whether we were aware of a mega project called the Lake Victoria-Mediterranean Sea Project that they are working on with the countries along the River Nile. We have not heard of it here. We were all embarrassed when they were asking us. 

They said the Government of Uganda has not come up to support the project. They said they would like to work together to improve irrigation along the River Nile from Lake Victoria to the Mediterranean Sea, to work on tourism, communication and water transport along the Nile. We have not heard anything here.

Madam Speaker, I would like to challenge the committees of this Parliament, as I conclude. The committees on trade, budget, agriculture, disaster and finance must come up and draw a strategic plan. If possible, I would move a motion that the House allows these committees to sit and bring a strategic plan on how to manage disasters in this country.

Madam Speaker, if that is allowed, you would direct these committees to come up with something to help. If that can be put forward to the leadership of these committees, we can come up with a concrete plan and see how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Government is going to say there is no money. 

We have a lot of money in this country but the problem is corruption. Look at NAADS; citrus fruits in Teso would be doing so well, but they get suppliers and damp things at the district headquarters without a follow up. The plants all wither and dry up at the district or county headquarters. In the end, we shall fail to supply the fruits factory in Teso because of the uncoordinated movement of fruits within the ministry. This is so disappointing. 

Madam Speaker, what can the 400 bags of maize the minister is giving Teso do? It is just a token. We really pity the minister. As I stated earlier, let our committees come up with a strategy to deal with the issues of disasters within three weeks other than us lamenting year in and year out. Madam Speaker, thank you.

7.33
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not happy when the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives was talking about the highest percentage of these stores being run by private individuals. I do not know whether people are just milking this Government. Issues of food storage should absolutely be taken up by Government.

Madam Speaker, as a water resources specialist, I know that there are districts, which are totally down in safe water coverage. Some of them are Isingiro and Namayingo as they mentioned. We need to come up with a bulk water supply system for these places.

Madam Speaker, people talk about irrigation here and I would like to concur with other Members that the three ministries - water, agriculture and disaster preparedness – should sit down so that they come up with a concrete budget specifically for irrigation. When you go to Egypt and Libya where there is no single drop of rain, they have water for production.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to have the tree planting day as you have suggested, and also mandatory gardens for every person who is 18 years especially if they are married. Even if you are not married, if you are 18 years, you should at least have one acre of kalo, meaning millet, like in Butaleja, and one acre of cassava. (Member timed out.)  

7.35
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I have a few issues to raise here. One, food is a basic need and now people are dying in some places, as we all know. Even the Minister of Disaster Preparedness knows very well that people died in Katakwi. They are aware but as we talk now, there is no single drop of food in Katakwi. These are realities. Yesterday, they were in Amen A and B in Soroti and they gave 20 kilogrammes to a family. I am now wondering what the 20 kilogrammes will do for an adult. Secondly, I do not know how long the 20 kilogrammes will last.

The trouble here, Madam Speaker, - Somebody one time described the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness as being a disaster itself. In Teso, for example, we all know that every five years we have disasters, basically from flooding and food insecurity. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness knows that very well, but they have not done the needful. This is what is disturbing us every day. 

That is why I am a bit uncomfortable with some of these reports. Sometimes we are given wrong reports; you remember, last time we were given a report that a certain bridge had been worked on in Ngora and yet there was nothing. Madam Speaker, you read that report saying that the situation is fair in Ngora but there are places where from March there has been no rain. Look at that situation in Kakor in Kapir, Mukura and Kobwin; we have a problem. I would like to request the ministry to urgently provide food to the people of Ngora.

7.37
MS SYLVIA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the points I had wanted to bring up has already been mentioned. 

I would like to say that we seem to agree that as a result of inadequate planning and lack of networking, especially between the ministries of disaster preparedness, water and agriculture, we are facing these problems over and over again. We seem to be dealing with effects and not the core problem. Therefore, the ministries could come together within a short time to come up with a plan which they could present to Parliament and then maybe the committees could consider this. This is because they have technical staff who can work on the budget and plans. To avoid duplication, it could be done that way instead of committees of Parliament coming up first.

Secondly, I was wondering what happened to zoning. We knew that certain areas would produce certain foods according to their soils. Has anybody done soil testing? I may have water and you bring me seeds that will not work in my area, so they will not help me. What happened to shared resources? There are areas that have food that could supply other areas if this was deliberately worked on by Government. 

In my constituency, there are some people - it is not a plant - who do not know where to put their milk. I call upon Dairy Development Association to save them from the sharks that are coming in with their dairies. Thank you very much.

7.39
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo West County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, I was wondering what could have guided your mapping. On page 4, line 23, the minister says, “The following districts are fairly food secure.” However, on the same page 4, line 24, he reflected Kasese. I was wondering how this came about. This is because I would imagine that Kasese is among those that are most hit for one reason – drought. We get severe dry spells. 

Secondly, even though they are trying to do some cultivation, Mr Minister, you must be familiar with the problem of the wild animals - the elephants. Therefore, how can a district that is confronted with double tragedy - drought and wild animals - feature among the fairly secure districts? That was an oversight. That is not an assessment I can accept.

Also, Mr Minister, can we have your interventions catalogued: One, immediate interventions; two, medium term interventions; and three, long-term interventions.

I wonder, Mr Minister, why your ministry is not tapping into research. A lot of our interventions in this country are not guided by research. As a result, while we try to intervene, we miss the mark and because we miss the mark, certainly, we do not get the projected outcome -(Member timed out.)

7.41
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for his presentation. 

However, I have one concern on this issue of food security; it is bigger than the ministry we are looking at. I came this morning from my constituency and for the last one week, I had been interacting with the farmers and asking why they cannot preserve food. Most of our farmers in my district use their produce to pay school fees. Parents use their maize or sometimes beans as fees. Sometimes a child has to go with 20 kilogrammes of beans and about 30 kilogrammes of maize to school and sometimes a family has four or five children who want to go to secondary school. That means, when the harvest is small or when the weather has affected the harvest, there is nothing left to store. 

You are asking the farmers to put food in silos yet there is nothing. Even the school fees that parents should mobilise to take the children to school is not there. It has to come from the harvest and go to the market; that is the cycle. Therefore, what I am looking at is actually bigger than the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. If something could be done – I was listening to the agriculture minister say that they have taken – (Member timed out.)

7.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The problems that we have are really crucial. However, I would like to appeal to all Members that we should try and put our heads together and see what to do. 

We are talking about irrigation and we all agree that it is the way forward. May the honourable members go and research on their computers and come up with an entity that will provide solar pumps. I have been looking for solar pumps; we need that entity to come and assemble them here so that we are able to get these solar pumps according to the size and needs of our people. The solar pumps will pump the water from the valleys to the big tanks in the hills and then the water can flow down for people’s use.

In case we were going to do what hon. Okupa was suggesting, then it would not be easy because US$ 4,000 is not easy money for everyone. We would like something that is workable and can do a good job. Therefore, for those that are good at business and at research, they should try and get us someone who can come to Uganda and assemble solar pumps for our use.

Solar pumps are good because once they are installed, there is no more money to spend on diesel like what some people are doing. Diesel cannot work with our people even if they formed cooperatives. We want a solution and the solution will be with solar pumps. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I would just like to inform the minister that the solar pumps are in this country and there are people who can install them. There are others who can fabricate the machinery and people can just buy the solar panels. When the minister comes here and asks Members to go and look for these people, I am at a loss of words. 

This is a responsibility of the ministry. What has the ministry done? Where have you piloted this project? Have you budgeted for it? Has the finance ministry given you the money?  I think that is where you should start from because you have all the technocrats around you in the ministry to do all these things.

MS KABATSI: I thank you for your information. The truth is that we do not have those solar pumps that can help our people. We have looked at what hon. Okupa is talking about and they cannot work for us.

Secondly, I would like to thank the House for giving us US$ 150 million. With this money, I am hoping that we will handle irrigation in this country. We are also looking at putting districts together so that they are able to produce what they are good at under the cluster projects. Once that money comes in, we are going to make sure that districts produce what they can produce better so that when the hunger comes, we know which districts can give us beans, maize, cassava among others. We shall cluster these districts together. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For the record of the Hansard, the Member who spoke before hon. Kabatsi was hon.  Sam Okwir from Moroto. He did not introduce himself.    

Honourable members, we have overburdened the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and yet he has no resources. I do not know what other capacity he has, but I think we are not showing leadership on this issue because it is not new. It has come up year after year and we send the affected persons two kilogrammes of posho and so on.

I would like to borrow what has come from the Floor and task the Government – the ministries responsible for agriculture, trade, water, finance and disaster preparedness and refugees - to sit together and bring us a plan to solve this issue once and for all because we are tired. We are really tired. (Applause) We want this plan next week because the Ugandans are frustrated. 

The Prime Minister is not here but please, tell him that this is an instruction from the House and we want a strategy next week so that once we are working on the budget, we can input it. We have let down the Ugandans with famine in the Republic of Uganda in the 21st Century! No, no, no! We are serious and we want this strategy next week.

7.49
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): Madam Speaker, I am grateful to the House and to you personally for those instructions because we are not coordinating. I know this because I am in Government and I see that everybody wants to protect their territory. We shall try to work together as a team.

We had a chat with the Prime Minister before we came to the House and he had instructed that I travel around the districts where there is hunger. I suggested to him that I would have to go with a representative from the ministries of water, agriculture, finance and trade so that as we move around, they can see the problems. This will help us to think in the same direction. 

I appreciate everything that has been said. I was learning and taking notes. I have also noted the concerns of the districts not on the list. 

I also realised that we need irrigation throughout the country. This implies getting appropriate technology. To me, there are many options for irrigation – we can even use foot pumps, solar if you have some extra money or diesel if you have good cash flow and can periodically buy fuel. All these options are there. Under the Prosperity for All Programme through the ongoing Operation Wealth Creation, we can redirect funds within to address some of those irrigation needs since there is also money for irrigation in Operation Wealth Creation.

There is anger in the society because this is a recurring problem, and people are right to be angry about it. Let us see how we can put our heads together. I support the idea of parliamentary committees sitting together as hon. Okupa suggested. The joint committee can even call all the relevant ministries before it and then we can structure a way forward together to solve the problem. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us get your strategy first because it is your responsibility as Government. We shall engage you, but let us first get your strategy not later than Thursday next week. Treat this as a very serious directive.

MR ONEK: I thank you for the directive. Under the guidance of the Prime Minister, I will call on my colleagues to see how we move forward.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to write to the Prime Minister.

MR ONEK: I am very appreciative, colleagues. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR ONEK: There was a request that we may need two weeks because as a team, we shall be out of Kampala to assess the hunger situation in the country. Therefore, if we spend that week in the field, we may delay. Therefore, we request that you push it to the following Tuesday. I thank you.  

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, our colleague has just reported that one citizen had to painfully terminate her life. I get a shock of my life hearing the minister, instead of treating this with the urgency it deserves, saying that they have to continue with tours. How much in terms of human life shall we lose? 

As a scientist, he knows that we can spend about five days without food and you are talking about two weeks; and if it is very hot, in three days, life would be lost. Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to continue talking about tours when we have a life threatening challenge in the country? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we left for recess, the report on hunger was on the Floor of this House. I believe the Government has had time, while we were on recess, to do those tours. We want that strategy next week. (Applause) You had your time when we were on recess; we now want that strategy. We are going to work on the budget. For how long shall we tell Ugandans that we have no plan, we have no water, we are thinking about jerry cans –(Laughter)– No, we cannot go on like this. 

Honourable minister, I am sorry, we want that joint strategy on storage, irrigation, production and disaster preparedness and funding from the Minister of Finance. I am going to write to the Prime Minister. (Applause) 

MR ONEK: I will be most obliged, Madam Speaker. I will communicate this and we will sit. I also wish to beg - Parliament had directed the Ministry of Finance to get us contingency funds for buying the emergency requirements. Up to now, we have not got those emergency funds. Maybe you could help us follow up on that as well so that we can hurry where the cases are most serious. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I apologise for keeping you late, but the state of the economy and the food situation were really important and Members had to express themselves on them for us to take a position. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.56 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

