Thursday, 14 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You are aware that on the 8th of this month, we commissioned the new multi-level parking for this Parliament. I am sure that Members are wondering why we are not using it as yet. 

On that same day, when we were commissioning, we had received a report from the Minister for Security, the Police and all the other security oriented institutions in this country that had raised a concern about the underground parking, the facilities and security arrangement there. They said that they are not yet adequate to be used as of now. There are some security issues that need to be resolved before we can open that facility up for use. 

It is all labelled and ready for use except for the security situation there. So, that morning, we met the President just before we went for speeches and the issue of about US$ 6.5 million to procure the security systems to protect that area was raised. The President said that he could not allow the security of the Members to be compromised and he has agreed that that money should be found from wherever to procure the security arrangements and have the security system installed ready for use by Members of Parliament.

What is going to be required is a system where we shall need a card, which you would use so that once you put it in, the bars will open and then you get in and park. That will be safe. Of course, in all the security arrangements, we shall be using cards and things like that, which are used in many of the facilities of this nature.

So, it will not be in use now. We have written to Ministry of Finance – I signed a letter two days ago - communicating the directive of the President but they have not acted as yet. I would like to hear from the Minister for Finance about what steps have been taken to put into effect the directive of the President and also to ensure that the car park is ready for use at the earliest opportunity by parliamentarians.

What is very possible and likely to happen in the next one week or so is the use of the top level here and not underground. However, you can also see that that is very limited. It is marked for some people and is a very limited space that will not solve our problems. That also has a challenge because the scanner and walk-in security system at the front door here is spoilt. I think because of a long time of no use, it kind of got spoiled and now they need to fix it. So, I think that within a week, that should be fixed. The ground floor, which is the top of this parking, could be useable after about a week or so by a few Members in the meantime, while we wait for the underground system to come into place.

I am also informed that the people who are supposed to supply this security arrangement only need confirmation from Parliament and the signing of a contract to make these machines available, even before they are paid money. So, we need to tap into this so that the Members can conveniently park in this ultra-modern multi-level parking that has taken a long time to be completed.

Secondly, there was an issue raised about the job advert for this Parliament to fill places. There was an issue raised by the Member for Dokolo on the capping of the age - 25 years for the people joining for the first time and 28 years as the upper age limit for the people going to take up senior positions. I did communicate that day that the Parliamentary Commission would take a decision on this matter and come back to the House. 

I am now informing the House and the whole country that the upper age limit has been removed and a supplementary addendum publication will go out in the newspapers tomorrow and also on Monday to correct this. So, people can then continue to apply, but the timeframes still apply on what has been requested. So, this is just to say that there will be no upper age limit – 25 years or 28 years for applications for those jobs that have been advertised. (Mr Bernard Atiku rose_) Can I finish my communication?

I would also like to inform you, honourable members, that all roads should lead to Bukedea on 23rd November. Gen. Angina will be holding a thanksgiving function for all the good things that the Lord has done for him. He wants to return thanks to God and he wants you to be witnesses, being colleagues that he works with. So, he has asked me to extend his invitation to all of you to come to Bukedea on the 23rd, which is a Saturday. So, please, join Gen. Angina at his thanksgiving in Bukedea. There are phone numbers and you can contact Mr Joseph Ariong on 0752507108 and also hon. Rose Akol, one of our own here, and her number is 075263171. Please, join the honourable member for this thanksgiving celebration.

Also, on the 19th , and that will be on Tuesday next week, at noon the Katikkiro of Buganda will be visiting Parliament. He will be meeting you, Members, at noon in the Conference Hall. There is a card that has been sent to all of you and I have received mine. I will also be joining you in receiving the Katikkiro of Buganda, Ow’ekitiibwa Charles Peter Mayiga. So, please, also join in that. I think that is it for now. I thank you very much.

2.41
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose to catch your eye arising from the communication that you just made, regarding the capping of the age limit for the vacancies that have just been advertised by this Parliament. It is unfortunate that I was not there on the day when my senior colleague from Dokolo District challenged that issue of the age limit. 

As the Shadow Minister for Youth, I am aware that close to 80 per cent of the 4,000 youth that graduate from the various universities are unemployed and many of them lie within the age bracket of 20 to 27. I thought that this was an opportunity for them to join this prestigious institution of Parliament. Therefore, the first version or edition of the advert was sufficient and should have been left the way it was. 

I am aware that if this age limit is removed, it is going to open a window for people who are already employed to also come in and begin competing with these young men and women yearning to join this institution in civil service. 

So, I would really appeal that we give the youth an opportunity to compete for these few vacancies. We have many times seen job adverts with emphasis of experience of three, five or 10 years. When I saw the advert, it never had these kinds of conditionalities apart from the qualifications. So, really, I will still want to appeal to you, Mr Speaker, that we leave it the way it appeared in its original from so that our youth can also have hope and compete favourably. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is an appeal you cannot make to the Speaker because that is a decision of the Parliamentary Commission. Certainly, it will be taken there, but I am aware also that the Constitution put the age of the youth at 30 years and not 28. So, I do not know what you are doing with the 29-year-old and the 30-year-old youth who also fall in that bracket. But that is a matter that will be discussed by the Commission. So, let us leave it at that.

In the V.I.P gallery, we have Dorothy Abola, the daughter to the late Ambassador George Abola. She is here on behalf of the family to witness Parliament paying tribute to her late father. (Applause) You are aware that a motion is coming up in the course of our discussions today in respect of the late Ambassador George Abola. It is spelt here as Abora - these people do not know how to spell it; it is Abola and not Abora.

He was buried. Parliament had desired that the body should be brought here but the family thought it was easier to handle it that way and then, we can come back later. So, that motion is going to be moved this afternoon and Dorothy Abola is here to represent the family.

Just a correction on the issue of the advert - the deadline for applications has now been extended to 6th December. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PUBLICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE ON THE PLEDGES MADE BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

2.46
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation has delegated me to lay these documents on the Table.

I beg to lay a report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation entitled, “Presidential Pledges and Assurances: 1986 to 2013.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is a matter that needs follow up and it stands committed to the appropriate committee for handling.

MR KABAJO: I also beg to lay copies of the submissions of the Members of Parliament to the Committee of Government Assurances and Implementation, which were used to extract the presidential pledges. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are those?

MR KABAJO: These are copies of the submissions by Members of Parliament to the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation which –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have those been captured in the report?

MR KABAJO: The reason that I am laying these is that in case somebody comes up and says that they did not make those submissions, a copy would be shown to that person. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those submissions from the Members.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I do not how we are going to proceed with this report here. I do not know whether we are going to debate, because it is a committee report; or do we expect responses from the Prime Minister on this issue? How do we handle it because it is a committee report and we cannot again refer it to another committee? 

I want to just find out because I think that it is the Leader of Government Business to respond because some of this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is not a report but a publication.

MR OKUPA: But if I heard right from the chairperson, he said that it is a report from the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is a compilation of pledges that have been made by Government. So, it is just a record of what has been pledged and not a report as such. It is up to them to now keep bringing up all those issues. The Members will now know what pledges have been made and so, they can bring them up.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, if we had time, you would allocate time such that we will be able to prepare and the Leader of Government Business comes to respond to them.

I am bringing this up because in Kasilo, I have seen pledges dating as far back as 1990 that have not been fulfilled. So, I would really be happy to hear from the Government whether it has become a bad pledge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, take note that there is a list of all those pledges that were made by the Government. There should be an appropriate time for giving some response to that – (Interruption) - Yes, I have already informed him. He can opt to be on record or not but I have informed the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek yours and honourable members’ indulgence to request for the amendment of the Order Paper in relation to item No. 6.

As the House may recall, yesterday I made a statement to the effect that the issues between Tanzania and Uganda were partly discussed by the heads of the two governments at a summit in South Africa. They agreed that they would discuss at their level during the forthcoming Summit of the East African Community in Kampala on 30th November this month - this issue and the one we referred to yesterday. 

In light of that, Mr Speaker, I thought that it might be in the interest of promoting that diplomatic effort, – that channel of resolving issues between sisterly and friendly neighbours – for us to let it take its full course. We can then come and report to Parliament the outcome of that discussion, so that if there is to be debate, we debate after the consultation has taken place. I beg to request. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: I seek guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance on the issue raised by the Prime Minister? Honourable members, indeed, there was a statement that came from the Prime Minister’s question time on this particular subject, and there was a response similar to what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just stated now. This request was from the Members, that this statement should be made because the matter was at the time in the press and there was need for clarification from the Government.

If that is what is going on, then I think it will be in the interest of the House to wait for comprehensive handling of this matter, so that when the report is presented we can ably debate. I accordingly grant the request of the Prime Minister that item No. 6 on this Order Paper be deferred pending results from the summit meeting which is coming up in two weeks.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the effort of the committee in presenting this publication of the presidential pledges. As Members of Parliament, we would like to have that opportunity to debate this issue. As you are aware, committee presentations are reports to the House, which gives Members opportunity to debate. I am seeking your guidance because what is presented is a publication; shall we have an opportunity to have a report extracted to enable us to debate this issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter will go to the business committee and we will take an appropriate decision.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Victorious Education Services, represented by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Nabila Ssempala, Kampala District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We also have pupils and teachers of Nakiyunguzi Parents Primary School represented by hon. Hussein Kyanjo and hon. Nabila Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings, please, join me in welcoming them.

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF KIGANDA, KASOKOSO AND BANDA B1 AGAINST ILLEGAL AND VIOLENT EVICTION BY NATIONAL HOUSING

2.56
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman representative Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure. 

This is a humble petition of people of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda in Kiira Town Council, Wakiso District, presented by hon. Rosemary Sseninde and seconded by hon. Ibrahim Ssemuju Nganda, Member of Parliament for Kyadondo East.

The eviction regards the fear of the intended eviction of the residents of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda B1 LC Kiira Town Council from their land and the destruction of their property by the Uganda Police Force, National Housing and Construction Company and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The petitioners aver that they are lawful and bona fide occupants of land comprising block 233, plots 4 to 25, 27 to 28, 30, 32 to 42, 58 to 89 and 164. Most of them settled on the land since 1964, others have bought bibanja legally from bona fide occupants over the years. Upon acquiring interest in the land, they obtained loans and raised revenue from other sources and erected residential and commercial premises for all purposes.

National Housing and Construction Company, Ministry of Lands and Uganda Police have begun a campaign to deprive them of their hard-earned property in total disregard of the law. Wherefore, by this petition, the petitions pray that Parliament investigates to ascertain the following:

1) How this land has been changing ownership from one party to another over a long a period of time since 1964 excluding the actual occupants and negating their rights.

2) The use of excessive force by the Uganda Police, which has marred with massive violence causing injury to life and limbs.

3) That Parliament urges the NHCC to stay away from the land until the above investigation is concluded and a report tabled.

4) That Parliament gives the petition urgent attention to prevent loss of life and restoration of peace in this area and also give any other remedy it so deems fit. 

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.” I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. Honourable members, you remember the discussion we had yesterday and even on Tuesday; these matters are urgent, particularly this one is fairly urgent. So, it stands committed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle expeditiously. The rules say 45 days but you do not need to wait for the 45 days; please handle this matter because it is causing a lot of tension. The earlier you handle it and report to Parliament so that we can take some decisions on the matter, the better for the people and for the country. Thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QN. 66/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

3.00
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja East Municipality, Jinja): “Would the Minister present to the House the list of all traditional/cultural leaders that are recognized and facilitated by the Government, indicating their respective jurisdictions?”

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question which has been asked is about cultural and traditional leaders in Uganda. 

The Government of Uganda recognises 13 traditional or cultural leaders in accordance with the Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Act, 2011. These are:
1. Augustine Osuban Kadugala – Teso
2. Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV – Toro
3. Solomon Gafabusa Iguru – Bunyoro
4. David Onen Achana - Acholi
5. Moses Owor – Tieng Adhola
6. Yosam Odur - Lango
7. Mwogeza Butamanya - Buruli 
8. Apollo Sansa Kabumbuli - Kooki
9. Philip Edgar Olarker Rauni III - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you supply copies of this response?

MS NAKADAMA: We sent the report to the Clerk but I do not why they do not have copies. However, I can provide copies to the Opposition. We sent the report to the Clerk.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): The Minister of State for Gender may think this is a laughing matter; I can see her smiling. She says that she is going to supply copies to the Opposition; can I take it that NRM have copies already? If they do not have, is it fair for the minister in charge of gender to say that it is only the Opposition which needs copies and not Members of Parliament? Now we have discovered the NRM MPs are no longer MPS.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us defer this matter. Wait for copies to be circulated and then we come back to it.

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE UGANDA WOMEN PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION UWOPA ON THE ESCALATING CASES OF SEXUAL OFFENCES
3.04
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I rise to make a statement under rule 45. Uganda Women Parliamentary Association has noted, with concern, the increasing number of cases of sexual offences that are being reported. Since January 2013, the number of sexual offences being reported by the media has heightened. According to Wandegeya Police Station records alone, 742 cases of rape and defilement were reported in 2012 and 22,614 cases between 2009 and 2011.

The media continues to cover stories of some of the most heinous sexual offences; from the story of the two-year-old girl who was defiled in Kumi in November this year, nine-year-old Hanisha Nambi who was gruesomely defiled and then murdered in September 2012, to that of the 23-year-old woman who was gang raped by Pakistani nationals and her internal systems damaged. The stories are many.

Uganda Women Parliamentary Association believes that there is underreporting of sexual victims to law enforcement officers because of various reasons, including: 

    • Stigma attached to victims of sexual offences.
    • Ignorance among the public on where and how to report sexual offences.
    • Fear to report sexual offences because of the preconceived perception of responses from JLOS actors.
    • Lack of victim and witness protection.
    • Public tolerance of men’s unwanted sexual advances towards girls and women as normal.
    • Retribution to victims and out of court settlements.

The increase in the number of sexual offences being reported demands attention from all stakeholders, but more so from JLOS actors. The Uganda Women Parliamentary Association therefore calls upon all stakeholders to take a more proactive position to combat the increased cases of sexual offences. In particular, UWOPA calls upon: 

1. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to immediately present for the first reading the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill on sexual offences, which has been in Cabinet for over a year now; and to develop temporary administrative measures to ensure that hearing of the cases of sexual offences are conducted in closed door and in camera.

2. Parliament to support the amendments relating to sexual offences when they are presented before Parliament.

3. Parliamentarians to prioritise this issue for advocacy in your various constituencies. We appeal to you to speak against this practice in your constituencies, in your meetings and in your interactions with your constituents. We request you to educate the public on the need to report the cases and to educate them where to report the cases.

4. We ask that through Ministry of Internal Affairs, Police should strengthen investigative processes and procedures for sexual offences, develop standard operating procedures on how to investigate and handle sexual offences and create a coordinating centre for the cases.

5. The Ministry of Health should roll out the post-exposure prophylaxis at all health centres for victims of sexual violence and make available the PF3 form to lower health centres for easy collection of evidence.

Mr Speaker, sexual offences take different forms notably defilement, rape, sodomy, supply of sexual content and material to children, incest which is now on the increase, child prostitution and child pornography among others. Our major concern as UWOPA is that the current Penal Code Act, enacted in 1950, does not address all the issues relevant to the current forms of sexual offences.

The relevant section, 123 to 125, of the Penal Code only deals with rape and attempted rape with a very narrow definition of rape. It does not, for example, explicitly deal with aggravated rape where a person administers a substance for purposes of committing a sexual act or where gang rape is involved and stiffer penalties. It does not cover explicitly sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual offences relating to those in positions of authority, sexual acts with a person incapable of giving consent, sexual acts meted to persons in detention, and persons living on earnings of prostitution among others.

The causes of this vice are many but by and large, as UWOPA we are calling for all stakeholders, parliamentarians and relevant ministers, to continue to advocacy on this issue. We want to especially request that the relevant ministers and ministries make commitments on what they are going to do to curb this vice. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and Members.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Betty Amongi for the statement and we have interacted over it. Yesterday, during the Prime Minister’s question time, a question with that statement was put to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister, on the Floor of this House, and I recall his words, said that if it had not been for the Kyambogo challenges, Cabinet would have considered the Bills in Cabinet on this subject. 

We had some challenges. Let me start with a bit of history. In 2007, I presented a Bill here - the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2007. Some of the provisions of that amendment law touched on some of the issues being raised. I agree with hon. Betty Amongi because many of the issues she is highlighting were not covered in that amendment Bill.

When we presented the Sexual Offences Bill in Cabinet, it was an omnibus Bill and, Mr Speaker, you know the challenges we have had with omnibus Bills, the Marriage and Divorce Bill is a good example. Just one provision in the Bill that is not acceptable can easily throw off the entire Bill. So, we went and restructured the Sexual Offences Bill into about five or six Bills touching on the respective laws. Those Bills are in Cabinet for discussion. The Prime Minister has already made a commitment or an undertaking on the Floor of this House to that effect and we shall certainly be with you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when we wanted the Public Order Management Bill, it came here very fast. When we talk about rape of children, the Government is not concerned. I feel unhappy with people who just make noise, especially ladies - (Interjections) Listen, I said “I feel unhappy”. I cannot laugh when I am feeling unhappy.

I seek clarification from the Attorney-General. Is rape not a very bad and criminal act that the Prime Minister must take from 2007 to 2013 - six years - without doing anything? Is rape not a criminal act, which is against humanity in Uganda, that it should take seven years without being given due attention?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, rape did not start in 2007 and we are not saying there is a vacuum. We already have a legislative framework for most of these offences. What we are talking about is strengthening them. Rape is punishable by life imprisonment and of course- (Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Attorney-General, for giving way. I like the statement that you are making, that there are laws in place to address the issues we are crying about. Our concern has always been: why are these laws not being implemented?

We have a number of laws that we have passed and they are shelved and are not made public; the courts are not applying them. That is why I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General; is it a problem of morals and order in this country, a problem of law, lack of legislation or lack of implementation from Government? Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, if I may first finish my submission in respect of the statement, then I will come to that. I was trying to wind up my submission on that matter by saying that there are existing laws and we are strengthening them, and I agree with that position. In Cabinet, we have already made a commitment that we shall be coming back here soon.

By the way, I hope this issue of life imprisonment is now clear in the minds of legislators. At first, we had a challenge because there was confusion in the application of the Prisons Act regarding a provision, which provided for 20 years. The Supreme Court has clarified that and said that 20 years only applies in terms of remission of sentence but once it is life imprisonment, it is life imprisonment. So, it should be clear in our minds, and that too is certainly a very serious punishment. 

On implementation, my colleague and friend you are in the profession and you know the challenges we have. We have challenges of resources, adequate personnel and skilled personnel. However, the Justice Law and Order Sector has been doing its best to ensure that all those challenges are surmounted. Without challenges, there is no life. We shall continue struggling and one day, we shall get there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we should take note that the Prime Minister made a similar statement yesterday. The learned Attorney-General has made the same statement on the undertaking that these Bills will come back to Parliament. The word they used is “soon”. The question now is: how soon is soon, learned Attorney-General? Can you guide us? Give a timeframe because soon is quite soon. Jesus Christ said he was coming soon.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, can I make a better undertaking than that made by the Prime Minister yesterday? He said that had it not been for the Kyambogo issues, these Bills would have been considered in the Cabinet yesterday. So, immediately the Bills are considered in Cabinet, they will be published and brought to Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us an update on Thursday next week, just to let us know how far you have gone? After Cabinet, on Thursday afternoon you can come and say, “This is how far we have gone with it.” Just that.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, you are giving me a serious challenge. I am not the Leader of Government Business and I cannot make a commitment on what Cabinet is going to transact next Wednesday. The Leader of Government Business is here and so is the Chief Whip. They can make that undertaking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Leader of Government Business.

3.21
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is one of great gravity - (Interjections) - Maybe some people should go back to appreciate the niceties of the English language. It is a matter of great worry – maybe, that is more understood. What the Attorney-General has said is that this matter should have been considered yesterday, because it was on the table, but then some more important matters superseded that process. 

Since at times we have interferences, we have got to amend the agenda of Cabinet, so give us one month. (Interjections) Yes. This is because we have got to consider it ourselves and we have also got to consult other parties interested in the matter. It is not only the parliamentarians who are interested in this matter; everybody is. So, one month, Mr Speaker, would be the utmost.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not know what the Prime Minister, in reality, has said. This is because we are talking about Bills and the Attorney-General said the Bills are already with Cabinet; it is only passing – I do not know what they are to pass. Now the Prime Minister comes here asking to be given a full month! 

I am getting worried, Mr Speaker. If you have not been affected, you may not see the urgency of the law. Given that the Prime Minister may not have a kid who can easily be raped, he does not know the urgency of the law. (Interjections) Maybe it is because they are always guarded and he thinks everybody else is guarded. 

Mr Speaker, don’t you think that you can use your office and powers and direct that next week, they report on this matter? This is because rape is happening every day. Even today, I read in the newspapers that six men – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I was seeing my friend and Leader of the Opposition getting quite hot. So, I thought I should stand up on a commercial interlude. 

Mr Speaker, we all know the legislative process. We are in Cabinet for clearance of the principles. Although the Bills are ready, normally Cabinet always first clears the principles and then the Bills are debated again in Cabinet. There are about five Bills, why shouldn’t we – 

Hon. Betty Amongi, you are my friend; you and I know what we went through with the Marriage and Divorce Bill. I have explained to you what caused the delays in restructuring the Sexual Offences Bill into five Bills. These Bills are before Cabinet; the principles will be cleared. Even one month is quite an understatement. At best, to come to Parliament with those five Bills, we should be talking in terms of about two to three months. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I am confident that the Minister understands why I feel that despite the fact that there are five Bills amending the Penal Code, I am requesting that the amendment related to the sexual offences comes first. You can present the remaining four Bills later. 

If you look at the magnitude of the sexual offences – it has gone to the extent of cyber sexual offences. You have seen what is happening in the universities involving sex tapes. Fathers are defiling their own daughters. You have a limited capacity of addressing this evil because we do not have a law that allows the judges to hear these cases in camera. Look at the woman called Mbabazi who was raped; she is supposed to narrate her ordeal in court but there is no law that will protect her and allow her to give evidence behind closed doors. I am banking on the Sexual Offences Bill to protect her and allow her give evidence in camera. 

That is why I am appealing that out of the five Bills, you bring the Penal Code amendment related to sexual offences and we deal with it. After all, the principle has already passed the First Parliamentary Counsel, it has passed your ministry and now it is before the Cabinet. I do not think you will have resistance in clearing the principle of the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, my appeal is that the minister should not focus on all the five Bills but let him bring the Bill that responds to one of these grave issues that are affecting very many women and girls of this country. To allay the fear of today’s Leader of Government Business, consultation will take place at the level of the committee. So, when Cabinet clears it, it will just come for the first reading and then all the consultation shall be done in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. So, most of the work is actually within Parliament. 

Our appeal is that if you could give us a period of two weeks – even if it is that one month, as long as it is a serious commitment to have the first reading so that the process in the committee begins. That is my appeal, Mr Speaker, to the minister.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, we shall take up the matter within the time requested. We shall do our best to ensure that in the time requested, we see where we are and should be coming back to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that within two weeks?

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR RUHINDI: If anything, I will come and report. However, as a rider, hon. Betty Amongi, in my entire career of legal practice, there is no judge or magistrate who when requested in such a matter to hear evidence in camera has declined. I have not heard of that. 

Mr Speaker, you are a practising advocate and you know this. We normally give a matter of that nature priority, including any matter of any confidentiality whether it is divorce or anything else. Such matters are always heard in camera in chambers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think the undertaking is that in two weeks, an update will be given to the House about the progress of these Bills.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE AMBASSADOR GEORGE ABOLA

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL CO-OPERATION) (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I arise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Ambassador George Abola under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of the former Ambassador to Canada, the late George Abola, which occurred on 17 October 2013;

AND WHEREAS the late Ambassador George Abola was born in 1940 in Gulu; and he switched to diplomacy after working in both the private sector and the Government of Uganda;

NOTING that the late Ambassador George Abola was an economist by training and was in charge of policy initiatives, economic monitoring and economic awareness and development;

FURTHER NOTING that the late Ambassador George Abola was a member of the National Resistance Council, which was the interim Parliament for Uganda from 1989 to 1996;

CONSIDERING that for 14 years until 2005, the late Ambassador George Abola served as Chairman of the Board for Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd, providing guidance in the rehabilitation of the sugar industry at that time. Between 1998 and 2005, Mr Abola worked as Deputy Director of Economic Affairs at the Movement Secretariat at the same time. 

APPRECIATING that the late Ambassador George Abola was a modest, hardworking and diligent legislator with a memorable political carrier exemplified by his impeccable performance at the Constituency Assembly; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 
i) That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Ambassador George Abola.

ii) That Parliament takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Ambassador George Abola to the country both nationally and internationally.” 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Masindi District.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, with great sorrow, Government leant of the demise of Ambassador George Marino Abola, which occurred on 17 October 2013 in Mulago Hospital. The late Ambassador George Abola was born in Gulu in 1940. He studied at Pece Primary School, St Joseph’s Junior Secondary and sat for his lower level examinations in 1960 at Sir Samuel Baker from where he joined Ntare High School and subsequently, joined Makerere University where he pursued a Bachelor’s degree in economics. 

Armed with this degree in economics, the late Ambassador George Marino Abola had an illustrious career ranging from economic monitoring, carrying out economic awareness programmes, and development in various areas of Uganda. He also served as a member of the National Resistance Council. He worked in the NRM Secretariat as Deputy Director of Economics. He also worked as the board chairman of Kinyara Sugar Works for 14 years where he provided guidance in the rehabilitation of the sugar industry. 

The late Ambassador George Marino Abola was appointed Uganda’s ambassador to Canada, where he was also accredited to the Republic of Cuba and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas from September 2006 to November 2012. While in Canada, he marketed Uganda very ably and attracted a number of investors and tourists to come to Uganda, his dear country, until the time of his retirement and relocation back to Uganda. While he was the Ambassador of Uganda to Canada in 2007, he also served as the Dean of Commonwealth Heads of Mission. 

At the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we will miss his modest character and diligence. May the soul of Ambassador George Marino Abola rest in eternal peace. 

3.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion moved by the Minister of State for Regional Cooperation, hon. Kiyingi Asuman, for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Ambassador George Marino Abola. 

I must first of all say he was not my agemate - we never went to school together - but I met him when I went to Canada in 2008 when he was the high commissioner in Ottawa. I recall that was the day President Obama got the ticket to stand for presidency; I was in his home. I saw him as a clean man, a real diplomat and a person who loved his country. 

Mr Speaker, when we were at his home, he told us about his work in Uganda. I discovered that he had been a Member of the NRC but he did not win the elections in 1996 because hon. Reagan of Okumu was the one the people of Aswa County agreed to bring here. But he was not an angry man. 

While there, he also told us that he was the chairman of the board of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd. I remembered that during the time of Ambassador Abola, it was the first time a government parastatal gave dividends to the Treasury - Shs 7 billion. I think he deserves credit for that. We have seen many parastatals die or go to the Treasury for hand-outs. It was this Shs 7 billion given to the Treasury, which made people in Privatisation Unit and Government and some outsiders privatise Kinyara Sugar Works. 

From that point, I confirmed that Ambassador Abola loved Uganda. He was a nationalist. Despite the fact that he worked at NRM Secretariat, when we went to his place he treated me even better than the NRM MPs I went with. This is contrary to some who would want to take MPs of their party only and discuss with them. He understood multi-party politics. He was a true civil servant and a diplomat, unlike some of our colleagues here who want to treat others as enemies because they are from the Opposition side. 

I believe some of you will learn lessons that when you treat people well, they will always talk well about you. That is the reason I came up to second the motion despite the fact that it was being moved by a junior minister and not the Prime Minister. (Laughter) It is because this man was smart and of the elite class from the Acholi sub-region and he really loved Uganda. 

You may not be aware that he was the one behind the formulation of the Poverty Eradication Plan under the Prime Minister’s office in 2001. Although this programme was later mismanaged, basically it was aimed at reducing poverty in the country. He also participated a lot in the issues of NUSAF, making sure that the people in Northern Uganda are helped to move away from poverty through his efforts as a good worker and a person from the region.

He advocated for services for his people in the Acholi sub-region without creating using divide and rule, despite the fact that he had even lost his election to hon. Reagan Okumu who is a member from the Opposition. He practised mature politics. He never believed in patronage and he was really a selfless person in this country.

The untimely death of Ambassador George Abola has robbed us of a person with special affection and respect, very friendly and always sharing words of wisdom. He was a unique person who had supernatural ability to make all those whom he met feel comfortable. He served his country diligently and with a lot of commitment, which is lacking in the majority of our people. 

Although the sparkle in your eyes is gone and your smile is faded, rest assured that some of us will work to achieve your wish to see a better Uganda and better services for Ugandans, irrespective of colour or skin. Comrade Ambassador Abola fought a good fight for all Ugandans and of course, he now awaits his crown. His efforts were never in vain. The struggle will continue and we will live to always be motivated by his dedicated, steadfast untainted service to Uganda. He was a corrupt-free person. May the Good Lord have mercy upon him and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose the question for debate. The motion for your debate is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Ambassador George Marino Abola; that is takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late Ambassador George Marino Abola to the country, both nationally and internationally; that his soul rests in eternal peace. 

I think we need to revamp the last resolution because we cannot, by resolution of Parliament, rest his soul in eternal peace. I think it should be, “that Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to rest his soul in eternal peace.” Clerk, take note and make the necessary correction on this. We have no capacity to do what only God can do. That is the motion before us. Let us have some debate.

3.48
MS REBECCA AMUGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to send my belated message of condolence to the family and the people of Gulu who lost hon. George Marino Abola. I was disappointed that the casket of the late hon. Marino Abola was taken to Gulu for burial before he was brought to this Parliament. However, I would like to thank your office for having given us this opportunity to pay our tribute to him after his burial. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

You may be aware that hon. Abola made a huge contribution to this country to revitalise the economy of this country, especially when he was the manager of the board of Kinyara. During that time, I remember when Northern Uganda was in a very difficult situation, he used to take his friends who are golfers to make some contribution to the camps in Northern Uganda. We do not take this lightly. 

As the Ugandan High Commissioner in Canada, Ottawa, I was able to meet him and attend some meetings with him. What I saw very unique about him is that hon. Abola managed to bring Ugandans together. The Ugandans in Canada were not as united as the Ugandans in the United States and he managed to sit with them in these meetings. Even in the most difficult meetings, he would sit with them and yet I saw that he was not feeling very well and this was already 2012. He drove us himself, moving to different areas and he did not allow other people to drive us. To me, this was very unique. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Abola managed to make the Northern Uganda issue a national issue. At one time, you remember there were people who made the issue of Northern Uganda just for the people of Northern Uganda. He dismantled that. I remember him making a statement that this is a challenge for Uganda and not a challenge for Northern Uganda; if it is affecting the economy, it is not affecting only the economy of Northern Uganda but also the national economy and, therefore, we must work together. I would like to thank him for putting the record straight on what was happening in Northern Uganda without distortion at some point. 

I would like to appreciate the meetings that the late Ambassador Abola handled in trying to harness the people of Canada to come to Northern Uganda, especially for investment. He said, “The time of the war is over but now, it is the time to make sure that Northern Uganda is a hub for investment, especially in agriculture.” I would like to thank him for that and for creating a network of friends for Uganda, not for himself. 

I thank the family for standing by him at the time when he was not well. I also thank the Government for making a contribution towards his burial. Mr Speaker, - (Mr Mugume rose_) - You will have time to make your contribution from Rukungiri Municipality. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace.  Thank you. 
   
3.52
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs in charge of Regional Cooperation and the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament for this motion. 

In the early 1980s, as a family we lived in Kiwafu Estate and just at the junction as you turn to Kiwafu Estate was the late George Abola’s residence. At that time, which, unfortunately, the motion has missed out, he was the managing director of one of the subsidiaries of the Milton Obote Foundation. As such, he was one of the strongest members of the Uganda Peoples Congress. My father, too, was a member of the Uganda Peoples Congress and George, as my late dad used to call him, was a family friend. 

Anybody who knows George Abola will remember that there were very few impeccably smartly dressed people like George Abola. He used to wear what we called the “Oxford Street suit” and “Chancery Lane”. He used to wear perfume and at the end of the day, he would have a game of golf at the Uganda Golf Club. 

Unlike most politicians who when they change parties become so rabid and forget their history, George Abola was not one of them. He changed opinion and joined the National Resistance Movement and life continued. You could not hear that talk of what we hear these days of people behaving more Catholic than the Pope. We need to congratulate him. 

Politics of this country does not need extremists. Whenever I see younger people who have joined politics and they are so extreme in their views, I wonder whether the George Abolas did not have time to talk to them. They can be very arrogant and the only reason is because they are in Government - (Laughter) - and you wonder whether some of us as politicians have not seen the George Abolas’ legacy. 

Yes, George Abola was from the Acholi sub-region but you just needed to know his friends, including a person like me who comes from a different world altogether. However, even with the difference in age and generation, I can confidently say he was a friend. He did not look at himself as an Acholi. I even did not know his religion; what I know is that since he was called George, he was Christian. 

This was a man who looked at Uganda as a country and believed in politics of maturity and harmony. No wonder, the Leader of the Opposition talked about going to his place and the hospitality he received; that was George Abola. He was very honest and a diplomat in the true sense of the word, both in appearance and in behaviour. Mr Speaker, if we had many George Abolas, some of these things that divide us, some of these small things that make people hate each other, this arrogance which is absolutely unnecessary, which deters the development and unity of this country, would not be there. 

Lastly, there is something, which I think Government should look into, about our education system. You see, the time the George Abolas went to school, whether it was Layibi or Dr Obote College Boroboro, you would have people from all over the country in those secondary schools. You just needed to look at the young boys who were going to Ntare School then; they were from all over the country. The Milton Obotes left Lango and ended up in Mwiri, and also the Kanyeihambas, the Dr Rwanyarares. You would have a Kadaga going to St Catherine’s in Lango. That was an education system that produced patriots nationally. 

Today, you have something which really threatens the unity of the country. Gone are the days when you would have somebody from Karamoja end up in Ntare or Butobere. It is not possible to have a Mukiga end up in Nabumali. The George Abolas were produced by a deliberate education system that used to bring up Ugandans and not tribalists - people who are looking at the petty things like tribe and religion. That was not the generation of the George Abolas. 

May the Almighty God rest Ambassador George Abola’s soul in eternal peace.

4.00
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late honourable Ambassador George Abola. I got to know the late in 1994 in this House during the time of the National Resistance Council. I would like to describe the late hon. George Abola as an accomplished legislator with a nationalistic view, hard-working and a person who was very humorous. 

Mr Speaker, as chairman of the Board of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd., the late hon. George Abola steered the revitalisation and rehabilitation of Kinyara Sugar Works after the liberation war. He was at the centre of getting Kinyara Sugar Works increase its production.

While he was chairman of the board of Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd., Mr George Abola was faced with complaints from the local community around the sugar factory on job opportunities. I want to state here that he was very accommodative. The complaint was about the casual labourers being ferried from other areas and about the middle-level jobs within the industry. 

The late George Abola invited the local leaders, and I was among them. We sat and agreed and gave quotas to the districts around where the factory was. This was a reform, which we are still using in Masindi and in Kinyara Sugar Works. I want to urge other chairpersons of boards that when there is an industry which is established in an area, the local communities should be encouraged to own the industry and participate actively.

Mr Speaker, the late George Abola guided the process of privatising Kinyara, taking into consideration the needs of the local community. He supported the introduction of the out-growers association. As we speak, Kinyara Sugar Works Out-growers Association still stands and it is a strong association, which has moved out to even mobilise other out-growers in Busoga region to be able to voice their views.

The late George Abola was a golfer and he would not miss a game of golf. No wonder, he established a golf course in Kinyara. The people of Bunyoro and Masindi District shall miss his contribution because at that time, nobody would have allowed us to participate.

I want to urge all other leaders to be accommodative in all the positions that we hold. Masindi District today and especially Kinyara Sugar Works boasts of having 6000 workers but among them are workers from Arua in West Nile, Acholi, Kigezi, Teso and Bunyoro. This was an initiative, which was introduced by George Abola. We shall miss the late George Abola. May his soul rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Let me first recognise those in the public gallery. We have the guild council of Uganda Young Men’s Christian Association represented by hon. Paul Mwiru and hon. Agnes Nabirye, Jinja District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

We also have residents of Kasokoso represented by hon. Semujju and hon. Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. I am sure they had come to witness the presentation of a motion, which was done earlier. You must have missed it but the hon. Seninde presented a motion in that regard.

I am now being corrected that the Guild Council of the Uganda Young Men’s Christian Association is represented by hon. Moses Balyeku and not hon. Paul Mwiru. However, both Members represent the municipality. So, I am sure that somehow they are connected.

4.06
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Ambassador George Abola. He was a simple man who worked amidst challenges but he delivered for this country.

I was privileged to be in Canada last week and if you looked at the place that this gallant son of Uganda worked in, it is in an appalling state. The building is about 100 years old and everywhere I went, I was told that this man worked for Uganda. This building is going to be pulled down and we hope that the Government of Uganda will quickly make sure that we construct another building. I know that an office has now been hired but we need to work on construction.

If you went to the house that this high commissioner stayed in, it did not look like that of an ambassador. It was in a poor state but he stayed there. I think it was brave of him to work under such hardship as an ambassador. I call upon my government to try and improve on the state of these people when they are out there because they reflect our country.

The swimming pool was no longer functional, the gardens were unkempt and everywhere was in a sorry state. If you looked at the bedroom he was sleeping in, it was not something that was good. Yes, as the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we even go up to the bedrooms.

The Ugandans living in Canada were able to hold a funeral service in respect of this man. This shows you that they really loved him. One of them told us that it was during his time that they began feeling like Ugandans. I think that was something very good mentioned about that gentleman and in respect of his soul.

I want to call upon my colleagues to put Uganda first even as we complain about some things. Usually, we want to complain and do nothing, but this man has worked. When you are in Canada, you feel that you are in Uganda because when we met the Ugandans and they talked about him, I told them that this is the gentleman who just died before we left Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I pray that God rests his soul in peace. Thank you.

4.09
MR DAUDI MIGEREKO (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by hon. Kiyingi, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, and supported by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

We shall all greatly miss Ambassador George Abola, whom I came to know very well as a Ugandan and an internationally accomplished personality. He did a lot of work here in Uganda in the fields of business, economics and political affairs and also as a diplomat.

I got to work with hon. George Abola fairly closely when I was Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry and at that time, he was the chairman of the board of Kinyara Sugar Works. He had taken over leadership of Kinyara Sugar Works at a very difficult time when the factory was performing below capacity, but due to his training as an economist, due to his interest in business and general commitment to work, he did whatever he could to revive Kinyara Sugar Works. 

By the time he relinquished chairmanship of the board, he had been able to drive up production to over 50,000 tonnes of sugar per year. This was no mean achievement, given the fact that he had taken over leadership when the factory was in a very poor state.

He, together with Gen. Otema, wanted to make sure that there was sugarcane production in Northern Uganda. He also initiated efforts to start a sugar factory in Northern Uganda. He did bring together a number of people with huge amounts of land, particularly in Amuru, so that they could start planting sugarcane and later on a factory would be established in the area.

It is extremely unfortunate that by the time he passed away, we were still grappling with how to get a sugar factory started in Amuru and in Northern Uganda. However, I am convinced that the efforts of hon. George Abola – the work he started on of getting sugarcane planted in Northern Uganda together with a sugar factory - will be taken up by many of us who are still here, particularly the representatives from Amuru and the leaders not only in Northern Uganda but the entire country. This is an initiative that will bring dividends to practically everybody in that area. It will spur development, with a huge multiplier effect leading to the creation of employment and enhancement of income flows to the many homesteads in this area.

Mr Speaker, hon. Abola was a diplomat. He preached and practised commercial diplomacy. Many of us had for long believed that to be a diplomat was nothing but to attend parties every other evening. Whenever you visited an embassy, you would be promptly advised of a party and function which you would be attending this and that evening. However, as much as Ambassador Abola enjoyed parties and socialising, he believed in networking and utilised attendance of parties to build networks and promote commercial diplomacy. He would seize every opportunity at a party to preach the investment opportunities that were available in Uganda. 

He believed in attracting investment to our country. He handled the issues of Canadians, - and Canadians talk market - being active in the mining sector, to try and ensure that some of the money available on the Canadian stock exchange would be channelled to Uganda. He marketed Kilembe Mines in Canada. He also marketed the hydro-power potential in our country, with the general belief that it was investment in these areas that would clearly help to spur the economy and lead to a total transformation of our lives here in Uganda.

It is true that Ambassador George Abola had a very strong UPC background, just like hon. Katuntu has stated. However, it is also true that he was an extremely strong personality in the NRM, so much so that he was appointed director for economic affairs in the NRM. He did a commendable job in ensuring that he marketed the NRM ideology not only in his home area but throughout the country. 

He played a critical role in articulating policies that would help to revitalise the Ugandan economy in line with point No.5 of the NRM ten-point programme, which talked about building an independent and self-sustaining economy. The success and the benefits that we are all enjoying here today are partly because of the efforts of people like the late George Abola. 

He took on marketing the NRM ideology in Northern Uganda at a time when it was nearly suicidal to do so, but he never had any problem doing so. He did so with conviction and with a passion; no wonder, the NRM has now become very popular not only in certain areas of the country but also in Northern Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.18
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At this point, when we are remembering our dear father who has left us, I recall the word “Abola” has a very powerful and significant meaning in the land where George came from. In that place, the name “Abola” indicates that people have not understood the power, the strength and the gift in you until you start making significant contributions to the community.

We are now just remembering what Ambassador George Abola has done. Indeed, he has left a very huge gap and among the elders in this nation, we have to consider him among the heroes. You have been hearing how George Abola did tremendous things in this country; indeed, he was not a man who lived a meaningless life. 

George Abola was a giver. If you went to him, he was the kind of person who would give you anything, even if he did not know you. Because of that, people who lived near him tasted the real George Abola. (Interjections) You may talk of money, as my sister is saying, but George Abola not only gave tangible resources like money, he would give you all the time you needed as he advised and encouraged you to be a person of integrity. We really miss him and I support the motion. Thank you.

4.20
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion to pay tribute to the late George Abola. 

George loved sport; he was a golfer. I knew that because I went to school with some of his daughters. He had a hard time when Amin chased away the Asians. He set up Transocean, a clearing and forwarding company, and he had a hard time setting it up. You know, in Acholi most of the people are not business oriented but George Abola was one of the first Acholi businessmen, so he taught the people of Acholi business. 

I came here to support the motion that we should pay tribute to the late George Abola. Thank you.

4.22
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to the late Ambassador George Abola. 

I did not know him closely but I have been moved; I think he has posthumously mentored me through the words of the people who knew him very closely. I noticed that he was actually a born diplomat. As a diplomat by birth and true to his conduct, he lived a very extra-ordinary life of a diplomat. 

Something comes to my mind, in support of what one of the honourable members just mentioned about the state of our chanceries outside this country and our diplomatic missions. Mr Speaker, we should take this opportunity of paying tribute to such a man, who was born a diplomat and lived a diplomatic life until he died, to improve on our missions abroad especially the chanceries. Last year, we said that if you went to New York and looked at Uganda House, it was in a deplorable state. We went to Ethiopia, the condition of our facility is really wanting. This can frustrate a person born a diplomat like Abola. Look at the money meant for the education of their children; they are given money that cannot even support their spouses to stay with them. 

When it comes to Abola, I do not know whether it was a blessing that he was a diplomat and then he went through political life before he was later appointed a diplomat. Now, we have developed a practice where every loser in elections, even when they do not have diplomatic qualities, is appointed an ambassador. 

An ambassador is the highest level in the diplomacy hierarchy. Below that position, there are first class people who are employed with the hope that they will someday become ambassadors, but all of a sudden they realise they do not have that opportunity of reaching the highest level of the hierarchy – (Interjection) – Someone is asking whether they are NRM. They are appointed based on their performance – first class at the universities and so on; so I think they are non-partisan.  

I stand to support this motion. I want to state it clearly that out of the contribution of Shs 9 billion that we receive from diplomatic missions every year, let us do something in memory of Abola and make sure that the chanceries are in good condition. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament resolves as follows: that it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Ambassador George Marino Abola; that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Ambassador George Marino Abola to the country, both nationally and internationally; that it collectively prays to the Almighty God to rest his soul in enteral peace. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to finish. I am sure, honourable members, you have copies now.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Isanga): Mr Speaker, this is my response to the question on traditional or cultural leaders in Uganda. 

Government of Uganda recognises 13 traditional or cultural leaders in accordance to the Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Act, 2011. I have the names, their title and their areas of jurisdiction. 

1. Augustine Osuban Kadugala, His Highness the Emorimor Papa Iteso from Teso

2. Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV, His Highness Omukama of Toro from Toro;
3. Gafabusa Solomon Iguru, His Highness the Omukama of Bunyoro, from Bunyoro;

4. Onen David Acana, His Highness the Rwot of Acholi; 

5. Moses Stephen Owor, His Highness the Tieng Adhola, for the Adhola people;

6. Yosam Odur, His Highness the Won Nyaci me Lango, from Lango; 

7. Mwogezi Butamanya, His Highness Sabaruli from Buruli;

8. Apollo Sansa Kabumbuli, His Highness Kamuswaga of Kooki, from Kooki;

9. Phillip Edgar Olarker Rauni III, His Highness the Rwot Ubimu from Alur; 
10. Charles Wesley Mumbere Iremangoma, the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu from Rwenzori; 

11. Wilson Weasa  Wamimbi,  Inzu ya Masaba, from Bugisu; 

12. His Highness the Kyabazinga of Busoga, from Busoga; 

13. Ronald Muwenda Mutebi, His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda, from Buganda. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

4.29
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask a supplementary question by stating that Obwa Kabaka bwa Buganda comprises of the following:
    • Kyaddondo County, led by Kaggo; 
    • Kyaggwe led by Ssekiboobo; 
    • Bulemezi, where the county chief is Kkangawo;
    • Busiro, the county chief is Ssebwana; 
    • Mawokota, the county chief is Kayima; 
    • Bugerere, the county chief is Mugerere; 
    • Butambala, the county chief is Katambala; 
    • Buruuli, the county chief is Kimbugwe; 
    • Ggomba, the county chief is Kitunzi; 
    • Buvuma, the county chief is Mbuubi; 
    • Buddu, the county chief is Pokino; 
    • Kkooki, the county chief is Kamuswaga; 
    • Kabula, the county chief is Lumaama; 
    • Ssingo, the county chief is Mukwenda; 
    • Mawogola, the county chief is Muteesa; 
    • Ssese, the county chief is Kweba; 
    • Buwekula, the county chief is Luweekula; and 
    • Busujju, led by Kasujju. 

Those are the 18 counties that form the Kingdom of Buganda. 

Could the minister, therefore, explain to Parliament whether by purporting to recognise and draw territories and facilitate individuals holding out as “his highnesses the Omukama of Buruuli or of Kkoki”, who are county chiefs in Buganda Kingdom, is not acting in breach of the Constitution? Under Article 246(2), the Constitution provides that creating of new kingdoms shall be done in a manner prescribed by Parliament. 

The Traditional Rulers Act, which was made by this august House, provides that in case there is a dispute about traditional leadership in any kingdom, that dispute shall be resolved by a council of elders. To my knowledge and that of the people I represent of Mukono, which is in Kyaggwe County of Buganda, we have never heard of any elders’ meeting that sat to declare the counties of Kkoki and Buruuli are now fully fledged kingdoms. 

I would like to know whether the Minister, by continuing to draw public funds to facilitate these individuals, is not in breach of the existing orders on the expenditure of public funds. Thank you.   
 
4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I want to say here that what we are recognising are traditional and cultural leaders. Those leaders have never been contested in those areas where they come from, saying that they do not deserve to be in those positions. That is why we are still recognising them and according to – (Interruption)

MR EBIL: Mr Speaker, the minister has tickled me by saying that there has not been any contestation about the positions of the people listed here. I want to ask: are you aware of a situation in Lango where- (Interjections) - Okay, I wanted to inform you that there is a contestation about some of these people whom you have listed. 

In Lango, for example, you know a delegation of clan leaders came to your ministry to say that there had been an election of another cultural leader. We, as members of Lango Parliamentary Group, are also going to settle the matter. Are you aware of this development, that there has been a contestation?

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, we are not aware of what the honourable member is raising. I think these people have never been to the ministry to show why they are saying that that person who is being recognised does not belong or does not deserve to be recognised. We are not aware of that. The person whom we have here is the one that Government knows; he is the only person that is being facilitated by Government. So, Mr Speaker, I think I have answered hon. Nambooze’s question. (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that the minister must have chosen her words with utmost care, and that is why she chose to use the words “they have never been contested”. I am aware that the minister has been around Parliament and Uganda for a while and is aware, as much as I am, that in 2009 there were riots in this country and lives were lost as a result of these particular disputes. 

The supplementary question hon. Nambooze asked was to the effect that these two are actually contested, and the process that generated their acceptance by Government was illegal. Is the minister, therefore, in order to continue claiming that these people are not contested, having witnessed riots that actually constituted even loss of lives in this country in 2009? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what amounts to contestation? Is it a public riot? Is that a contestation? Or is there a procedure for filing these contestations with your office?

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, the people who are contesting come to the ministry and give, in accordance with our Constitution, what is supposed to be done in terms of coming up with a cultural leader or in terms of refusing to recognise the cultural or traditional leader. So, the people do that in accordance with our institution and cultural leaders Act. (Interjections) They do that.

Mr Speaker, as far as what my colleague from Lango was saying, we have never had a group of people coming to our office to contest that. It is very different from what the honourable MP is bringing up about what happened in 2009. That one was contentious and there were security issues surrounding it. That is why you saw what happened. Government had to come in and do what it did. 

Also, none of those people who you mentioned as being contested are on the list of the people we are right now recognising. That was in Kayunga. We have not yet recognised that- (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I rule on the order? I was asking for guidance on what normally happens. What that means, therefore, honourable member, is that there was no formal contestation, so I cannot rule the minister out of order. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. I seek clarification on two issues. I come from Busoga region where there has been a stalemate about our traditional leaders. As the minister in charge, what could you do to rest and harmonise the Basoga regarding the benefits of the traditional leaders in this country? 

The second issue is that about a month ago, there was a question raised about the criteria which the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development uses to recognise traditional leaders. I was in the House when the minister, hon. Karooro Okurut, said that if a group of people goes to their offices and say they have recognised a person as a cultural leader, the ministry will have no objection. 

The third issue is that sometimes-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, these are supplementary questions; you cannot go on forever.

MS KABAALE: Let me wind up. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Court has gone on to recognise some leaders as cultural leaders; what does the ministry have to say about that? Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have addressed my mind to rule 42(7), which bars debate on a matter of this nature. I am only wondering whether it is not procedurally right for us to move a motion to allow debate on this matter. I seek your indulgence - I am seeking leave, Mr Speaker, to move a motion that debate be allowed on this matter because it is very important and there are issues, which you cannot get out of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the structure of a parliamentary question to be changed into a motion would pose a management challenge. You need to propose a motion formally, which seeks certain remedies, and then we will deal with that at an appropriate time. If it is the wish of the Members, we will adjourn any further discussion on this question, which is a question for oral answer, and then we will grant leave at a convenient time for the Member to move a motion and we handle this properly, - (Applause) - so that it is handled in a comprehensive way rather than in this way.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Just for the record; the people of Padhola – (Laughter) – might want to accuse me if I left this error on the record of this great House. The right title of our cultural leader/traditional leader is His Highness the Kwar Adhola. The Tieng Adhola is purely the institution. I could nearly lose an election for being in the House and not correcting this. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure when those clarifications start coming in, a Member may also come from Acholi and say the one from Acholi is His Highness Lawiirwodi me Acholi – (Laughter) – These corrections might start coming, but I think let him conclude.  I have now ruled that we are going to have a formal motion that will have a discussion on this subject that we have –

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking is to do with these titles. Who qualifies to be “His Highness” and who qualifies to be “His Majesty”? 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have these discussions when the motion is brought, please.  

AN ACCOUNT OF THE BUSINESS TRANSACTED BY COMMITTEES SINCE THE INCEPTION OF THE 9TH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AND BUSINESS PENDING

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Foreign Affairs, are we ready?

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Stanley Omwonya): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to apologize on behalf of the foreign affairs committee for not presenting our report as the matter came up yesterday and the other day. 

The parliamentary Sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs is mandated, under rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure, to: 
a) Examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministry covered by it;
b) initiate or evaluate action programmes of the sector ministry and make appropriate recommendations;
c) critically examine Bills brought by Government before the House. 
d) examine Government’s recurrent and capital budget of the ministry; 
e) monitor the performance of the ministry and departments under it; and 
f) ensure Government compliance with approved plans and programmes.

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Foreign Affairs oversees the activities of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Uganda’s missions abroad. Since 2011 to date – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will the honourable Member for Alebtong explain to the House what is happening at the moment? (Laughter)

MS AMUGE OTENGO: Mr Speaker, I am just impressed by the dress code of my mom, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Member of Parliament for Dokolo. Thank you. She looks very smart. (Laughter) 

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since 2011, the committee presented the sector ministerial policy statement for the financial years 2011/2012, 2012/2013 and 2013/2014. 

The committee, at various times, visited a number of Uganda’s missions abroad and they include the following: Turkey, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Tanzania, South Africa, New York, USA, Canada, Kenya, China, United Arab Emirates, Russia, Brussels and Denmark. An amalgamated report of these visits on the missions abroad will be presented to the House shortly.

The committee also made on-spot site visits to Uganda’s border points at Bunagana at the Congo-Uganda border; Katuna at the Rwanda-Uganda border; and also visited Alefori Sub-county, which borders with South Sudan. 

The committee also handled petitions on trafficking of women in Iraq and on mismanagement at our missions in the United Arab Emirates. 

The committee has some pending business, which includes the whistle-blowers’ report, which should be coming to the House shortly. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We now have the status; it is only one committee remaining. In the gallery this afternoon, we have SOS Orphanage Learning Centre Kisigala represented by hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Sylvia Namabidde of Mityana District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. Please, rise; you are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have Berkeley High School represented by hon. Milton Muwuma and hon. Olivia Kabaale of Iganga. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO BEACHSIDE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

4.52
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did present the report and we are only waiting for debate.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, the report was presented. Let us debate.  Were the copies circulated?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, copies were circulated. Last week when the report came up for debate, the debate was deferred after a lot of submissions were made by members. They pleaded for more time to actually go through the report. I would be surprised if any Member raised the same issue today. Even the other time, the report was presented for the second time. I just told the Clerk to reproduce copies because I knew Members had not carried theirs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready to debate this matter?

4.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will remember that this report was presented to you and we had expected that last Thursday, we would have pronounced ourselves on the recommendations made. I expect your input if there are any amendments to be made to our recommendations.

Indeed, as hon. Paul Mwiru has said, there was a protracted negotiation here at the Table. I remember at the end of the day, I conceded and said if the honourable colleagues want to have more time from Thursday to Tuesday this week to have in-depth understanding and reading of the report, so be it, so that we move together in harmony and in tandem.

I really would like to appeal to you, honourable colleagues. If we keep having these reports presented and they do not attract debate or they are not considered, the more it discourages us. With due respect, it is like a lady spending time cooking and when she brings the food at the table, you say, “I am sorry, I am satisfied so I am not eating”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or a man cooking.

MR WADRI: Yes - or a man cooking – (Laughter) - and then he is disappointed. You can imagine what kind of disappointment you would have caused. The Rt Hon. Speaker is trying to be gender sensitive but I am talking as an African because that is how we really look at things.

I appeal to you, honourable colleagues, let us spend some time on this. After all, it is not a voluminous report and the attachments are there. Let us take a decision so that we move and go on to the next issue. Having all these things and then again we sleep over it I think will be a little unnecessary. Let us give these recommendations a nod and we move forward. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the chairman of PAC and also read item No. 13 on the Order Paper, which has been appearing and disappearing from the Order Paper - the energy report. I also know that reports from my own committee, the Committee on National Economy, at times are presented but never get a chance to be discussed in the House. Can I, therefore, suggest that the chairman owns his report by summarising it in five minutes to stimulate Members to start the debate? 

Bring out the salient issues and we debate because it is becoming a culture that reports are made and they disappear - they never see the light of day - and we do not pronounce ourselves as Parliament. Out there, there are suspicions that there are those who are killing reports in this Parliament. So, I think we need to protect the image of Parliament and also the efforts of those who take a lot of time to prepare such reports. Mr Speaker, that is my view.

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think as Members of this House, we have got to be honest with ourselves. We are either interested in reading the report or not, but we cannot keep postponing debate just because we decided not to read. 

If there is nobody who is ready to debate, we will ask that the Chair puts the question for the adoption of this report and it will be deemed adopted as Members have no additional input to make. It is frustrating to sit and prepare reports and then every week, you hear Members say, “I have not read” or “I have not got a copy”. When you give out copies, they say they have not read. Which word do we take seriously this afternoon?

Mr Speaker, please, allow debate and if there is no person who wants to debate, being a member of the committee I will move that the report be adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I recall that when I was a Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, there were times when reports stayed on the Order Paper for over a year as “business to follow”. One time, we asked the Speaker of the day, Rt Hon. Ssekandi, if we could pass them as they were since they had taken over a year on the Order Paper. He laughed and said, “we shall consider it tomorrow”. The following day when Members came, they could not debate and we had to pass them.

This also applies to these reports of the Public Accounts Committee. Nobody would love to have these reports here. If we, the members of the Appointments Committee, had seen this report before we appointed the chairman of the Uganda Land Commission, I am sure this would have been the basis of stopping his appointment. The more we delay, the more opportunities we give for others to be promoted; some might even become Chief Justices when they are also implicated in this report on some issues.

So, like hon. Alaso said, I would like to propose that since the report is very clear and we have read and understood it, you put the question on this report. I thank you.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also support the submission made by hon. Mukitale that if it is possible, let the honourable chairperson go through the recommendations within five minutes to generate debate on this report and we adopt it. The reason we have committees in place is to investigate some of these petitions and give a report to Parliament. So, we request that you allow the chairperson to give us a hint about what is contained in this report within five minutes because some of us were not present when they were submitting. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This report was presented and we were given copies to go and read and come back to debate. That was the directive of the Speaker several weeks ago. It is on the Hansard that it was presented by the deputy chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts. 

The guidance I seek from you concerns the proposal of my chairman of the Committee on National Economy, that the chairman presents this same report again. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for him to do this? I just want to understand whether it is in order to do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there honourable members who have read this report and are ready to debate?

5.01
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What is going on in the House now is not very healthy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating?

MRS SANTA ALUM: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, debate.

MRS SANTA ALUM: Yes, that is my preamble. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, I am in charge of the integrity of the House, so I must defend it at all costs.

MRS SANTA ALUM: If I am to go back to what the chairman has said, we are dealing with the issue of corruption and this issue is not new to this House. Many times, you see that corruption starts with the Attorney-General keeping aloof and then the technical wing does not do what they are supposed to do. Somebody signs a contract, he is given land but at the end of the day, you find that the very people involved in this saga are waiting for compensation. 

Mr Speaker, the first question that I would like to ask is: How can somebody operate business in this country without the knowledge of the Attorney-General? Secondly, how can the Attorney-General speak very comfortable when people are trespassing in his house and he is not bothered? He is not even questioning why we see people transacting business without his involvement. These are serious concerns to me as a person representing a district that is suffering a lot from many evils.

I would also like the committee to clarify whether they did not find it useful to say something about the legal team of the Government. Most of these problems, if you analysed them critically, are committed in an organised manner – the technical wing stealing public funds. So, my proposal is that something must be done with the technical or legal team of Government.

In conclusion, I will say that corruption in this country has taken a new twist; people in offices sit down and plan systematically to rob this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there anyone else who would like to debate on this matter?

5.05
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of corruption starts with the civil servants, and the public out there cannot differentiate between NRM and the arm of Government where the civil servants fall. When we move out, they even point fingers at some of us who do not want anything to do with corruption and they say that we, in the government, are part of those stealing money and yet the people who steal the money are known. 

Parliament passes the budget and the money goes to the Executive and to the civil servants to implement the government programmes. They come up with good reports and accountability and yet when you go to the grassroots, there is no value for money. On the other hand, they come and frame themselves by stating issues without getting any backing or documentation to qualify or quantify what they are doing. In the end, government loses money. 

The report that has been presented has mentioned the names of people who were involved in this corruption case. One of the annexes to this report indicates that the legal counsel did not even sign the letter he wrote. That shows that he had a hidden agenda behind what he was doing. I want to say that I support the recommendations the committee has made. If anything, these people should be interdicted and they should vacate their offices. Thank you. 

5.07
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I have perused through it and I will raise a few questions. 

I hope the Attorney-General will help me understand some queries. I know that this matter was before court as is highlighted in the report. I want to know if the Attorney- General took interest to follow up the decisions of the court. I also want to know when the Attorney-General carries out judicial reviews. The Attorney-General did not represent NFA and yet time and again, even in this Parliament, when we have sought to be part of the Attorney-General, we have always been refused. Here, when he actually had the mandate, he avoided standing in this case and his office distanced itself from this matter. So, I want to know why that happened and also seek the Attorney-General’s opinion on the court’s decision.

I would like to also say that time and again, government land has been allocated to individuals. We have seen people settling in game parks and selling government land. We have the issues of Temangalo and so on. I do not know how these reports are going to cure this problem. Thank you. 

5.09
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Probably, I rise to equally seek for guidance from the Attorney-General. 

This investigation and report is largely as a result of a consent judgment - a bad deal, a bad case - that went up to the Supreme Court and was withdrawn. A second consent judgement was made. Learned Attorney-General, this report is seeking, among other things, to pass recommendations that would undo the consent judgment. I would love to benefit from your accumulated legal knowledge, so that you guide us as to whether this is a possibility and within the ambit of this great House. 
 
5.10
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion wholeheartedly. It is unfortunate that this report affects one of our colleagues in this House, who is also my friend. 

This report depicts one of the CHOGM scams, where some two clever people also wanted to partake of the cash bonanza. They never got an allocation for whatever they did. The report says that as they developed hotels for CHOGM, they put up three huts which were unfinished and they are asking for compensation and will get US$ 1.6 million. 

What is horrifying in this whole situation is the role played by the Judiciary, specifically Justice Murangira. At page 22 of the report, it says that the claimants wanted money, but where they asked for little money, the judge decided to give them more, for instance on deposits paid for construction. 

By the way, the report says there were just three unroofed huts. The gentlemen had asked for US$ 169,500 and the judge said, “No, that is too little; take half a million dollars.” I wonder what was wrong with the judge. When you read the report, you see evidence of collusion right from the start to the end. US$ 1.6 million can do a lot of work in our village hospitals and yet here it was easily claimed and given away. 

I think the recommendations of the report are good; this House should pass them as they are. However, something must be done with Justice Murangira. Maybe he did not do this himself, but it is very bad for our Judiciary; this report gives a very bad name to our Judiciary. It shows that he could have colluded with the two gentlemen to defraud the people of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.14
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having taken time to give us this information. 

I have reservations. At page 22, there is a table showing amounts claimed and the court award, and as hon. Okot said, you realise this needs more comprehensive investigations. The agencies which are in charge of fighting corruption should have these people prosecuted. 

The recommendation on page 25, which implicates hon. Fox Odoi, says, “Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi be held liable for influence peddling”. This case was in court and I do not know whether Fox Odoi was given a fair hearing in the committee. If so, why does the committee simply pass judgement whereas the case was in court? What happened in court? 

So, I agree that we should debate this matter, but as usual, Parliament gives recommendation and observations. Let me echo the words of the Leader of the Opposition, when he said yesterday that we should recommend that all the investigative agencies should get interested in what is written in this report. Parliament has played its part but we need to get the best out of this. I see this as mixed up. If we investigate, prosecute and become judges, it becomes very difficult for us to adopt these recommendations. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.18
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

On page 19, there is an observation suggesting that there is an unseen hand in NFA, which was guiding BDC and putting pressure on the staff to process the licence. With the alarming issues in relation to corruption, I pray that more investigations be done. This is the time for us to expose those who are promoting corruption by even mentioning names. We have taken people to court but the way judgements are passed is not satisfactory. I would rather we name and shame them. So, I think we need to expose these people after holding more investigations. 

Secondly, on page 20, the report mentions commencement of construction before provision of a licence. Structures are managed by human resource. Many people do this in order to provide room to get commission. The staff that we recruit are knowledgeable and appointment is based on merit. So, why should such a thing happen? It is because people plan to manage corruption; these are intended moves. Therefore, we must be ready to fight this. 

Lastly, I get irritated about the issue of creation of new structures in this country. When we talk about authorities, at preliminary level we receive good objectives and intentions but we must learn that before we create more structures, we must analyse whether the already existing structures cannot perform the tasks we expect. 

In relation to NFA, we have the forestry departments; what is it that those departments could not do that warranted us to create an authority from which we do not benefit? What specific benefits do we get from National Forestry Authority? I think we are not benefiting much; they are doing a disservice to us. So, why should we go on creating more structures? In my opinion, some of these structures need to be swept off. What are we gaining, apart from promoting corruption and recruiting more people from whom we do not reap? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been thinking a lot, and these are questions that I always raise - how do people get to know that there is land somewhere? How do they get to know? These are questions we should ask. Two, how do they know that if they engage in a certain activity, they will get money?

Mr Speaker, I want to help Members to understand this today. First and foremost, hon. Fox Odoi is my personal friend – very good friend - but on this one, I will tell him that what he did was wrong and he should be ready to answer. Hon. Fox Odoi was a personal private secretary to the President at one time. From there, he was transferred to the Attorney-General’s Chambers. The reason why I am bringing this up is to show you why the Attorney-General’s Chambers cannot act and why the President may not act. However, this time I am going to exonerate the President because he wrote a letter – look at page 16. 

On 7 January 2010, His Excellency the President wrote to the Attorney-General citing an attempt by BDS to defraud NFA of more than Shs 3 billion. The President directed the Attorney-General to do all that it takes to ensure that the fraudsters - who are the fraudsters? Fox Odoi, Raphael the Judge and the team - do not succeed in their scheme. The President also expressed optimism that the High Court would not accept NFA to be condemned to pay more than Shs 3 billion for no legal breach on its part. The Attorney-General was directed.  

Mr Speaker, as I said, first, I do not know how they got to know about the land. Two, they were supposed to build 100 chalets - I do not know what chalets are; we need to know about them today and find out how much each chalet costs. Three, they paid for a licence at the cost of US$ 6,000. The land is not theirs, they only buy a licence at US$ 6,000 and they are compensated US$ 1.9 million for only investing US$ 6,000, using their offices to steal the land.

Why do I say this? It is civil servants who are fond of committing such crimes. Fox Odoi was a civil servant; he was working in the Office of the President and he knew about all these transactions. It is true this is just inside trading, and anybody who does inside trading is treated as a criminal. 

I will tell you, if you want to know the background of many Members of Parliament here, whenever there is a crisis on their hands, they try Parliament or local governments- (Interjections) – Yes! I believe my brother, Fox Odoi, would still be in the Attorney-General’s Chambers but when he discovered that the long arm of the law would catch up with him, he came to hide here. We should not accept to keep such a criminal here. Whoever will accept- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to maintain respect for each other as we debate this matter. If the person is a Member of Parliament, references should be dignified. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the Leader of the Opposition. He was wondering how these people get to know about the land. The whole system is crooked. If you read page 4 it says, “On 19 January 2006, the same day he reapplied, NFA responded and gave Mr Twagira a no-objection to the development of the ecotourism business in the forest reserve.” 

The letter of no-objection was written to him and on the same day, he was advised to give information about his organisation, tourism business profile and business plan. It is the same person applying and they are using the information he is giving to do the work. When you move down and look at 12, it says that NFA used the feasibility study submitted by Twagira to assess the viability of the project and to develop the company’s minimum expected income. What more do you want? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is very good information. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for accepting this information. The information I want to give him is that by the time this plan was hatched, right from 2005 and 2006, the hon. Fox Odoi was still working in State House. He was not in the Attorney-General’s Chambers yet. That is the information I want to give you.

MR OBOTH: I know that you could be afraid because hon. Fox Odoi’s name is mentioned. The clarification I want to seek from you is purely about your generally sweeping statement. I do not know whether it is based on fact or just imagination for you to say that before most civil servants contest for Parliament, there is something about them. I would wish to challenge you to say what it was about me since I came here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, one time I suggested that we do an audit of the qualifications of Members of Parliament here. The day I mentioned it, many people wrote to the Clerk saying, “We are amending our academic papers” because they knew we were serious. Some of them had even claimed PhDs, which do not exist. 

Even now, if you challenge me, - I am not talking about you, hon. Oboth - I can tell you that I know a good number of them for whom I can say, “This one did X or this one studied this” - (Interjections) - By the way, I have been around here for long and I retired with honours - (Interjections) – Yes! I have been here for 15 years, why haven’t you mentioned that? You mention it; there’s no problem. I am waiting for it. The Ministry of Finance has never been closed; it still exists. I want somebody to come and say, “Nandala, you took money”. I can tell you, you will come up and say, “Nandala was the – (Interjection) – Fuel? Ministry of Finance does not deal with fuel. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am sorry; the Chief Whip knows I never took fuel. There was no fuel in the ministry. 

Mr Speaker, let me concentrate on my point and I know the Chief Whip will allow me to do that. My brother from Fort Portal raised a point from page 4 and it clearly showed the sequence. Now it is going to flow better. By 2005/2006, hon. Fox Odoi, by then Mr Fox Odoi, was still in the Office of the President. From there, he was moved and taken to the Attorney-General’s Chambers. At that time, Raphael Ochan was the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Gender.  

Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Gender, using the knowledge of his colleague in the then Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, knew about the land. He told himself, “I cannot get this land; I need a powerful hand.” He then approached State House and he got a young man called Mr Fox Odoi and told him, “We must strike this deal”. Hon. Fox Odoi, by then Mr Odoi, agreed and said, “I will use my office” and indeed he used his office and they went to NFA and got land. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How did he use his office?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, let me read for you what was done; if I can recall, it was mentioned somewhere. 

First, this land had been allocated to Mr Mushesha for planting trees under the forestry department and he had planted his trees and they were growing very well. In order to cut those trees, one needed muscle, and the muscle was somebody from State House. That is how Mr Fox Odoi then, now hon. Fox Odoi, comes in to use the muscle to cut the trees and build the 100 chalets. Out of 100 chalets, they had only tried to construct three, which were not even done - they put up the foundation and stopped there.  

Mr Speaker, where is the problem? There is a gentleman called Akankwasa, who was the Executive Director of NFA, and the Chairman of the board of NFA was by then hon. Baguma Isoke, who is now the current chairperson of Uganda Land Commission. There is something about them. 

On page 8, it says that the Minister for Water and Environment wrote - and who is the Minister for Water and Environment? That is hon. Mutagamba, the former DP Secretary-General. (Laughter) Mutagamba wrote saying, “I have invited the directors of BDS for dialogue and negotiation with NFA as donors. We are concerned that their funds have been frozen and are about to be credited to a private company. However, both the NFA board and the Attorney-General’s Chambers did not pursue this matter seriously.” 

It says, “Both the NFA board and the Attorney-General’s Chambers did not pursue this matter seriously”. Who was the Chairman of the NFA board? It was hon. Baguma Isoke. Where did hon. Baguma Isoke come from? He was in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment at that time in 2006 when that land was being given to those colleagues of ours. So, it is a clear indicator that the committee has left out some people. 

One of those left out is Minister Mutagamba, who used to visit the area even in the night. Here, the report clearly says that Mutagamba used to visit the site every now and then at night instead of going during day time. For a woman to visit a place at night is more dangerous - (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I seek clarification from the Leader of the Opposition. What is wrong with somebody visiting somewhere at night and what is wrong with a woman visiting somewhere at night? Where is it written in the Constitution that a woman should not move at night?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Mutagamba was allowed to visit the site every now and then in her capacity as minister. However, given the fact that the site at night is not well lit, she would not see well. You are aware that hon. Mutagamba wears glasses during the day, so what about at night. It would have been fair for her to visit the place during the day and not at night as always, moreover in a forest. That is why I brought up the issue of a whole minister visiting a place at night. Mr Speaker, we have left out Minister Mutagamba. 

We have also left out the chairman of the NFA board, hon. Baguma Isoke. If we had got the information earlier, we would not have approved him. I told members in the committee that this man has problems but nobody listened to me. Now here is a report clearly indicating that this man is not fair and you have allowed him to go ahead and manage lands. We should deal with him in this report. When handling the recommendations, we shall deal with him.

There is another person whom the Attorney-General refused to work on, and the Attorney-General should also answer for this. The President said that Justice Murangira should be taken to the Judicial Service Commission but the Attorney-General never took him. There is one man called Okumu Wengi; as soon as his name was implicated in the Gandesha’s case, because he was from the wrong region he was taken but you cannot act on this one from the right region. These are double standards. Even the President knew the man was from his – (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, in this country, Uganda, we have a Constitution and the regions are clearly marked, without indicating whether one is good or bad. Is the honourable member in order, as Leader of the Opposition, to say that in this country we have regions which are good and some that are bad? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable members, our debate should show the solidarity of this country. We should not be making attempts to divide this country in unfair ways. Please, Leader of the Opposition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, even the Constitution of Uganda, under the national objectives and directive principles of state policy, says that when developing Uganda on equitable basis, special consideration must be put in place to handle regions which are underdeveloped. The Constitution also recognises that there are some areas which are not equally developed. This means that if Nandala comes from that region, he will be – (Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, with all due respect to my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, is it in order for him to continue insinuating that Government acts based on regions when you have properly and clearly guided him? Is he in order to continue insinuating that this country is full of nothing but sectarianism?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have all heard from debates in this House that there are areas in all the regions of Uganda that have some difficulties. In a recent debate on Buhweju, we heard what they said about Buhweju. Buhweju is in the western part of the country. During the debate we had to pay tribute to hon. Matovu, we heard about the water stressed situations in Isingiro District and other places, and these areas are in the western part of the country. 

In the northern part of the country, we have had difficulties in some places. In Karamoja, in Arua we have difficulties. The whole country has specific problems in certain areas. In Busoga, there are also problems. So, please, let us emphasize on the unity of the country as Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. 

I want to commend the President for saying that Justice Murangira should be taken to the Judicial Service Commission to answer for this mistake. I ask the Attorney-General to explain to us why he never transferred Justice Murangira to the Judicial Service Commission as directed by the President. It has been noted before that whatever the President directs must be acted on; why didn’t the Attorney-General act on this? 

Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the committee that the US$ 1.9 million be refunded. Whoever touched that money, including hon. Fox Odoi, should refund it. Secondly, the one who forged the consent judgment should be held liable. This is terrible. Why shouldn’t we deal with them? All these lawyers who forged the consent judgment should be taken to the Uganda Law Council. 

Thirdly, Mr Akankwasa, the former Executive Director, and the Chairman of the board then, hon. Baguma Isoke, should be held liable for not pursuing this matter so that we can get money. They were complacent in the theft of this money. An additional recommendation should be that the Attorney-General –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we come to those when we begin processing the resolutions?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank the committee for a job well done. Our colleague, hon. Fox Odoi, should be ready to answer and pay us because this is a very serious matter. There is also a case on the Northern Bypass, which again involves our colleague, hon. Fox Odoi. We shall bring it up at an appropriate time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, do you want to say something at this stage? There were specific issues. I will have Yumbe District. 

5.42
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to begin by thanking the Leader of the Opposition for accepting, for the first time in this House, that the President of this country, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is really fighting corruption. I am very grateful to you for accepting that he is doing that.

Mr Speaker, I just imagine and wonder about Ugandans who cannot listen to their leader, the President of this country. After taking his time to write, despite all the many activities he has, and tell these people that, “please, do not do this because it is a wrong thing”, they still did not listen to their President. To whom then can they now listen to? 

I get worried that even if we spend our time talking about corruption, we shall do nothing because if they cannot listen to the final man of the country, what about us? Therefore, can we continue to pray that Jesus will come quickly and save this country from the mess in which the country is. (Applause)

I have reservations about NFA. I want us to recommend that we comprehensively investigate NFA and not only this issue of compensation. Mr Speaker, in West Nile, especially in Yumbe and Koboko, we have a forest reserve called Kei. Lorries full of timber leave this place – (Interjections) – Yes! 

People of NFA have their people whom they work with. They prevent the local people from getting timber from the forest. They have even chased them away and destroyed their crops, saying that these people are encroaching on the forest. 

I do not know where that timber goes. I want to know whether according to the law, the authority has the mandate to cut down trees and take timber but the local people do not have. If somebody can help me to answer that question, I will say that we still need NFA. 

If I had the powers, I would say that let us dissolve NFA because I do not see anything meaningful that they are doing. They are now seriously participating in promoting corruption in this country. I thank you very much.

5.45
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the committee for this wonderful report and also thank them for the methodology that they applied in generating this report. They used a multi-pronged approach. They interviewed officials from NFA, the Solicitor-General’s office and officials from the Attorney-General’s Chambers. They also interviewed the directors of BDS and directors of other companies whose interests were affected by the claim. They pursued various contract documents and court judgements of the case. I want to thank them indeed.

Like my colleagues have mentioned here, I wish to applaud His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his commitment in fighting graft. This is evidenced by his letter of 7 January 2010, which directed the Attorney-General to do all that it takes to ensure that the fraudsters do not succeed in their scheme. I want to think that with his continued commitment, corruption must be a very risky venture to undertake.

Let me draw your attention to page 18 of this report, and in particular the second paragraph. It says that the NFA board later withdrew the appeal at the intervention of the then Minister of Water and Environment, hon. Maria Mutagamba. The committee should have helped us to understand this. I would have loved to know the intentions of this intervention from hon. Maria Mutagamba, which led to the withdrawal of the appeal. I think that this is very critical. The committee should have gone a little further to give us the intention of the minister in intervening the way she did.

On page 24, we read that the Attorney-General did not implement the directive of the President to do all it takes to stop NFA from losing money to fraudsters. Now NFA decides to represent itself in court and to use private lawyers without seeking legal advice from the Attorney-General. This brings into question how institutions of Government relate. 

Refusing to act on the directive of His Excellency the President was a very bold stand by the Attorney-General. When finally we lose money like we did, I think that the Attorney-General should be held liable. I have read through pages 25 and 26, which highlight the recommendations of the committee, and I have not seen any recommendation to the effect that the Attorney-General should be held liable. He neglected a presidential directive, leading to loss of colossal amounts of money. It is my humble appeal, therefore, that we include in our recommendations that the Attorney-General should be held liable. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.49
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. However, I am not fully satisfied with the report because it is not exhaustive. We cannot have witnesses and people like ministers involved and in your concluding remarks you do not recommend anything about the ministers. There are two judges involved - one is a director in the company - but you focus on one judge. What about the other judge? What about the whole Ministry of Water and Environment where NFA falls? What about the board? 

As a committee, why are you only fixing your mind on these few people? Even in the recommendations, you start with the small people. You should start with the big ones. Why do you start with the small ones? Start with the big ones if you want to fight corruption, because it is a sensitive matter. 

This report is going to be taken out, people will read it and they will wonder what is wrong with this PAC of the Ninth Parliament. They will ask why we are leaving out some people. If you are to investigate fully, you have a list of witnesses but how come some are left out? 

You are only looking at who paid this money and in this report you did not even show us where the money came from, the US$ 1.9 million. Ministry of Finance, who allocated this money? By the time somebody gets paid by Government, we should know where the money has come from. If we go back to the Auditor-General’s report, is this money there? Did NFA pick this money from its coffers and pay it out? 

Mr Speaker, I think that this report is still shallow and we need to refer it back either to the committee or to the whole House – (Interruption) 

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, a committee, especially PAC or any other accountability committee, generates its work from the work of the Auditor-General. Those are the people who were identified for us. As Members of Parliament, we do not have the capacity and time to go and dig out the sordid details regarding corrupt tendencies in any ministry, department or whatever the case may be. We depend entirely on the work done by the Auditor-General. It is only in rare circumstances that the committee goes beyond the confines of the report of the Auditor-General. I just want to make that clarification.

The Constitution clearly spells out that if you, Alex Byarugaba, or whoever, is involved in any corrupt tendencies, you will be liable as a person, whatever your capacity. You do not have to look at a ministry as a whole; I may be a commissioner in Ministry of Finance but I am not culpable. Thank you.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you for the information. As I conclude, I want to say that this report is not as exhaustive as we need it to be; US$ 1.9 million is a lot of money in this nation, which is a very small economy. If we just look at a few individuals and we make recommendations – everybody would be invited to the committee and given an opportunity to give his side of the story such that we have a clear report. 

By the time we make these recommendations, let us be very certain of what we are mentioning. If you select, somebody will say, “Fine, that report is out, where is the recommendation about the minister?”

We need a more thorough and conclusive report in order to involve everybody that was involved in this. It would help us as a nation if we always had investigations that are fully exhaustive. This is a matter of national interest; it is corruption. The donors and citizen are watching and we cannot have a summarised report like this. Let us not leave anybody out. If there is a judge in the High Court who is also a director in the company, let him also be answerable. If there is a minister involved, let them be answerable. Let the board members be answerable. Let us make recommendations involving all parties. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I thought I would make a response at once, but let me just say something. When it comes to who paid, the report details what happened. We are saying people went to court, got an order and changed the accounts, meaning that they actually got money from the bank – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see when you access the microphone before you are given the authority, it affects the recording of the Hansard. When they go to transcribe, many members are speaking and how do they synchronise? It is the same ear that is going to listen to these overlapping discussions. It is better that you make a request off the microphone so that your voice is not on the record. 

MR MWIRU: I thought I would take the questions and answer them in an orderly manner – 

THE SPEAKER: That is what I hoped would happen.  

MR WADRI: I want to give information to the Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality West, who says this report is shallow and we have not mentioned the name of every person who is involved. 

If you read the background of this corruption scandal, first of all, the person who wanted land for planting trees is Mr Twagira Charles. That was the time when CHOGM was around the corner. People were looking for what immediate investment they could get themselves involved in so that they could get quick returns. He was advised that if you want something quick, you go into eco-tourism development. 

By that time, this company called Beachside Management Services was long in existence and it had had three shareholders. The hon. Justice Raphael Ochan has one share in that company. For a long time, this company had not transacted any business – it was a dormant company - to the extent that when they decided to go into construction of a tourism site, not even once was the Justice Raphael Ochan ever invited to say, “let us take a decision as directors on an investment as a shareholder with one share”. That is how we found it useless to invite him. Let colleagues understand this very clearly. By the time he became a judge, he had relinquished active participation in this company. He was a dormant partner. So we could not just close our eyes on inviting all those that we knew had crucial roles played in this investment under an eco-tourism site construction. 

THE SPEAKER: But you invited hon. Fox Odoi.

MR WADRI: Hon. Fox Odoi came several times, accompanied by his lawyers. There is a law firm known as Mugyezi, Barata and Associates; they even objected to him appearing before us until we sought the legal opinion from the Director, Legal Services, in Parliament. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the presentations which we have been listening to clearly and quietly, there was an observation made that the consent judgment was forged. I seek clarification from hon. Mwiru; if the consent judgment was forged, why haven’t you held all people responsible accountable, because we do not want to do it in a sectarian way? 

I have also read paragraph 70, about the disputing of the agreements that were being handled, that some people wanted to hide in an aspect of court and defraud the country.  Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the moment you have a share, you are called shareholder. I want to put this in perspective. Not all shareholders participate in the day-to-day business of the company. Two, every company is supposed to file what we call annual returns, and this will show the directors of the company. The moment the annual return is filed, if you say you are not interested, then we sell your shares so that you are not a shareholder.

When a company is going to invest, the power of attorney is always given to one, two or three people who may not even be shareholders. Given the fact that Raphael Ochan is a lawyer, who knows the implications of being a shareholder, even if he never attended meetings but he has never objected to whatever was taking place, he is held liable on all the transactions of this company as a shareholder. So, there is no way Justice Raphael Ochan will run away from his liability. At an appropriate time, we must make a recommendation on him; he must have been the one who influenced his colleague, the Justice Murangira, to take the decision as he did. (Laughter)

MS LANYERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is really a scandal. One of our duties is oversight; I support the recommendations of this committee but sometimes we are told that the recommendations of Parliament are just advisory. So, I feel that we should push this report to the IGG for further investigation. 

On page 26, for example, I wondered when you said that Justice Murangira be referred. I know that normally, allocating of cases is done by the Principal Judge, so when you read page 26 you see that there is a lot of corruption taking place. 

I feel that we should take this report to the IGG or to an investigative arm of Government so that better work can be done. Whatever we are going to recommend here may be construed as simply advisory. We might be wasting our time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any other response? Attorney-General, do you want to say something at this stage?

6.04
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, you know the normal practice of our audit queries from the Auditor-General; the committee has done its work. Regarding the best way to conclude and to get results, I would concur with the honourable Member for Lamwo. 

When you read all these recommendations, there is a case and there is no doubt about it. The President wrote and even the person who was presiding over this case did not mind about the fraud. As Parliament, we have done our job. Why don’t we say that following the appropriate action we have taken from the Auditor-General’s queries as per section 163 (5) of the Constitution, investigative action be dealt with by Government agencies and these people be prosecuted? That is what I am picking from you. 

If it is possible, and we agree with the committee, we can adopt these recommendations and take them to the investigative agencies so that these cases are brought to book.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this good job. I want to thank the Members for their contributions on the report. 

Questions have recurred on what the Attorney-General did, that the Attorney-General had instructions and so forth. We appreciate all this. I worked in the Attorney-General’s Chambers and those are the consequences and hazards of collective responsibility; occupational hazards.

The investigation was done by the committee and I believe such questions came up; for instance, a directive came from the Head of State why did the Attorney-General not take action on that directive? Certainly, I think maybe even the chairperson would be better placed to answer that question. This is because I believe if it became a pertinent issue in their committee, the proper way to handle it would have been to invite the Attorney-General to make observations on it. So, I cannot be party to an investigation that has more or less been concluded.

The honourable Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality made a serious observation and the response was equally excellent. Certainly, the work of PAC is tailored on the issues raised by the Auditor-General and certainly, if we have got to take the view of the Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality, then we have got to look at other ways of ensuring that we make our work more effective. That means other relevant agencies, which are mandated to take up certain assignments, do take those assignments up, like the IGG. 

Regarding the issue of influence peddling, for example, principally, the mandated agency to investigate this is the IGG. Of course, you know that when Parliament sits the way we are sitting and we begin pronouncing ourselves on court orders, one may begin wondering whether we are proceeding well. However, that does not mean that this is the end of the matter because anyone has a right of complaint. The moment you feel aggrieved, there are ways and means, which are constitutionally or statutorily appropriate, for redress. Regarding a judge of the High Court, for instance, the best redress is to have the matter referred to the Judicial Service Commission, the Police and others.

I really do not want to lose hope or to despair. When you feel the matter is of a serious nature and needs further investigation and clarity, this can still be done through other appropriate agencies.

Everybody feels concerned, and there is no doubt about it. I stand here not really as an advocate of anyone but I stand here as a person who is interested in seeing that justice is done and justice should not only be done but must be seen to be done. The moment we sit here and begin deliberating on a colleague, who is not even in the House, it is a challenge. I am not saying that he should be here - Certainly, he should be here but I do not know why he is not here; maybe the Speaker knows because, of course, he gives permission to such people - (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for giving way. I was here when the report was being presented. Our colleague, hon. Fox Odoi, was in the House and as soon as the chairman began talking, he walked out. So, most likely he is staying away. He knows this matter is on the Order Paper today.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much for the information. That was not actually the - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my good brother, hon. Fred Ruhindi. If you read the report, on page 2, your office was invited and interviewed and I think they had nothing to say. So, are you not aware that you appeared before the committee?

Secondly, you are talking about other arms of government. The IGG has already investigated and declared this thing bad, on page 7, No. 20. On 6 August 2006, you said there was no transparency and that this is wrong. So, which IGG do you want to take it to? Do you want to buy time so that the Ninth Parliament expires and we forget about it, or do you want us to deal with this matter and we finish it for the sake of the people of Uganda? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am kind of getting worried about the direction we are taking, especially when the Attorney-General, who is my good friend, starts saying that we are debating this when the Member is not in the House. I do not know whether if, when we are debating about any subject in this House, you are supposed to defend yourself. Whether he was here or not, I think he would not have anything to say. 

We are presenting a report of a committee of Parliament. He was supposed to have defended himself - and I heard that he did – at the committee level. I plead with colleagues to stop defeating our own work; corruption will catch up with all of us at one point or another. Thank you. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as attested to this by these attached documents. In the build-up to this case, it was very clear that the two investigative arms of Government have been involved. The Police have been involved in this matter; complaints have been lodged to them, case file numbers are mentioned. These are cases which were handled at Entebbe and we have indicated all that information. There are letters from the Inspector-General of Government, where he was petitioned and how he responded. 

Attorney-General, it is a known fact that recommendations of Parliament to the Executive are advisory; we do not determine for you who you want to assign responsibilities of implementation. When we say that someone has been found liable, in my own understanding, it is within your docket to know whether it should be the IGG to swing into action or the Police. That is not within the powers of Parliament; it is now your responsibility whether you want to begin eating the chicken from the head or the gizzard or the back, the meal is served to you as the Executive. You cannot expect us, as Parliament, to determine whether it should be the Police to swing into action on this day. Please, do not abdicate your responsibility. 

The clarification, therefore, that I am seeking from you is whether when we say that these recommendations are for the Executive to implement, you want us to set benchmarks in terms of who should implement and when and where to report. Is that the type of thing you expect from us when you are priding yourself that after all, these recommendations are advisory and not mandatory? 

Can you tell us what exactly you want us to do? Already, the two investigative arms have been involved - the documents are there – so, what more involvement do you want us to have? You were part of these discussions, and as a responsible agency there is nobody who has played a key role who has not been invited. Even the person you are saying is not here was not entertained only once but several times and even represented and accompanied by his legal counsel. What do you want us to do, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think that we are not contradicting each other. I think, as the former President of this country, Milton Obote, used to say, “We are at one with each other”. (Laughter) We are on the same page. 

All I am saying is: If you say that these other agencies have done their job, what have they done? When you say, “Now this matter is before Parliament and we must take action”, what are you going to do? Are you going to overturn a court order? That matter can only be handled by the Judicial Service Commission, for instance. If it is a question of indiscipline of a judge, for instance, this can be handled by referring the matter to them. If it is influence-peddling, you refer the matter to the IGG. 

What I am actually cautious about is to make a recommendation as though it were final in nature. If you said, for example, “I recommend that so-and-so should be prosecuted”, certainly you would be referring the matter for further investigation and the taking of necessary action, just for clarification.

Finally, the Office of the Attorney-General has a challenge; we have parastatal bodies, and this should be for the whole country. A parastatal body is a quasi-autonomous body in Government; it has powers to sue and to be sued in its own name. It has powers to represent itself in courts of law. However, parastatals which are not adequately facilitated in terms of personnel, for instance, in the legal department, always request the Attorney-General to represent them. So, for an organisation to come to the Attorney-General when things have been muddled up is also a challenge on the part of the Attorney-General. 

My call to our sister agencies and affiliated agencies is that if you want advice or representation in courts of law by the Attorney-General, please request for that advice before you go to court – from the beginning, ideally. But to reach mid-way and the matter is already muddled up and you find our state attorneys running here and there like headless chicken is not good at all. By the way, we are even sparsely staffed; we do not have that kind of capacity. 

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you for listening to me patiently. As for the recommendations, I have studied them and as I have already said, let us refer them to the appropriate agencies for further action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me summarise the issues and then you can make responses. The issue that is being raised is that we might be suggesting things in the recommendations that we should not be suggesting. I think that is the point which is being made here. 

When we go through the recommendations, which we should begin processing now since the debate is over, I want you to reflect on a few things. If you look at recommendation No.1, for example, it says, “Field operation director be held liable for causing financial loss.” Can Parliament hold somebody liable for the offence of causing financial loss and therefore impose a sanction? That is the point they are making; the point must not be lost in drafting what we are going to say.

Let us look at recommendation No.2: “Council be held liable for causing financial loss.” That is the same as the first one. 

Let me look at the third one: “Mr Fox Odoi be held liable for influence-peddling.” Can we hold hon. Fox Odoi liable for influence peddling? That is the question we must reflect on so that when we finally adopt the recommendations, it is proper. 

I am just looking at the drafting. Honourable members have agreed that these matters must be dealt with, but we do not want the drafting to kill it. Here you state, “BDS be asked to refund the US$ 1.9 million unjustifiably paid to it”. That was a court award; can we order for the reversal of a court order? Can we do that as Parliament? These are reflections that we need to make. 

Even the same applies here: “Byarugaba and Co. Advocates be held liable…” What do we mean by “be held liable”? It is this kind of phrasing, which is lacking. 

The last one is: “…be held liable for not exercising due diligence when the matter went to court”. We know what due diligence is, but I am just worried about the drafting. I think it is the same sentiment being expressed by the Attorney-General. Maybe, as we begin processing them, we should have these reflections so that we can capture the spirit of what we want to recommend rather than kill it in the drafting. 

6.24
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank everybody who has made a contribution towards this report. 

I want to start by making two general observations. First, our recommendations as Parliament are advisory to the Executive; so, nothing stops us from recommending and it is up to the Executive to take action or not. 

I say this because we seem to be moving towards a point where we fear to do our part to recommend to the Executive; after all, our recommendations are not self-executing. Even when they are adopted, someone must take action. We took decisions about money given to HABA, for example, to be recovered, but the Executive never recovered that money. We expect them to report back to Parliament through a treasury memorandum but we shall have done our part. 

Secondly, and most importantly, when the Attorney-General was speaking, he insinuated that we are dealing with a matter that was dealt with in court, therefore as Parliament, we may not have locus to deal with the matter. These issues were extensively raised by Mr Fox Odoi and the lawyers for BDS in the committee. However, since we were doing work on behalf of Parliament, we enlisted the services of our legal department. We forwarded to them a copy of the objections which had been raised and asked whether Parliament had the powers to deal with this matter. 

I beg to lay on the Table the letters written by Mr Fox Odoi and the lawyers objecting to the committee handling this matter. As a result of this letter, we wrote to the Director, Legal Department in Parliament, who responded by clearing us to deal with this matter. In particular, on the issue which is being raised by colleagues, I beg to read the response he gave on this. 

The issue was whether the committee has jurisdiction to investigate the matter and this is what he had to say: “Whereas Article 128 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the independence of the Judiciary and protects itself from being subjected from the control, direction of any person or authority especially in exercise of their judicial functions, nothing in the facts as we have understood them seems to suggest that PAC seeks to control or direct the Judiciary in the exercise of its judicial powers. 

Article 163 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates the Auditor-General to audit all expenditure of public funds and report to Parliament annually. The National Audit Act re-enforces the Constitution in similar terms. Parliament is required by the Constitution to debate the report of the Auditor-General and take appropriate action under Article 163(5). 

Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates Parliament to monitor the expenditure of public funds. 

Parliament has established the Public Accounts Committee pursuant of Article 90 of the Constitution and rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure to examine the audited accounts showing the appropriation of sums granted by Parliament towards public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. 

Beachside Development Services and its shareholders or officials were invited to appear before PAC in connection with audit queries reported by the Auditor-General in his report. The committee is interested in ascertaining the circumstances under which Beachside Development Services contracts with National Forestry Authority, which occasioned expenditure of huge sums of money, public funds, in damages was negotiated and later nullified. 

Whereas there appears to be a consent judgement apparently endorsed by court, the committee is not desirous of over-turning the decision of court; the committee is interested in establishing what went wrong, who is responsible, should anybody account for that nugatory expenditure…”

So, that was his legal counsel and he proceeded by advising us to proceed with this investigation. So, what we are doing in this matter is not to overturn anything. It is clear from the onset that someone in NFA wrote a chit. Whereas they had applied for a licence, someone, specifically the supervisor, wrote, with impunity, to Beachside Development Services Ltd. The chit reads as follows: “Beachside Development Services Ltd., start work on the site, the licence is being processed”. So, that is how these people started working and yet they were allocating the same land to a one Mushesha who was already engaged in eco-tree planting. 

These people had even paid Shs 6,000 as licence fees. They wrote a letter through their lawyer, as per the annexure, and demanded for a refund of the licence fees. National Forestry Authority wrote a cheque and paid back the licence fee to Beachside Development Services. They made a claim that they had actually built 50 chalets on the ground. We visited the ground and found nothing; we only found a fish pond, and yet these people went away with US$ 1 million. Therefore, there is someone who was actually behind this. 

So, as we delve into this matter, we are not seeking to overturn the count judgement because we are allied to the Constitution. When you read Article 126 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it creates duty – “Judicial power is derived from the people and shall be exercised by the courts established under this Constitution in the name of the people and in conformity with law and with the values, norms and aspirations of the people.” 

So, what are the aspirations of the people? Is it to lose tax-payers’ money? That is not the aspiration of the people. So, whereas we may not overturn the judgement, the people who were involved in this can be referred to some organ for appropriate action. If we do not, the same people will be appointed justices of the Court of Appeal and they will come to us for approval. However, once we have a basis, then we can challenge their appointment. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members have raised very many issues, but I would like to specifically respond to the one raised by hon. Balyeku. It is not true that we did not interface with a number of people. In our preamble, we list the people we interfaced with. So, for him to say that we have left out some people is not correct. 

Secondly, when it comes to Justice Raphael Ochan, it is true he was a director in the company and he held one share. Mr Twagira Charles, the director, appears before the committee and this is what he had to say: “In all this, I did not deal with Mr Raphael Ochan. We were dealing with Mr Fox Odoi and a one Baguma”. The reason he gave was that he was looking for influential people. He said that, “After being promised a deal for an eco-tourism lodge, I assembled a team of influential people, namely Fox Odoi, Mr Baguma…” He also indicated that he was looking for people with money and influence. This is the testimony of Mr Twagira Charles in the committee. He even indicated that when he went to him saying that, “we have a deal, why don’t we invest in this matter?” he refused. It is also indicated by Mr Twagira in the minutes of the committee. 

For us as Parliament, therefore, to say that we go for hon. Raphael Ochan because he had one share in the company when the people have confessed as to who actually participated and who was at the forefront, in my opinion would have actually been stretching too far. The people involved had been identified by the same people within the company.

Having said that, Mr Speaker- (Interjections) - 

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague. I seek clarification on this issue. At first, you said the recommendation you made is advisory to the Executive. Now, you have just said that Parliament is supposed to take appropriate action because it came from the Executive. Are we again recommending to the Executive? This is the clarification I seek. Thank you very much. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague. I did say that ours is to make recommendations and then it is the Executive to take appropriate action on these recommendations, which are not binding. Our recommendations as Parliament are not self-executing. Once we make them, it is up to the Executive to - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, for the purpose of the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I said something about the microphones. Please, respect that. Proceed.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a point of clarification?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, it is a point of clarification. Maybe the lawyers and the Attorney-General should help us on this because I think it will help us even in future. When you read Article 163 of the Constitution, the framers of the Constitution were clear; they said, “(4) The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this article for the financial year immediately preceding. 

(5)Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” 

The appropriate action which Parliament is mandated to take - not anybody else - is either to drop those queries or to recommend those queries, which are not answered, to the relevant agencies. This is not advisory. It is not! We are mandated by the Constitution to say, “Please go and do a,b,c,d.” 

That is why I agree with the learned Attorney-General that the recommendations that the Auditor-General prescribes to be dropped, it is Parliament to take appropriate action. The fair way to deal with it is for the relevant agencies to prosecute. You are saying in your report that there is a financial loss and action must be taken; who will take it? There is another arm of Government to deal with it. 

So, we cannot say that this is advisory to the Executive. No way! The people who are involved came from there and it is our constitutional mandate. So, as the Speaker guided, I think the most appropriate action should be, since there is a financial loss and there is a query, for Parliament to pronounce itself saying, “Relevant agencies, deal with this work.” That is all. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I think the words “appropriate action” are contextual and will depend on the depth of the user of the words. My understanding of the same would be that we can take appropriate action by recommending to Parliament - we recommend to the entire House to adopt so that this becomes a recommendation of the entire House. So, the issue we are dealing with here is that while there is a requirement for the Executive to respond - to come back to Parliament through a treasury memorandum - it is the Executive to take action on this matter. 

As a matter of procedure, in this committee, once we are satisfied, when there is evidence we can pronounce ourselves on the matter and we do not push it to the Executive again. What we push to the Executive, it is the Executive actually to take appropriate action. It cannot be us executing our own recommendations.

Having said that, there was an issue raised about the civil servants, but we seem not to be raising this matter. When it comes to the Attorney-General, in the annexes you have there is a letter which was written by Dr Khiddu Makubuya, copied to my good friend, hon. Ruhindi. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya was saying that the way this matter is, this is organised crime; it is fait accompli and as the Office of the Attorney-General, we shall not proceed to participate in these proceedings. 

In our opinion as a committee, we did not find it appropriate to hold the Attorney-General liable in this matter. However, if the entire House, in your wisdom, thinks we should, these recommendations of ours can be amended and we include it.  That is how it is. For us as a committee, we evaluated evidence and that was our finding.     
   
Lastly, when it came to the minister, the evidence to the committee about hon. Maria Mutagamba, our friend, was that yes, she visited the site as she did. However, other than that information being corroborated by very many people, we did not see where she personally participated other than visiting the site. That is why we mentioned that she used to visit this forest reserve at night with these people as it had been narrated to us as a committee. 

The committee report is not voluminous according to hon. Balyeku. If we were to include whatever has been gathered as a committee, then this Parliament would not have the capacity to go through this. One of the reasons as to why the report was being deferred was because Members were saying, “No there is a small report; let us start with the small report.” So, we included what is relevant but the rest can even be found in the Auditor-General’s report; it is included therein, and the Auditor-General did supply Parliament and each Member of Parliament with a copy of the queries of that financial year. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I would wish to implore colleagues that - (Interruption)

MR OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the chair of the committee to help me clarify this issue. He has just stated that the Attorney-General acknowledged that this was organised crime. The clarification I am seeking is: how did he then save Government? Was it enough for him to merely mention in his letter that this was organised crime without taking any action?

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the President did direct the Attorney-General, the chief legal advisor to Government. The Attorney-General defied the President and as the appointing authority he did nothing about this Attorney-General. That is why the Attorney-General wrote the letter is in the annexes, copy 27. He responded saying, “I acknowledge receipt of loose minute…”  He was writing to the Minister of Justice. Once the minister got the directive, he wrote to the Attorney-General for his input. He said, “I acknowledge receipt of the loose minute dated 5 November 2010 and signed by the Solicitor-General, Kasibayo Kosia (SA), on the above subject. The Attorney-General’s Chambers did not handle this litigation. National Forestry Authority had its own lawyers who handled the case. Your office was called in to handle a fait accompli…”, meaning something where people have already finished their game. “…Your positive response to attend a meeting should not be viewed as endorsing the manner in which the counsel hired by NFA handled the case. The crux of the matter is to minimise negative financial consequences to Government. 

Your office seems to have considered that Government will lose but lose less through a negotiated settlement. The Attorney-General’s Chambers cannot accept responsibility for the prior handling of the case and its consequences. 

I urge you to participate substantially in negotiating the settlement and push for optimal reduction of loss to Government on account of this case. I hope that this aspiration is fully accepted by the line ministry.” 

Just like I said, as a committee it would have been an oversight on our part. However, if in the wisdom of the entire House you think that on the basis of the Attorney-General not taking action on this matter, we can amend it and have that recommendation. It would then be up to the appointing authority, basing on the presidential directive, to take action on the Attorney-General. 

Finally, honourable colleagues, I know how contentious – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to pre-empt the submission of my friend and colleague. However, after my first submission, and with your intervention, Mr Speaker, I wish that the chairperson of the committee looks at this matter critically. 

In my first term in this Parliament, we went for orientation and we would go through the functions of Parliament. The key functions, as I recall, are the functions that we do or exercise - legislative, representation, institutional and oversight. What we are doing here is principally oversight. We are like whistle-blowers in a sense. 

Why is it that the Auditor-General reports to Parliament? The Auditor-General does not actually report to Parliament so that Parliament should take up all the other functions of the other agencies of Government and take action. Certainly, that would not be constitutional. They report to us simply because it would be vanity of all vanities, for instance, if you heard that the Auditor-General reports to the Ministry of Finance. That is why they report to us as Parliament and we look at the recommendations. 

Why don’t they take final action themselves? It is because if they were to take final action, the Constitution would have given them those powers. However, they come here so that we look at their recommendations and we re-establish whether there is a prima facie case to be followed up - is there something that needs to be further looked at? 

So, for us to say in our finality – for instance, when you say that Justice Murangira be referred to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action, it means that you have actually more or less made your judgment. Certainly – (Interruption) – hon. Wafula Oguttu, I am not wasting time, it is critical. 

You cannot say, “I am referring Justice Murangira to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action”. You instead say, “Based on the evidence we have received, we recommend that the Judicial Service Commission in its mandate takes further action on this person.” The other way is to take disciplinary action. Mr Speaker, that is my view. You cannot say he is hereby declared liable and you recommend to another organization, which has got investigative powers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think these issues are clear. The question that is now being asked is: what should go in the drafting of the recommendations? Member for Lira Municipality, you have not yet contributed on the debate; I will allow you.

MR AKENA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am worried that I may not be at par with my colleague from Nakawa. What should occur is a situation where we are dealing with semantics. I wonder whether the lawyers can take off their legal minds and help us because the key issue, which I think the people of Uganda want, is justice. 

From the way this case was handled, clearly there was some legal gymnastics. Although there was a judgment, to any right thinking sober Ugandan, that was not justice on behalf of the people of Uganda. As the chairman mentioned, there was either criminal conspiracy or a criminal mafia element. To those of us who are lay people, justice is between right and wrong. Legally, it can mean something else, and we appreciate that. 

I appreciate the last point the hon. Attorney-General made in wording it better, but let us not lose the substance. We are all crying for justice and there is clearly a case of corruption somewhere involved in this whole matter. So, I am just appealing that if it is a question of better language, let the lawyers help us but let us not lose the substance and then we can remain one as far as fighting corruption is concerned in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for all these constitutional institutions, there is always an overriding provision - they shall not be subject to anybody’s direction or authority. They will not be subjected to the direction or control of any person or authority. So, in making these references to these categories of institutions, we should not be making directives which would be against the Constitution. We should leave it within their mandate. 

We should make recommendations to them so that they take action but we should not direct them. When you have already concluded and you have made a finding of fact that somebody is liable and so take action, you are directing that they are liable, so take them to prison or something like that. –(Interjection)- Well, you believe, but that is your finding. You have said, “Based on the facts we have established from this Parliament, please take appropriate action and deal with this matter.” These are our findings, so that it is a recommendation in that sense. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I agree entirely, that these are recommendations and the Executive may take them or leave them. However, my concern is that increasingly, when oversight committees of Parliament are making recommendations which are in effect to the Executive, we seem to be overstretching the latitude and leverage Parliament has in making these. I think what we do not seem to be discussing is the unwritten law of the resolve and the will to fight this vice of corruption. 

Nothing stops the Executive from acting against a public servant even when a Parliament inquiry is going on, if there is a will. Nothing stops the other arms of Government - the Police, IGG – from doing parallel investigations if there are concerns. But we spend a lot of time saying Parliament’s recommendations are advisory. I am really getting disturbed. 

I would like to request that we do not adulterate committee reports so much and threaten committees even to the drafting level. There are also now Executive members beginning to take advantage of this to kill committee reports at that preliminary stage. 

I think as Parliament, as an advocate of separation of powers and providing checks balances, we would really want to appeal to the Executive to respect Parliament committee reports. You go to the Executive, where we do not sit, and act on those resolutions the way that you want, but to try and adulterate is not good parliamentary practice. You are killing Parliament. I would like to advise that you really try as much as possible, if you have the will to fight the vice, to act at Executive level and not here on the Floor of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now go to the first recommendation and then we deal with it, because I think that we have discussed enough. 

MR OBOTH: I have been touched by the contribution from the honourable from Kibaale – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Buliisa.

MR OBOTH: Buliisa. The three strands of Government that are all known to us are Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. The Judiciary, established under Article 126, exercises the power for and on behalf of the people of Uganda. Would it not be appropriate now for us to start questioning ourselves as to why Parliament, which does the same, whatever they say is merely advisory but the Judiciary is not advisory. If they asked the Chief Whip today - God forbid - to leave the House, the Executive will have no option.

Maybe, we should question the rationale. We represent the people. Is it because the mandate capacity of Members of Parliament who are here are not able to process through decisions? I thought that was quite intriguing, but that is not for today but maybe for the future. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us process the recommendations now. I think we have had enough discussions on this subject. Please, bear the advice that was rendered at the back of your mind when we are making these resolutions, so that we do not do things that are not necessary.

“1. Mr Rueben Arinaitwe, the Range Manager and Mr Ruhombe, the Field Operations Director, be held liable for causing financial loss by authorising Beachside Services to carry out the purported eco-tourism within a forest reserve without a licence.” 

Is “be held liable” okay? You see, as presiding officer, I also have a reputation to protect. They will say it passed under my hand that Parliament held somebody liable for causing financial loss. Parliament held somebody liable. Does Parliament have the authority to hold people liable for causing financial loss? Can we draft it better saying the same thing?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We are saying Mr Arinaitwe and Mr Ruhombe be held liable. I think it is only court that can hold somebody liable for committing an offence.  

I think what we can possibly do is recommend that the appropriate organ - I do not  know whether it will be the DPP or whatever institution - should take up this matter and establish the culpability with the view of prosecuting this person. I think it would be unconstitutional for this Parliament to ask – (Interjections)

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not a lawyer but a paralegal. From my 20 years as an officer of court and the little training I did in law, I am not a lawyer but a paralegal. I want to seek legal clarification from the learned hon. Stephen Tashobya.

Many times when we read charge sheets, where charges are preferred by the Police for litigation in courts of law, they say, “so and so be found liable for causing financial loss”. This is a charge sheet; the Police have not condemned or judged you but they now leave that to court to go and prove whether you really caused a financial loss or not. But how do the charge sheets read? Advise us whether what I am citing is wrong in as far as formulation of charge sheets is concerned.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, hon. Kassiano Wadri. First of all, I am not very sure how many charge sheets you have seen, but we are actually agreeing that it should be the Police to prefer a charge. It cannot be Parliament to prefer the charge. That is why we are saying that the appropriate organ should investigate and if – (Interjections) - Then why did they not go to court? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General had proposed that we say, “referred”. Of course, one would imagine that judges normally go to the Judicial Service Commission as a matter of courtesy; all those that they refer there would have actually engaged in some form of indiscipline. 

However, the point we are making is that they should be held liable. I think we need to first start by defining what the meaning of that phrase is before we start saying that it is correct or not – (Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. When According to the Advanced English Dictionary, the word “liable” means “Subject to legal action”. That is the information that I want to give you.

MR MWIRU: What we are actually saying, Mr Speaker, is that according to the evidence we have heard, the documents we have, to us there is a prima facie case made against these officers. 

By this officer writing on a chit saying, “Please proceed and start construction” without a licence, we are saying that the Executive should interest itself in this. It is now up to the Executive to either – 

As I said, Mr Speaker, as a committee we would have no objection to what hon. Ruhindi said, that we refer this to the Judicial Service Commission because people do not go there to visit; so we would have no problem with that. We are agreeable to amendments that do not dilute the meaning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, on number 1, is there any amendment? 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to amend –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To propose an amendment.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to propose an amendment by echoing the words we have alluded to. I trust your guidance because the moment we investigate as Parliament and then you bring a report and then you say, “held liable for causing financial loss”, that means that you are passing a judgement. – (Interjections) - Let me make my submission. When we listen to each other, we shall find a way forward. 

It clicked in my mind that we had the same case in the reports we made earlier, which were challenged in court. As Parliament, if we have done investigations and there is a case, are we to turn ourselves and pass a judgment on these people? When you say “financial loss”, automatically that is a judgment in terms of finances. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I think we need to correct something. It is true we formed an opinion and it is our judgment in as far as this is concerned. That is why we are saying that since our recommendations are not self-executing, we are recommending to the Executive to take action. The Executive can either take action or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just make a suggestion. What you are saying is that by authorising Beachside Services to carry out the purported eco-tourism within a forest reserve without a licence, a breach was committed and the people responsible should be held accountable. Isn’t that what you are saying?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker, that is what I am saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the responsible institutions should do the processing of holding them accountable. 

MR MWIRU: I concede to that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue here is that there was authority given to people to carry out activities without a licence and that is a breach. Those who are responsible should be held accountable and appropriate action be taken against them.

MR KABAJO: Whereas I do agree with the way you have put it, I would say that by doing what they did, a breach was committed, which led to financial loss and, therefore, they should be held accountable. We should also, in that sentence, make it clear that their breach led to financial loss and that they, therefore, should be held accountable. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: The problem is the two words “accountable” and “liable”. I still feel the word “liable” is better, because what are we aiming at and what is our mandate? We want to recommend, upon our findings, that legal action is taken. “Liable” may mean somebody is held responsible and liable to criminal charges. That is what we want to use.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I fully appreciate the dilemma that this Parliament finds itself in in executing its role as an accountability institution. I really would not find any reason not to use the wording, “be held liable” because it is not Parliament finding those people liable; this is still very advisory within the mandate of Parliament. 

In any case, the committee of Parliament, under Article 90, has some powers of a quasi-court. They have made findings of fact, which in their opinion would be able to advise the other arm of Government. It is now the duty of the other side.

Mr Speaker, I really do not see anybody who would think that we are overstepping. A duck is a duck by whatever name you call it. Whatever quacks like a duck must be a duck -(Laughter) Mr Speaker, I know you are a very polite man and you are leading us to be very polite, but I would be glad to find an equivalent word for being liable. 

Liability is liability, and I am at pains because this involves one of my uncles. However, if Parliament will start now modifying and re-modifying, we are in trouble; we shall lose the teeth, we shall lose the hand and we shall lose the head.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can I put the question to this? I put the question to the original text in recommendation No. 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation 2: “Mr Peter Muloba, the NFA in-house legal counsel, be held liable for causing financial loss. He overrode his junior’s opinion, bypassed the board of management, agreed and entered into a non-existent consent judgment on behalf of NFA.” I put the question 

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, for the record, I have not known anywhere where a senior is punished for ignoring the opinion of his junior. The reverse should be true. Can we find an alternative? 

MR NADALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, a senior will always be right. Here, the only crime he committed was bypassing the board of management, but not ignoring the junior. The junior can do something that in your opinion is not right. I think we only delete the junior and leave “bypassed the board of management, agreed and entered into a non-existent consent judgment”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The consent judgment might be wrong but does it not exist?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, with his help, I would redraft and say “…for causing financial loss when he ignored the board of management, agreed and entered into…” As for “non-existent”, you cannot enter into a consent judgment which has not existed. In any case, I would find the same wording here very redundant if you are saying it was non-existent. Maybe the chair can help us. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you. The point we are making is that the junior was acting on the advice of the board and the senior took a decision disregarding the position of the board. 

On the issue of the consent judgement, the counsel who was handling the matter, Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka, insisted that she never signed any consent and yet the senior counsel was actually defending the consent, which the committee did not see but it was the basis of the award. I think we can remove “non-existent” because it is consent and we - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I think the major thrust of this issue at hand is the fact that this was a non-negotiated consent judgement. When there is a consent judgement, it means the two parties must agree before they come before the adjudicating authority, but here was a situation where there was no negotiation whatsoever. A paper was just brought that this is the consent judgement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, there was a consent judgement; non-negotiated but it existed. Can somebody improve on that?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the place of “non-existent consent judgement” could we say that he entered into an illegal consent judgement on behalf of the NFA? We can use the word “illegal” since that consent judgement was not agreed to by the parties who were supposed to have agreed to it, in the opinion of the committee. So, can we refer to it as an illegal consent judgement, as an improvement? Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, what we need to appreciate is that when the parties appeared before court, facts were narrated to the counsel for NFA and she disputed all the facts. The judge proceeded to record, by consent of the parties, when the counsel was actually objecting. She had forwarded a draft with the terms to counsel for BDS, which terms were rejected by NFA. So they took it by consent of parties and they took that direction. So, for you to call it “illegal” - Once it was executed by court, it cannot be illegal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem with what the chairperson has just said is if the counsel objected before the judge and the judge went ahead and still recorded that there was consent, how does the senior man, Mr Muloba, become liable for entering that consent judgement?

MR MWIRU: The point we are making is that there was a first and second draft. Even when counsel was contesting that in court there was never such consent, counsel proceeded to sign on another consent, which the counsel who was handling the matter did not accept or did not agree to the terms. So, there is no way that someone who did not handle the matter would come and pronounce himself and say this is the consent, which was signed in that regard.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need to get to the crux of the matter. As far as I understand, it looks like the committee is saying that this was unauthorised consent. You cannot say you entered into a non-existent consent judgment because once you enter into it, then it exists, and you only enter into it by signing. 

If I understand the chairperson, the senior counsel signed this judgement without authority from the NFA. So whether it was irregular or illegal, the point to be made is lack of authority. We are impugning him for doing that act without authority from the board.

I would suggest that we just say “without authority, entering into a consent judgement on behalf of the NFA”. I hope that sorts out the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Without authority, agreed and entered into the consent judgement on behalf of the NFA.” That is the amendment. Is that okay? Can we approve that amendment first? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to recommendation 2 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation 3: “Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi be held liable for influence peddling and BDS be asked to refund US$ 1.9 million unjustifiably paid to it.” 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I think this is what I alluded to before. This case was before court; is this Parliament therefore going to reverse that order of the court? If not, the best way to do it is, since the evidence is coming from the committee, to say that, “Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi be investigated by the relevant agencies and prosecuted”. 

The justification is that, even when the President wrote and indicated that there was something wrong, these people went ahead. So, if there is any review - I am just sceptical about whether we can reverse a court order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I raised a concern here that by saying BDS is asked to refund, in essence you are nullifying a court order. Can we do that?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I think this is a tricky situation. Even at committee level, there was a very heated argument. We take decisions as a committee, but I think we may need to redraft it because the effect of this is what you had alluded to. I can accept an amendment and see how we can modify it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to propose an amendment. One, that Mr Twagira and Mr Fox Odoi be held liable for influence peddling. Two, they be held liable for the loss of US$ 1.9 million because there was influence peddling. 

We are bringing them in because they are board members of that company. We are doing that because we are trying to remove the veil. Fox Odoi is a board member of BDS and we are saying that their influence peddling led to the loss of US$ 1.9 million and they used the company as a conduit to get the money. 

I, therefore, propose that Mr Twagira, Mr Fox Odoi and Mr Raphael Ochan - because he is one of the board members - be held liable for influence peddling and causing financial loss of US$ 1.9 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is Mr Twagira? What is influence peddling as a crime? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As both chairpersons of the committee alluded, I think the way this was worded is problematic. First of all, the issue of refund does not arise because there is a judgement and judgement is property in law. For Parliament to make a resolution and literally reverse a judgement would not look neat. 

I just want to give information to the Leader of the Opposition that causing financial loss would apply to employees of NFA. Both Twagira and Odoi are directors or shareholders of BDS.

What I would suggest, Mr Speaker, is that if this judgment was improperly obtained, like we have found out in No. 2, then we would have proposed for NFA - (Interjections) - You do not appeal because it is already a consent judgement but you can apply for its review – to advise NFA to apply for the review of the consent judgment. The lawyers can always have a way around it, time barred or not, because that would make the logical consequence of this. 

If the judgment is reviewed and we have good grounds for review as we have seen in No. 2, then this money is recoverable because it only accrued as a result of the judgement. 

So, if we can propose under No. 3, although I am yet to see the drafting going on – Or we could have a consensus that NFA should consider reviewing the consent judgment they entered into for purposes of eventual – (Interjection) - but I am talking about the second part; BDS has to refund. I do not think that one is the problem. 

I am talking about this one that as it is now, it does not make any sense to me. So, NFA should consider applying for the review of the consent judgement obtained without authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The first bit stays the way it is - the issue about influence peddling? I asked who Twagira is and whether a private person can do influence peddling under the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What we are raising here is that Mr Fox Odoi was in office. We are confusing things here; he is now a Member of Parliament and so, he is hon. Odoi but by then, he was Mr Odoi. He was in State House and BDS is his company. So, Twagira linked up with Mr Fox Odoi, according to the minutes, to influence so that he is able to get the land and he got it. 

What Mr Odoi did was to use his company, where he incorporated Twagira. So, I think here, first there is influence peddling and even causing financial loss – (Interjections)- or stealing, maybe because he used his office to make sure that this money is stolen in one way or the other, using his company. 


I think the recommendation should say, “…be held liable for influence peddling and abuse of office.” (Interjections) Yes, he abused his office. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, let me give some facts – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me first deal with the bit, which was agreed already. Can we adopt that amendment so that the text can be captured properly, then we come to the first part? I cannot recollect exactly what was stated but it was that NFA should consider applying for review of a consent judgment. Was that the text?

MS SSENTONGO: I would like to seek clarification from the Shadow Attorney-General. If we have negated the consent judgement by saying it was not authentic, how do we bring it here again by calling for its review? We seem to be contradicting ourselves. I have a problem there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the consent judgement is already a judgement. Somebody has got to say that it is not judgment. That process that leads to someone else saying it is not judgment is the review and it is through court. That is what is being done in No.3 now.

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It looks like NFA and Mr Fox Odoi and the company had connived to make it easy for them to win this case. So, can’t we get another organ - maybe government - to now take this up, because NFA is an agent of government? Can government take the responsibility to ask for the review other than asking NFA which we are suspicious of?  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just thinking about the phrasing of that recommendation. I think it is even better, with the ideas from my honourable colleague, that somebody else applies for the review. 

The initial framing was to the effect that “NFA considers”. We were still giving NFA the leverage to wander around and it may not consider it necessary to apply. So, maybe we would have got more from a framing that gives a directive to NFA to apply for review. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, in essence, you need grounds to apply for review. So, that is the consideration the Shadow Attorney-General is making. You cannot just say, “I am going to seek review” and then you do it. You need good grounds to do that. So, that is the consideration, I think. 

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought we had put grounds in recommendation 2, and I was thinking more in line that NFA should seek to recover the US$ 1.9 million. They can do it possibly by applying for review, but I will take the point which the honourable member from Yumbe raised, that it may not be NFA to apply if there is a possibility that the Attorney-General can apply for the review. 

However, what we really want here is for the organ which lost the money to try its level best to recover it; or since the money was under the care of the government, the government should try to recover the US$ 1.9 million, rather than dealing with BDS. Wouldn’t it be appropriate for us in this recommendation to put it to NFA? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him respond to the amendment. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, law is a very funny animal. National Forestry Authority is a government institution, but it is also corporate - it sues and it is sued in its own name. The Attorney-General is also corporate. 

The Attorney-General was not party to the suit. You cannot go to court to overturn a judgement where you are not party. So, it is only NFA that was taken to court or went to court that can take a decision. The Attorney-General was not party to this case. There is no way he will go to court. He is actually a stranger on this case. 

MR KAKOOZA: Listening to the contributions, I would think that maybe Parliament can recommend to the IGG to get interested in what is provided in this report. Otherwise, I find this recommendation very redundant. We can have a Severino case all over again because now Parliament is coming back to say, “Please, turn around”. 

The best we can do is that we propose a review by maybe the IGG or any other relevant organ, as hon. Katuntu put it. To assert ourselves and say that Fox Odoi and Twagira must do this after a court pronounced itself, I find that very difficult. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, you should help us with this. Who can be guilty of influence peddling under the IGG law? 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have all agreed that there was influence peddling, from the facts as I read them and as conceded by Mr Charles Twagira, when he said that they asked him to get influential people. So he got people who have got money and influence. 

However, we are saying that as of then, hon. Fox Odoi used his office as Presidential Advisor on Legal Affairs, and he was also acting like a director in his company. For us to say that he should be held liable for influence peddling – It is now the Executive to decide where to lay this matter of influence peddling. Should it be taken to the IGG or not? The Executive is now going to take action in that respect. 

On our part, we have shown them that there is evidence of influence peddling. We will give them minutes of the confession of Mr Twagira, where he said what actually it happened, and then the Executive can take action on that. 

The IGG had dealt with this same matter already and halted the process as per the letter attached to the report, but these people went ahead and proceeded to transact this matter. So, it should be the Executive to decide what direction they want to take. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, how do you want to frame the last bit of the last paragraph? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the first one was that, “Mr Twagira and Mr Odoi be held liable for influence peddling”. The second one was as proposed by the Shadow Attorney-General – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that finally confirmed? 

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker, it is confirmed because Parliament cannot overturn a court order. What we can do is to recommend to the entity to interest itself to see whether it can succeed in reviewing the award. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, NFA should consider seeking a review of the consent judgement. Is that how it is? Hon. Katuntu, can you restate your amendment for the record.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I suggest, “NFA should consider applying for a review of the consent judgment obtained without authority.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question to that judgment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to recommendation 3 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next one is on 4: “Counsel Byarugaba of Byarugaba and Co. Advocates be held liable and referred to the Law Council for disciplinary action for signing on a decree on a matter which he did not have instructions to handle purporting to be Molly Kyepaaka Karuhanga”. 

MR KATUNTU: Well, it is all about doing things in the correct way. My view is that we should not make a resolution in vain. You have to make a resolution which can be implemented. You can have a very beautifully worded resolution which is actually redundant. 

So, if we pass it as stated here, who will be the complainant to the Law Council? Will Parliament go and give evidence against him? A Law Council case is like a case in court; there should be a complainant and you have to go through testimonies and so on. 

If there is a lawyer who is in breach of professional ethics, you need to have a complainant. The complainant in this case should be NFA. National Forestry Authority should be able to refer this case and go and prosecute its case. 

As it is here, it is redundant; it will end here and none of us in the committee will go there every week whenever they are sitting to prosecute this. It could even come up when some members of the committee are no longer members of that committee. 

I, therefore, suggest that we should ask the NFA to refer the conduct of Mr Byarugaba, of Byarugaba and Co. Advocates, to the Law Council for disciplinary action.
 
MR MURANGA: We have all along been talking about Byarugaba signing a consent judgement, but you are now bringing in a decree. Are you now referring to a decree or consent?

MR MWIRU: From the judgment, we extract a decree, which is a summary of the judgment. You see, this lady, Molly Karuhanga, is actually very bitter that counsel Byarugaba signed purporting to be Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka. The IGG actually caused her arrest as a result of this.  

So, if you say that NFA should handle this, they will not go anywhere. She also wants to be cleared. The decree has her name, but the signature is not hers, and she was willing to come and appear before the committee. 

If we say Government should handle this, then the Executive should make efforts to get in touch with her, because she is willing to come and give evidence to clear her name. She lost her job at NFA over this matter. 

THE DEPUT SPEAKER: Usually, a consent judgment is also the decree. So, it is a consent judgment/decree because the two parties will sign and then the judge. So, are we saying that what we passed in 2 is different from what is being discussed in 4? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, it is different in a sense that the other one was just the consent and then they extracted the decree arising out of the consent. That is how it was handled. Someone who is not Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka appends a signature as Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, she is not even the one who signed the consent judgement?

MR MWIRU: No, it was a new counsel whom they even disowned. He had no instructions to represent NFA in court. He signed on a decree yet he was not the person whose name is on the decree. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I see now is that Mr Fox Odoi and his team committed a criminal act, because they even forged a consent judgement. They forged a decree, got money and he is even the chairman of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline in Parliament-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have dealt with hon. Fox Odoi in 3. Here, they are talking about Counsel Byarugaba who signed on the decree.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I say this because the eventual beneficiary of this money was hon. Fox Odoi; so, he wanted all the wrong things written. He is really terrible. Therefore, what we have to add here is that hon. Fox Odoi was involved in forgery and we should really – (Interjections) - I would propose – I have even forgotten the proposal, but let me draft my amendment here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please; this is a document, which will speak for itself. It is a decree. The signatures on the decree have been elaborated; there is a Byarugaba and then there is a judge on the decree. Now, how do you bring Fox Odoi in a decree? We do not want to lose the gist of this- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the person who was the biggest beneficiary in this was hon. Fox Odoi who wanted – (Interjections) – Yes, there could be others, but the subject matter was raised by hon. Fox Odoi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is not in No. 4, honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, as much as we have charged him there for influence peddling, we must also charge him here for forgery. It is a serious matter, Mr Speaker.
 
MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the point here is about an advocate who appeared in court and actually said he did not have instructions to handle this matter. Here, they extract a decree and put Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka’s name to execute it and she refuses. These people then get the decree, go to this lawyer and he signs as Molly Karuhanga Kyepaaka. So, with due respect to my boss, the Leader of the Opposition, this matter is about the lawyer; it is not about Fox Odoi. Here, it is purely about this person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need amendments; clarifications are not going to help us. If it is not clear here, please suggest an amendment.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, this is a fraudulent act and taking this counsel to the Law Council does not help us. They will discipline him alright, but this is a fraudulent act. This person should be jointly held liable with the company that took the money and actually together with Justice Murangira. 

I propose that we say, “NFA should refer the conduct of Counsel Byarugaba of Byarugaba and Co. Advocates to the Law Council for disciplinary action with a view to have him be jointly held liable for the loss of US$ 1.6 million.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is the Law Council; this is not a court. This is the Law Council, which deals with professional matters of the advocates. Please, let us not overload this thing; we will lose what we want to say.          

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I have a different opinion. In this case, I agree with the shadow Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu. From the explanation of the chairman, he says that the person who is aggrieved is Ms Molly Karuhanga. If this Molly Karuhanga had been interested in referring this issue to the Law Council, she would have done so a long time ago. So, I think Parliament is wasting its time on this particular recommendation. We should just strike it out and we proceed- (Interjections) – Yes! 

The aggrieved person had the opportunity - how many years ago since these things occurred? She had opportunity, Mr Speaker. Are we going to sit here as Parliament and say that we are recommending that Molly Kyepaaka Karuhanga is referred to the Law Council -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: NFA  

MR KABAJO: No, because the person aggrieved is not NFA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is NFA.
 
MR RUHINDI: Just one or two things. One, Mr Speaker, I think we should not look at Ms Molly Karuhanga in her personal capacity because whatever transaction she was carrying out was being carried out in the names of NFA. Therefore, the aggrieved party is NFA. 

Two, it is not that I have anything to do with the Leader of the Opposition in this matter or hon. Fox Odoi, but when you talk about fraud, you are really talking about a crime. Normally, in criminal law - you are a lawyer - a crime is personal. There must be evidence, and it is for the chairperson of the committee to verify whether there was any evidence to link this fraud to hon. Fox Odoi. In other words, in a crime, you must certainly establish the mens rea and the actus reus - the act and the intent. They go together in a crime. 

Now, the chairperson of the committee should actually clarify the issue we are raising. Does the evidence he received link hon. Fox Odoi to the fraud? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I will pronounce myself on this matter. I am doing it for the second time. I said that in as far as the decree is concerned, it was actually being handled by the counsel for BDS. He drafted a decree and sent it to NFA. Now, NFA’s Molly Karuhanga sees it and she refuses to sign it. These people in NFA then look for someone whom they had given instructions - who had even disowned them in this matter – and he signs on the decree yet he did not actually handle the matter. 

Molly Kyepaaka lost her job because the presidential directive was worded in such a way that action should be taken on all those officials in NFA who participated. Because her name was on the decree, whoever got this directive took action on her and she lost the job without even being heard.  

So, she actually looked at the decree and realised that whereas her name is there, the signature is not hers. This is why we are saying, in her personal capacity, she would not force NFA to take a decision on this matter. Just like those were her bosses, they would not move on anything. That is why we are saying that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But was the signature that of Byarugaba? 

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did he agree that it was his signature. 

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker. Even other documents, which he had signed-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. What I am saying is, did he accept that that was his signature?

MR MWIRU: No, he did not, but that was his signature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have forensic evidence that he was the one who signed it?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker. He had written some correspondences to NFA and when these people looked at it, they all agreed that the signature was for that person. What we were doing as Parliament is to refer this matter –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is, supposing he says that signature of his was forged? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, if he says it was forged, of course, people would be interested in who was in possession of that document and that now would be the work of the Police.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, if I do anything purporting to be the Attorney-General, if I write any document and I sign it, purporting to be hon. Fred Ruhindi, I will be prosecuted. I am wondering: is there anything that protects lawyers by virtue of their profession, so that if they engage in just the same thing - authoring a document purporting to be somebody else - just because they are lawyers we cannot convey them to the Police for further investigation? What seems to be giving us a challenge here is that the preferred action is just a referral to the Law Council. What about if we treated Byarugaba like any other Ugandan and we said here that for forging that signature, let us convey Byarugaba, the Ugandan, to the Police to investigate why he forged somebody’s signature. Would that help us out of this dilemma?

MR KAKOOZA: According to the explanation, actually it was in this Byarugaba and Co. Advocates’ that there was unethical conduct and it must be approved by relevant agencies. I think what we should do now, since Molly Kyepaaka Karuhanga was working in NFA then NFA should take it upon itself to complain to the relevant agencies, so that this case is investigated. They even  lost money.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think recommendation No. 4 has a problem. From what is transpiring, Mr Byarugaba never even appeared before the committee; so, to conclusively recommend for action without having heard from Mr Byarugaba and ascertained that this is actually what happened, or to believe this Molly, will be a problem. So, I think the suggestion is that you need a lot of investigation about this. 

The resolution should be about an investigation on this, to ascertain who actually signed. If Ms Molly Kyepaaka Karuhanga says, “That is not my signature, it was signed by Mr Byarugaba” and for some reason - maybe an oversight - he did not come to give his side of the story, you cannot believe Ms Molly Karuhanga. 

So, I suggest that the Police should investigate the circumstances under which the decree was signed, purportedly by Mr Byarugaba, on behalf of Ms Molly Karuhanga.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I seek clarification from the shadow Attorney-General. We have earlier on recommended that NFA should consider reviewing this consent judgment. Now we are saying that the Police should come in. What would be the action during the review that we proposed earlier? Are we not repeating ourselves in this? I want to say that the recommendation now in No. 4 is a bit redundant; it has already been made redundant by what we resolved earlier on.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier, I tried to distinguish between the consent judgment, which we are reviewing, and the decree. We are now dealing with the decree. (Interjections) We are dealing with the decree. The two are separate and distinct, so there is no contradiction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do we adopt the amendment made by the hon. Katuntu? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to recommendation No. 4 as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation 5: “Justice Murangira be referred to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action based on his role in- a) awarding damages not pleaded in the plaint filed in court; 
b) alluding to the consent, which was never executed in the awarding of the said damages; 
c) not having visited the locus but awarding damages for 50 chalets, which were never built; 
d) awarding US$ 1,020,186 for loss of user rights yet there was no licence; and 
e) letting his draft judgment find its way with counsel for the plaintiff and later ordering it to be photocopied for each party to have a copy.”

Is there any other amendment?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with all the provisions but add that “and be held jointly liable with BDS for the loss of US$ 1.6 million.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the Judicial Service Commission, and judicial officers have immunities. Would it be very problematic if you stopped at the first paragraph and only add “in the transaction relating to the judgement in that case”, instead of listing (a) to (e), so that the Judicial Service Commission now would have facts tabled?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what you are saying is right but we could say, “…based on, among others…” because the Judicial Service Commission could discover more, including the one that my sister is raising. Let us say these are the few we have quoted and then there are others, which could easily come up in this matter.

So, I propose as follows: “Justice Murangira be referred to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action, based on, among others, the following…” We can then go on to list (a) up to (e), so that we take care of what my sister is raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am conscious of one thing; once you have a parliamentary report and it does not conform to the law, you give chance for somebody to impeach it. Whatever we do and say and resolve must be strictly in compliance with the law, such that nobody will have a chance tomorrow to impeach a report.

What hon. Kamateeka is proposing is not possible, and I will tell you why. The Judicial Service Commission cannot try BDS, but that is the amendment. So, you need now to look at what we call the mandate of the Judicial Service Commission. What are the grounds upon which you can refer a judicial officer to the Judicial Service Commission?

I just need to go through all this, so that we appreciate it. You see, not any mistake a judge makes in a decision is referable to the Judicial Service Commission because the law actually grants judicial officers – (Interjections) - not discretion but immunity and to make mistakes. That is why a judge of the High Court can make a mistake and the only remedy that you have is to refer that matter to an appellant court. When it is reviewed and they say that the judge erred in law and fact, that is not necessarily a case of the Judicial Service Commission. 

If I can have the Constitution, the crimes clearly spelt out should be:
    1. Unethical behaviour. The unethical behaviour should be clear; for example, you cannot say awarding damages not pleaded and so on. That cannot be a referable case to the Judicial Service Commission. It cannot be. 

Part (b) is about alluding to the consent that was never executed in the awarding of the said damages. I think if you look at part (e), it says, “letting his draft judgment find its way with counsel for the plaintiff and later ordering it to be photocopied for each party to have a copy.”
That is unethical. That is purely unethical because one party is trying to benefit or is colluding. This can be investigated because that is unethical. 

Part (d) says, “Awarding US$ 1,020,186 for loss of user rights yet there was no licence” It borders; we need to go further, in my view, to show that actually, this award –(Interjection)- It is not about wrongly because you see, judges do that literally on a daily basis, and practising lawyers will tell you. They award damages that are not correct literally on a daily basis in the courts of law and on appeal, they overturn them. 

So, my view about this, and I really plead with the chairperson of the committee, is that we can look at it and redraft it to show the real unethical behaviour. The wording should really be different, not to say that he awarded this, because those are ordinary in judgements. What we could do is to investigate, given the circumstances - unfortunately, I must confess that I have not read the entire report – because you see, eventually, what will go to the Judicial Service Commission would be the resolution. 

I wanted us to sit and reword the complaint that we have such that it alludes to unethical behaviour and not to impinge details of the judgement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I propose something, which may help? By saying that Justice Murangira be referred, you are not saying who should refer. There is an aggrieved person arising from the purported unethical conduct of the judge, and that is NFA. It would be NFA to make this because it is NFA that is aggrieved by the purported unethical conduct of the judge. 

Somebody should be able to make this referral, because here you are saying that Justice Murangira be referred but referred by whom? So, I was just saying that it might be better to go there and just stop at “for his conduct in the handling of this case” and then NFA would be able to adduce the details of what is there. 


MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I intended to give information to hon. Katuntu but I did not get an opportunity. 

You see, what we want to observe here, and if I have not forgotten because I am a member of this committee, this judge was part of the fraud. That is what we need to indicate here openly. When you see how the events occurred, it is a fact. That is why you see all this awarding and everything. He was part of the fraud and that is unethical. If we can relay that there, then we make a good recommendation on him and then you can refer it to the Judicial Service Commission. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just say this; the recommendation we are going to pass is not the complaint to the Judicial Service Commission. No, it is not the complaint itself. The complaint is going to be raised by somebody else drafting and sent there. That is where the details will come. So, this is not the document where you say, “these are the grounds that Parliament has sent to you”. We are not sending this to the Judicial Service Commission.                   

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right. We are now trying to see about the conduct of the judge. However, if you look at page 16, even the President had directed the Attorney-General to take this man to the Judicial Service Commission but the Attorney-General kept quiet. Now here, if we refer to the Attorney-General again, he could even keep quiet further and this man cannot be – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is NFA the one aggrieved, really.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you read the letter, –(Interjection)- it says -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not on record, learned Attorney-General. (Laughter)                   

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I would like to partly agree with hon. Katuntu in respect to (a), (b) and (d). We are trying to give particulars. When it comes to the consent judgement with advance counsel, it is brought to the attention of the judge and he says, “yes, let them photocopy and give everybody”. I think that maybe we could do away with (a), (b) and (d) and leave the other particulars because actually, they lead to that. –(Interjection)- We are doing away with (a) (b) and (d). I am conceding on (d) and then we leave other particulars 

Mr Speaker, I have heard my colleagues allude to that issue. We are not actually recommending to NFA but to the Executive. It is up to the Executive to get this report, extract and then write to the relevant government agencies and departments –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not true, honourable member. If you look at No.5, it says that Justice Murangira be referred to the Judicial Service Commission. You are giving a guide on what should happen. Now, if you say that and nobody refers, what are you going to say? 

The Attorney-General is not agreeing. The Attorney-General was complaining about what happened in NFA itself. So, why don’t you find the person who is aggrieved by this award, just like we did in No. 4?

MR MWIRU: I will have to go by that, but remember that there is a letter by the President directing the Attorney-General to take action and nothing was done. Now, we are telling NFA to refer. But for purposes of finishing our job, I think we can do that and wait for whoever will take action. I can contend with it.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, in relation to what the chair has just cited, I intend to come up with an amendment to recommendation No. 8 about the Attorney-General for failure to implement the directive of the President. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I concede to the amendment that we put NFA and we move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we want to put NFA and the Attorney-General again because when one of them refuses to move –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, we are on No.5; you are supporting a motion that is not yet on the Floor. Can we deal with No. 5. What is the final position, chair?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I conceded to the amendment by hon. Katuntu and as modified by you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just suggested for you to consider.

MR MWIRU: I conceded that NFA considers referring Justice Murangira to the Judicial Service Commission for his conduct in this matter for purposes of that Commission to take action. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You just stopped at “his conduct in this case” but you should state the case and its details. What is the case and the civil suit number?

MS KAMATEEKA: I thought that the earlier proposal was to say, “for unethical conduct in the matter”. I propose that we add that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the amendment proposed by hon. Kamateeka, that we insert the words “for unethical conduct” not just “conduct”.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I had gone with your earlier guidance that we leave out the details of the case and we say, “NFA refers Justice Murangira to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action for his conduct in civil suit No…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay?

MR MWIRU: Civil suit No. 003 of 2009.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be okay. I put the question to that amendment now.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to recommendation No. 5 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation 6: “Police should investigate the validity of the second consent judgment in the Supreme Court withdrawing the appeal contrary to the directives of His Excellency the President.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No.7: “The NFA administration, and executive director in particular, be held liable for not exercising due diligence when the matter went to court, bearing in mind that the mandate of signing licences rests with him.”  

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I am not raising any substantial issue, but let us bear in mind that the mandate of signing licences rests with these two entities rather than with him. The sentence mentions the NFA administration and the executive director. So, at the end, it should say that the mandate of signing licences rests with them because you are referring to two people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any value added by putting “NFA administration”?

MR KABAJO: In that case, if there is no value added, then we delete “NFA administration” and just say, “The executive director be held liable for not exercising due diligence when the matter went to court bearing in mind that the mandate of signing licences rests with him.” 

MR MWIRU: I concede on that.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, before you concede – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not conceding – 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: You see, we must be careful and say, “The executive director then.” The reason I am raising this is because you can go and discipline the current one –(Interjections) – Yes, Mr Mawanda, we have seen these things happen. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can add the name and say, “So and so being the executive director be held liable?” Can somebody please draft that for the record?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: The executive director then was Mr Akankwasa.

MR WADRI: Yes, he is the one who was sleeping with Shs 900 million under his pillow.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is “Mr Akankwasa, being the executive director, be held – 

MR KABAJO: “Mr Akankwasa, the executive director then, be held liable for not exercising due diligence when the matter went to court bearing in mind that the mandate of signing licences rests with him.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to recommendation 7 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I find it very ugly and completely unacceptable that the Attorney-General – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just propose the amendment because you have already spoken to it.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, my proposal is that the appointing authority, under recommendation No. 8, should consider taking appropriate disciplinary action against the then Attorney-General for failure to implement the directive of the President, leading to financial loss. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I stand to support the proposal. This gentleman was directed and never acted. In fact, at an appropriate time, I will also move an amendment about the minister of water and the chairman. Even if he has left or he is dead, let us have the recommendation because the law says whether you have left office or you are still in office, you will be held liable for the loss, under Article 164 of the Constitution.

MR WADRI: I do agree with the Leader of the Opposition that Article 164 of the Constitution commands that even if you have ceased to hold office, you can be held accountable. However, the difficulty I have with this proposal is giving that responsibility to the appointing authority when this person is no longer in his service. The best we can do, probably, is to require this from other agencies of Government, but not the appointing authority. The appointing authority only has powers over those who are in his service, but he is not in his service.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree with my colleague. Our amendment is to the effect that the Attorney-General then, Dr Prof. Makubuya, be held liable for inaction on the directive, which was issued by His Excellency, which led to a loss. That is the light in which we are saying this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, first state the amendment before you start speaking to it, so that we capture the text.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Mr Speaker. If my colleague from Kioga can agree with me, I want to amend his proposal to read as follows: “The Attorney-General then, Prof. Makubuya, be held liable for his inaction, which led to the loss, despite the directive by His Excellency the President”. The justification is known.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, earlier, before hon. Katuntu came in, I said exactly what he said when he came up. National Forestry Authority is a body corporate, with powers to sue and be sued in its own name, to hold property, to manage its affairs, to have its own legal representation- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I know what the Deputy Attorney-General is driving at. The Attorney-General was directed by His Excellency the President to act but he never responded to His Excellency to say that he cannot act because of this or that. The only thing we see here is an internal memo to the Solicitor-General. If he had responded to the President, he would have directed another organ to deal with the matter. So, is the Deputy Attorney-General in order to defend an inefficient Attorney-General when he was directed by His Excellency the President?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, all that the learned Attorney-General was trying to say was that NFA is a body corporate just like the office of the Attorney-General. He had not said anything beyond that yet, unless you are now thinking for him.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought for him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, in which case I rule you out of order.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. I was explaining the powers of the NFA as an independent organ able to sue and be sued and so on [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “We have understood that”] - Why don’t you be patient?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, you are the one on record. So, just continue.

MR RUHINDI: There are certain issues where you have got to think a bit harder than usual and these are some of them. 

Mr Speaker, my worry is that there was an investigation by the committee but did the committee ever call the former Attorney-General to verify why he did not respond the way you expected him to have responded to His Excellency’s letter? Was this matter verified or are we simply guessing?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Deputy Attorney-General has raised a very pertinent question. The committee did not deem it fit to call the Attorney-General because he had pronounced himself on this matter, to the effect that he did not participate. The Solicitor-General appeared and actually, he is the one who produced the letter where the President had directed. 

His view was that they act as technical people, not whatever they had been directed to do because if they direct, they can advise otherwise. That is why you see that according to them, when the President wrote, they wrote an internal memo saying they shall not participate because these people are a body corporate, they did not involve them from the beginning and they now wanted to involve them at the end. So, they considered the situation to be fait accompli, according to the words used by the learned Attorney-General.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not support amendment No.8 because when I read page 17, it clearly indicates the circumstances under which the Attorney-General could not handle the issue. It was very clear. 

I do not want to refer you to the case where Parliament was in court with Severino, where the Attorney-General deemed it fit that he could represent Parliament by force and frustrated Parliament from representing itself. Here, he was polite in the view that NFA is a body corporate with powers to sue and be sued. So, in those circumstances, the Attorney-General acted to advise the Solicitor-General because NFA had not deemed it fit to request the Attorney-General. 

We have seen these circumstances in the report. There was a lot of connivance between the company and the other officers in NFA. In that regard, I do not agree with that amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, given the submissions, I think we can abandon that and move to the next one.

MR OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I have heard and considered the opinion of Members. I, therefore, withdraw recommendation No.8.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, withdrawn.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose a recommendation No.8. It is based on page 18 of the report, No. 52: “Following the Court of Appeal ruling, NFA filed an appeal in the Supreme Court. However, NFA board later withdrew the appeal at the intervention of the then Ministry of Water and Environment, hon. Maria Mutagamba.”

Mr Speaker, NFA wanted to try, but the minister intervened. Remember this minister used to visit the site at night. So, given those facts, I want to recommend that the Minister of Water and Environment then, hon. Mutagamba, be held liable for the loss in this case.

Secondly, she interfered with an institution, which she was overseeing when it was taking corrective measures. That is the justification. I propose that hon. Mutagamba be held liable for causing financial loss and also that the appointing authority takes disciplinary action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If we had thought of that earlier, we would have accommodated it in No.7, because it is saying that “The Police should investigate the validity of the second consent judgement in the Supreme Court withdrawing the appeal contrary to the directive of His Excellency the President.” It would have been there, except that this is now limited to the consent.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would have agreed with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. When you look at the list of the names of the witnesses attached on Appendix No.1, maybe the committee should clarify. Everybody should be given a fair hearing. 

Even the minister then because of that letter could have come to the committee. However, if the committee really found out that it was unnecessary, now then to have a recommendation to say that she is part of the connivance is a bit difficult.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the board really had serious reasons and grounds of appealing, it had the authority to overrule the minister. Now that the board also did not –(Interjections) - Yes, maybe we should actually fault the board and not the minister.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason we did not actually call the minister is because there was a board resolution. she was actually communicating the position of the board, meaning that the board did not take into consideration the directive of the President. The board acted on their own and then she wrote to the Attorney-General. Her letter is copy No.33 in our annexes. 

When you read the last paragraph of the letter, she says, “I am generally satisfied with it”, meaning that she was communicating to the board. The point we are making here is that the organ to act for NFA was the board and once the board had taken a decision, we would not deem it fit to hold someone else, who does not form part of the board, liable. So, that is the reason we did not make a recommendation on her. Otherwise, we would have invited her to appear if there was no board resolution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, then here we should say, “the entire board of NFA be held liable for causing financial loss.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that not covered in No.7, honourable member?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, this is withdrawing the appeal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is the one you are talking about. That is the appeal they withdrew from the Supreme Court – it is that withdrawal that is a subject of No.7.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not think we should take this as a laughing matter. This minister used to go there and it looks like – (Interjections) – Please, give us time to explain. I know why you want to defend your fellow woman but sometimes when people overstay in offices, they become –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I want to make my case; there is political responsibility for this minister. (Interruption)

MS OLERU: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I want you to clarify whether the site was a conference room where the minister would move at night and have time to sit and debate so that they could come up with a resolution. 

In my culture, sometimes when you move around a site at night, it is not just for a meeting; maybe, you have gone to talk to your gods or maybe you are a witch or something else. (Laughter) So, it is not just a matter of going to talk. Therefore, can you convince me that by moving at night to a site, the minister was going to talk about getting involved in that issue? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, my sister has made it better. For purposes of moving forward, we shall say, “Hon. Mutagamba be held for political responsibility…” - (Interjection)- Yes, because money got lost.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but hon. Nandala, this is a fully constituted board; how can somebody be held politically liable when there is a board resolution that is not signed by the minister? I think the amendments we have made take care of most of the concerns.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and the Members for the support in passing this report. I do not take it lightly. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question to the adoption of the committee report with those amendments that have been made to the recommendations. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the work we have done, especially regarding this report, and the time you gave us to conclude such matters. 

However, I am strongly concerned about some of our reports. There was the issue of OPM, which was given to us as PAC and we were asked to write a report within one week. We presented the report, it went on the Order Paper and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR SSEWUNGU: The report on the Office of the Prime Minister. Newspaper articles were written about this report and they gave false information, yet the matter was pertinent. If you go to Karamoja and see what is happening – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask something, in order to guide you; was the report submitted to the Clerk’s office?

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes, it was submitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it on the Order Paper as business to follow?

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will reinstate it there. Do not worry about that now. You have already raised it, it will come back there. Whatever it is, it will come back. 

Honourable members, there is a matter that has been brought to my attention relating to the Finance Act of 2008. Remember, yesterday we had some discussions on treasury memoranda that should be presented to the House to assess what has been done with the resolutions of Parliament.

I am speaking on the matter of the Finance Act of 2008. The Eighth Parliament passed some provisions relating to waiver of arrears of tax, duty, interest and penalties due on or before 30 June 2002 and still outstanding by 30 June 2008. That is the subject of this Act, which was brought to my attention this morning.

Now, it affected some of the recommendations of the Auditor-General, or queries by the Auditor-General. When that happened, for some of the queries which should have been affected by this particular Act, there was no treasury memorandum. There was no decision communicated to the Auditor-General that the Ministry of Finance had access to Parliament and some decisions had been taken by Parliament in relation to that particular period. In which case, what should have been handled by this particular Act recurred in last year’s report of the Auditor-General and has now been a subject of a debate in a committee.

I am just wondering how we shall proceed with this kind of business, because there is an Act that made a declaration on some of these issues in 2008. It was not communicated to the Auditor-General, so the Auditor-General has reinstated the queries that it had in the past over that same period. They had no communication that those matters had been resolved, so they have come back with the same recommendation. I am just wondering how to proceed with the business that is based on something, which we have an Act that was passed by this Parliament handling it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was a member of the finance committee at that time and I know what you are saying. They said there were people who should declare taxes voluntarily; so long as you came out voluntarily, you would be allowed. If you refused and they investigated and they discovered you, then you would pay. That was the purpose of the Act. 

There are two distinctions there; are the taxes they are talking about those which were declared but unpaid in form of arrears or those which were investigated and discovered? In the Auditor-General’s report of 2007 to URA, for example, those tax arrears should appear because they would not have been waived by then. 

However, if it comes now to reporting in COSASE, they could say, “By 2007, there were these tax liabilities collectable, but because of this Act, this was waived and the query was dropped”. On the other hand, if there was an investigation and the taxes were got, then there is no way you can waive them. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I was a member of COSASE; these were audit queries of URA on tax recovery and some other outstanding appeals. In 2008, Parliament agreed on the principles of the Finance Act. 

When you read the Finance Act, it reads, “The Act amends Finance (No.2) Act of 2000 to change the levy on the export…” It then goes on to say, “All outstanding recoveries by 30 June repeal section No.7 of the Finance (No.1) Act of 1999.” Part No.4 of that Finance Act clearly stated, “Waiver of taxes and arrears”. That means Parliament accepted to drop those queries by law. So, to bring them up again would cause a problem. 

Honourable members, who were in the Eighth Parliament, should remember the problems which we faced. The chairperson of that committee then did not present a report. During the time of the late Odit, these were the queries. However, at that time, Parliament agreed on how to deal with it and the report was laid on the Table here and was adopted. 

The only thing left was that Parliament commanded for those treasury memoranda, that the outstanding queries, which Parliament accepted to drop, should be brought and not stay on the record of the Auditor-General, which was not complete. Since Parliament commanded the Minister of Finance to bring treasury memoranda, all these queries, which were outstanding – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, at this stage, we would not be talking about what we are discussing. You remember yesterday and the other day, we made a passionate appeal to the Executive that when Parliament passes resolutions, the Executive should go and act on them and issue treasury memoranda within six months as commanded by law. These treasury memoranda are subject to audit by the Auditor-General. So when they come and the Auditor-General audits them, then it would form a position so that what has been pronounced, like audit queries being dropped, would be captured. Those audit queries would then no longer be carried forward and subsequently, re-presented as new audit queries. 

As long as the Executive does not come up with treasury memoranda showing the actions they have taken, these audit queries will continue to appear in the subsequent audit queries. Even after Parliament has pronounced itself that they be dropped, they will continue to appear because the Auditor-General will have no way to capture them. 

This, therefore, goes back to the Executive. Let them act on all the recommendations that Parliament pronounces itself on. Whether you act or not, bring them up so that the Auditor-General can know how to proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what happens to those matters, which are before your committee, which fall within this but there has been no action from the Government to bring it to the attention of the Auditor-General? 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague. If they do not do that, the Auditor-General will continue bringing up those audit queries. So, the only way that the Ministry of Finance, which brought this law, should bring those treasury memoranda to show that these problems were handled and dropped. Otherwise, the Auditor-General will continue to bring the same.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are confusing two things. The Auditor-General makes a report and Parliament processes it. The treasury memoranda will only be issued when Parliament has adopted the report. Most of the issues that are arising are as a result of URA; COSASE has looked at URA for the last ten years and that is why issues are arising from 2008. So, there is no treasury memorandum up to that time because we have not sent the report. 

Secondly, it is not a command; it was called a remission of taxes. In 2008, we remitted all taxes, whether on hides, income tax or VAT. So, if URA came now before the committee and if they are looking for accounts of 2007, they would say, “by this law, these were remitted”. So, in the report, the committee will mention that those taxes were remitted and they cannot come here as a query because there was already a law. So, we should not trouble ourselves -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is that it has come back in 2012 as a query and, therefore, it is a subject of a committee inquiry; the same stuff. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the point is about the operation of the law; what does the law say? The Auditor-General is presumed to know the law. We do not have to send that law to him. He should know the parameters under which he is acting. If the Finance Act of 2008 made a remission, even the committees of Parliament cannot go into it. Once it comes as an Act of Parliament, it is operation of the law. 

So, I think we may not be able to resolve it here. I have not read that law and I am sure my learned friend, the Attorney-General, has not read it because this is the time when he should be able to guide us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am concerned that despite the committee having a lot of work, they have work that they should not be doing bogging them down. 

MR KATUNTU: That is it, Mr Speaker. I think this is a matter, which should be resolved. The committee should not go into that; they should go into what the law allows them to do. 

If I understood you well, Mr Speaker, the point which has been raised is for us to know that particular law and to what extent it operates. On that account, the Attorney-General can initiate a document – because it is better to deal in writing - to say, “This has been brought to my attention and this is my own interpretation”. We can then proceed and guide the committees accordingly. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, before you do it, I think this is just a mere problem with URA. There is a management letter, which is issued, which lists queries that are outstanding. When URA goes to clear them, it should point out the ones which should be dropped, because the law says they should be. I think it is not the Auditor-General. 

Uganda Revenue Authority might be hiding something different. Even if you showed the Auditor-General the law, these are processes - (Interjections) – No, even we, auditors, can come and say, “You should have collected this money” and then you say, “No, the law allows me not to collect it” because you are the one who is the custodian of the law. 

Now the Auditor-General may not know, – maybe he knows - but URA should do it in the process of the audit exercise, unless URA is not doing its job. Mr Speaker, I do not think they are right. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I first must thank you for sitting this long. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 8.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
