

Wednesday, 14 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few issues to communicate; one is that next week on 23 November, 2018, we shall host the third African Organisation of Public Accounts Committee Symposium and the AGM. It will be held at Speke Resort Munyonyo on the theme: “One voice for Public Accounts Committees and similar committees in managing public debt and fighting corruption.” The debate is quite big. There will be 300 delegates from all over Africa; Members of Parliament, staff, members of supreme audit institutions in all those countries and members of the Public Accounts Committees. Also, if you have time, you can go and attend. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for your support on the fight against cancer a few months ago. The Uganda Rotary Cancer Programme is spearheading the acquisition and installation of a true state-of-the-art cancer treatment machine called Linear Accelerators at Nsambya Hospital, which costs approximately Shs 18 billion. Last year, you contributed Shs 1,000,000 each during the run and it has been applied to the budget of some of those machines. So I would like thank you for that. There are going to be a number of annual runs to raise money. This year, we were the lead sponsor on the run on the 26 August 2018. I was represented by the Deputy Speaker and once again, I would like to thank you for your contribution to this noble cause. 

I would like to ask again that you make some more contribution towards the fight against cancer, which is becoming a problem, not only for old people but also the young ones. Therefore, if you agree, we can do what we did again and I will raise it in full equal instalments. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, with respect to the work of the Members moving Private Members’ Bills, in the recent past, they have had difficulty securing certificates of financial implication and this is the work of the Clerk. If you have a Bill, let the Clerk be the one to call out the request for the certificate of financial implication from the ministry. 

I am also warning the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that under our rules, if we apply for a certificate and it has not come within 60 days, we shall proceed with the Bill. There are particular Bills which have been targeted by the Ministry of Finance not to give us certificates so that we do not handle them but I am telling you that next week, they will be on the Order Paper; one of them is the Local Content Bill, where the ministry is dithering. We shall also put any other which is overdue on the Order Paper. As long as we get permission from the House, if 60 days pass, it will be on the Order Paper. 

The management of Kampala Capital City Authority have requested for an opportunity to interact with Members of Parliament, given the role of Parliament; also as a stakeholder because we live and work here. Therefore, they are proposing that we meet in the Conference Hall on Tuesday 20 November, 2018 at nine o’clock in the morning. Those who are able can come and we have that interaction. 

There are few matters of national importance that we postponed from yesterday and we shall give them exactly 30 minutes. 

2.59
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance that I have concerns human trafficking that is going on in the country. 

A few days ago, security agencies stormed the premises of a company called International Employment Linkages and found 62 girls locked in a three bed-roomed house in Kiwatule. The girls seemed to have been there for quite a number of days living in very bad conditions. That story was even reflected in the New Vision of 11 November 2018. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that some of these licensed agencies are indirectly involved in human trafficking while disguising themselves as organisations getting jobs for Ugandans. In a country like Uganda, where there is massive unemployment and few opportunities, it is almost impossible to say how many Ugandan girls have been trafficked abroad. The police, however, say that up to 50 girls are trafficked daily, undetected and for those that are detected, the police receive over 70 cases monthly. 

In the recent case of Kiwatule, the girls were held in the house for several days and yet the organisation is not supposed to do so. We need to get an explanation from the ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Internal Affairs on what they are doing to regulate and supervise these employment agencies. 

If the girls are treated in this manner before they go abroad, how do we trust their destinations then? This has been a concern for so long and we have over and again raised this matter in this House but we have not seen any response. Madam Speaker, I call upon you to intervene yourself. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ndamira. Honourable members, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is in charge of supervising these bodies. So we would like you to give us answers to this question. 

However, I also heard that we have quietly signed agreements for domestic workers with some countries and yet as a House, we had resolved that we do not send out domestic workers. Can we ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come and report to us on Tuesday next week without fail? 

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students of Kampala Quality Primary School, represented by hon. Latif Sebaggala and hon. Nabilah Sempala Naggayi. You are welcome, children. (Applause)

We also have students from Makerere Business Institute. They are represented by hon. Michael Kabaziguruka and hon. Nabilah Sempala. You are welcome. (Applause)

Furthermore, we have students from Kyambogo of the Young Democrats Party and there they are. (Applause) 
They are again from Nakawa division and represented by hon. Michael Kabaziguruka and hon. Nabilah Sempala.

We also have a young entrepreneur, Mr Bryon Kawaddwa. Honourable members, on Sunday, I officiated at the Adventist Business Conference and he was the best exhibitor. In one year, he was able to grow from rearing poultry and now he has heifers. He is really an excellent person. On your behalf, I pledged to give him Shs 3 million as support for his business. He is represented by hon. Edward Ssembatya and hon. Lillian Segujja. He is from Luweero District. You are welcome, Mr Kawaddwa. (Applause)

3.05
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to present a matter of national importance regarding the Excise Duty (Amendment) Tax, 2018 which was assented to, last month by the President. The lawful charges would now be 0.5 per cent but to-date, telecom companies are still charging one per cent.

I would like to know - because most people who were dealing in mobile money businesses have fallen out of business. Is it designed by Government to fail its own people or it is an accident. It is just a matter of gazetting, Madam Speaker. For example, the former Member of Parliament from Rubaga South, hon. Singh Katongole, was gazetted within hours. However, I wonder why we are taking long to gazette this law yet these issues are affecting the majority of Ugandans. 

My prayer is that the Government should gazette this law quickly such that we can save most Ugandans who are failing to run mobile money business. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we first know whether it was assented to even before gazetting. Can the minister in charge of finance come and explain to us his arrangements to enforce the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018. Thank you.

3.07
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of national importance on the murder of one Dickens Okello, an 11 year-old-boy and a pupil of Alito Primary School, in Alito Sub-county in Kole District.

The murder took place on 9 November 2018 at 4.00 p.m. The suspects are Madhave Daga and Pranav Vyas. They are believed to be of Indian origin belonging to Meena Company that buys cotton in Lango sub region.

The two children were coming back from school; one was called Dickens Okello and the brother is Denis Ogwang. Okello was the one who was killed.

According to the 13-year-old Ogwang, he witnessed the murder of his brother. He made the following statement: As they were coming back from school, they met two Indians who were in a vehicle. They stopped and offered them sweets, biscuits and money, which they rejected. They also offered to put them in their vehicle but the pupils also refused. Having rejected all their offers, the two Indians came out of their vehicle and started chasing after them. 
   
Unfortunately, Okello got held up by a barbed wire near hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s place and fell down. Okello was caught by one of the Indians who was wearing a white T-shirt. He strangled Okello and threw him in the bush. Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the pictures of the Indians on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Have they been arrested?

MS ALYEK: Yes. I would also like to lay on Table the picture of the deceased child. When he strangled the child and threw him in the bush, they drove off but eventually, came back within a short time when the police had already arrived at the scene. The deceased was taken to Lira Regional Referral Hospital unconscious and he did not wake up. He eventually passed on.

The Indians together with their vehicle, Toyota double cabin, registration number UBD 679Y, are being held at Central Police Station, Kole District. They are being charged with murder case No.CRB318/2018. The post-mortem was done in Lira by two doctors; Dr Olwa and Dr Nam. Dr Olwa carried out the post-mortem while Dr Nam witnessed the examination during the exercise. 

According to Dr Nam, the deceased’s neck was broken, had blood clot in the brain and under the eyes. Surprisingly, the report from the regional police spokesperson - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now discussing the merits of the case.

MS ALYEK: Our prayers are:

    1. We need a thorough and independent investigation in this issue by Government.
    2. If these people are found guilty, the culprits must face the law without fear or favour.
    3. There must be compensation for the loss of the child by the culprits to the family of the deceased.
    4. Government should advise the Indian community on how to relate with the local people in this country.
    5. Government should organise a meeting with the local leaders on the recurrent problems caused by the Indian community.
    6. Government should verify the status of the foreign investors in the country, their work permits and passports and every relevant document must be ascertained. 
    7. The Indian community and other foreign investors in this country must stop mistreating the citizens of Uganda. (Applause)
    8. The security personnel should do constant surveillance to establish those who are operating illegally – doing business in the community without license. 
    9. Then the CIID and the entire police leadership in the Lango sub-region should be investigated because there was foul play in some of the reports that we got.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you want action from the Government but now you are proposing resolutions. Honourable members, I ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to take up this matter urgently. I also ask the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to keep a watching brief over that case and give us an update.

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.15
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I condole with the members of the family of the deceased. What cannot wait, where I seek your guidance is, the Government should be able to tell us the motive of the assailant. 

This should be known because there are very many children walking to school on a daily basis. The murderers could be having some kind of ritual sacrifice; a sort of religious belief. Government, through its agencies like CIID, (even if it involves further interrogations) – this is where Americans do not compromise – should tell us the motive of those Indians.  We need to know what the motive of the Indians is before we can relax as we wait for the criminal investigation. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought the motive is part of the investigation? We have reported the matter. The Government is here. We have asked the Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle it quickly. We have asked our committee on defence to have a watching brief. They should come and give us a statement. (Interjection) You cannot separate the motive from the action.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also send condolences to the family. It is very unfortunate that a young innocent boy can be killed. 

On behalf of Government, I would like to assure the Members that the Ministry of Internal Affairs will make sure that investigations are done, and next week, the minister will give us preliminary findings of the motive and whatever information he will have without injuring the case which is proceeding in court. (Interjections) I am speaking on behalf of the Leader of Government Business.

Secondly, on the first issue which hon. Catheline Ndamira raised - the issue of human trafficking; it is a serious matter. As you directed, the gender minister will come next week and brief us on how the ministry is regulating these agencies. They will also give us information specifically on that agency which was hiding the children. They will be investigated to understand why they should hide children in their houses.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they should also come and tell us whether they have or have not signed agreements for exporting domestic workers. We hear that they have signed some agreements which they have not told us about. Let her also come and tell us about that.

3.18
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a very vital issue concerning this country. Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development under USMID project contracted Start Engineering Limited to construct several roads in this country. 

In particular, the project which stalled is in Jinja. We want to thank Government because they worked on the Nile Bridge. However, as soon as you leave the bridge - a very good one - and you branch into Jinja, where hon. Mwiru, hon. Balyeku and others come from – there is even a house that you, Madam Speaker, launched in June this year – the road is in a total mess. 

According to the New Vision of Monday, 12 November 2018, it is quoted that the contractor abandoned work due to non-payment. I need to know from the finance minister and the lands ministry whether they released money to the municipality and the municipality failed to pay. 

It is also quoted that during the selection of these contractors, the PPDA guidelines were not followed and the contractor was using sub-standard materials on the road. This is a town where some of us pass as we go to our villages. (Interjections) I will accept the information.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, hon. Waluswaka. The issue of non-compliance is a very serious concern in Uganda. I do not know what we are going to do. 

I sit on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and recently, we went to do our oversight role as usual. However, when we reached Jinja town, I was really perplexed because the town is in shambles. Indeed, like the honourable has put it, it has been abandoned completely and it is upon this House to make a serious follow-up on this USMID project. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, here, where we are at Parliament – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no. Honourable members, the Minister of Lands is required to urgently come and speak to us on the issue of USMID. Jinja is the only place in the country that is not okay. All the other municipalities are okay. It is very annoying.

MR BURUNDO: As I conclude, the problem is not only here – 

THE SPEAKER: The minister is here.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude before the minister gives a concrete answer.

THE SPEAKER: No, you have given away your time.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr. Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank hon. Waluswaka for raising that issue. USMID is Uganda Support for Municipal Infrastructure Development project which is implemented through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. (Interjections) Some may not be aware. The major component of this project is to address the infrastructure in selected municipalities. It has been running in 14 municipalities, including Jinja, and we are now preparing a second phase where we are going to add on eight other municipalities. The request is with the Committee on National Economy - actually today we appeared before the committee to finalise the engagement.

Let me say that USMID has been audited and evaluated. It is one of the successful projects we have had in this country. Specifically on the issue of Jinja, it is true there have been some delays in relaying money to the contractor. The reason was that we run this project in a transparent manner and there was a complaint raised by one of the engineers in the divisions in Jinja municipality. It was contesting the quality of the materials which were used on two roads - Engineer Zikusooka Road and Jinja Main Street. 

When this complaint came, we commissioned studies and engaged a private laboratory and also the Central Materials Laboratory of Government to check whether the materials that were being used by the contractor were actually genuine materials. We instructed the municipal council to delay some of the payments until the assessment has been done. Let me say that the two laboratories have given us results and coincidentally, I was just reading the report of the laboratory test results of materials used on Main Street and Engineer Zikusooka Road in Jinja Municipality. 

Both reports from the private laboratory and the Central Materials Laboratory do not find any problem with the materials which were used. They confirm that the materials used were genuine and up to standard. Therefore, the municipal council has now been allowed to make the payments to the contractor and also the contractor to continue and finish the works. 

The contract was supposed to end on 16th of November but we have now authorised that they can extend the contract up to December. So, by the end of December, the contractor should have finished the work and then handed over the work to Jinja Municipality. The money is already with Jinja Municipal Council and the tests have been completed. The contractor is authorised to continue and complete the work.

Let me also say that we shall have a detailed debate when the Committee on National Economy brings their report when we are discussing the second phase of Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), which is going to have more resources to work on our towns. Thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, are you aware that there was a company that was contracted by your ministry to do Tororo-Mbale and Soroti –

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, let us have hon. Ilukor. We are on matters of national importance.

3.26
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding Atutur Hospital, one of the 22 hospitals opened in 1969 by the then Government.

Atutur Hospital has for nearly one month been non-functional. This hospital does no surgical operations on patients. It does not do X-rays, scans, laboratory tests; neither does it see patients at night. The situation is like this beacause the Hospital has not had electricity for one month.

The alternative power from the generator, which was supposed to serve in case of the absence of power, broke down more than six months ago. The Shs 4,000,000 needed to repair this generator is not there. The non-availability of power in the hospital is because a policy was brought in to connect the hospital to Yaka. Now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development delayed to release funds to districts for onward conveyance to hospitals.

Imagine a theatre in a hospital connected to Yaka! Even in our own houses, Yaka sometimes goes off when we are unaware. The theatre is connected to Yaka. If a surgical operation is being carried out and power goes off, what happens? 

A laboratory where vaccines and so many things are stored is not functioning. Government wastes money buying vaccines which they put in the fridge but there is no power. How much money have we lost? 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health should liaise with the finance ministry and energy ministry and see how some departments in the hospitals can be reverted to the old system of metering, rather than Yaka to save our people. Otherwise, our people are watching and keeping quiet. We shall meet them in 2021. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, are you aware that there is no power in Atutur? Is it true that they are using Yaka? The minister is here. That is her work.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising this matter about Atutur Hospital. We got that information and I really sympathise with the people.

However, I would like to assure you that, as you said, we will work together with the ministries of Finance and Energy to ensure that this issue is handled. Madam Speaker, give us a two-week period so that we can be in position to ascertain this and come back with feedback. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please come back next week with a statement.

3.29
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the non-payments to tobacco farmers in Kibaale District by Continental Tobacco Uganda.

In August and September, Continental Tobacco Uganda bought tobacco from the farmers in my district and in big numbers. Some were in Nyamaarwa Sub-county, Matale Sub-county, Bubango Sub-county and others. Some farmers were paid while others were not paid but were promised payment very soon. 

They have been following up in vain. They have struggled in this period to pay school fees, especially in a situation where prices for maize have gone down. The only hope was to get income from the sale of tobacco. To-date, they have not been paid. 

My prayers are that the tobacco farmers in Kibaale are paid their hard-earned income by Continental Tobacco Uganda.

Secondly, I pray that Continental Tobacco Uganda refrains from such delays in payment to the farmers when they have actually taken their produce. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what to do on this one because this is not the first time Members are coming here to report this company called Continental Tobacco. There have been three or four other occasions when the same company has been reported here for failing to pay. Ministry of Trade, what do we do? This company is on our Hansard for the same crime.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to regret that some of the farmers in Kibaale have not been paid for their tobacco. I would like to request that we crosscheck with Continental Tobacco Uganda and then we get back to the House with full information and actions that we are actually going to take against them in one week’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Ministry of Trade will come to us after one week.

3.32
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi Okollo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance, relating to the intention by the Ministry of Education and Sports to divert Shs 700 million which was meant for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School to Pawor Secondary School, where the work has been completed. Pawor Seed Secondary School was allocated Shs 700 million. As I speak now, the work is being completed.

Arua District Local Government received Shs 700 million for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School. The district advertised for the construction of Anyiribu Seed Secondary School. However, the ministry wrote a letter on 6th of September to the Chief Administrative Officer of Arua District to divert this money to Pawor Seed Secondary School where the work has already been completed.

This has come at a time when the contract for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School has already been awarded to two companies because the work should have already started. Part of this money is already on the district account.

Gibo Cheap Stores was awarded the contract to construct the storeyed classroom block with furniture and toilets. Meanwhile, Dolphin Construction was supposed to undertake the construction of the multipurpose laboratory block and the administration block.

This will be the first school with good infrastructure in the constituency. Under the APL1 the Government allocated money for Ulepi Secondary School and Okollo Secondary School and these two projects have since failed since 2011.

Okollo Secondary School was given Shs 286 million under the APL1 but as I speak now this project failed. Ulepi Secondary School was allocated Shs 216 million and up to now there is no work done and yet the money was allocated by this Parliament.

When the Ministry of Education and Sports wrote to divert this project, I did not understand the motive. I pray that this money for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School should not be diverted and the ministry should explain the motive as to why all the secondary schools in this area have been neglected.

I beg to lay on Table the advert by Arua District Local Government for open domestic bidding and a letter which I wrote to the Minister of Education relating to the stalled World Bank projects. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Education; I do not know whether he is ready to explain whether he instructed the diversion but most seriously, if the four projects for which money had been appropriated by this House had failed as he is claiming.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for this information. The Ministry of Education has received this complaint and we are investigating; I pray that you give me one week to get back.

THE SPEAKER: Concerning the four failed schools?

MR MUYINGO: Exactly, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come to us on Thursday next week.

3.37
MR EMMANUEL KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about part of the express highway to Entebbe, in particular Munyonyo Spur. 

This is an extension of the road that goes to Entebbe; however, the design for that particular stretch was wrongly done. Instead of the express highway going over or under the local roads, the roads are meeting at the same level.

There are several accidents along that road; on average, we have two fatal accidents every week. To have some relief they put some traffic lights at some junctions but unfortunately some of them do not operate all the time and we do not know why this is happening. Could they be using “Yaka” because you find vehicles crisscrossing each other?

In particular we have a junction called Mchanga shortly after Kajjansi; that one does not even have street lights and there is a sharp corner immediately after which is the most dangerous.

Yesterday, lead vehicles were escorting some dignitaries and one of them had a fatal accident and rolled over; we were lucky that the dignitaries were not affected. However, this happens twice every week at a minimum.

We request that the ministry through UNRA does something about it immediately. They should be able to put traffic lights along that stretch and I understand that there are designs to make the local roads fly over the express highway but that will take years because they are still at design level. Between now and then we are likely to have -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, why don’t you allow us to ask the minister to come and explain to us the design of that road? You are now making proposals and I do not know whether -

MR KIGOZI: It is because people are dying every day.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we appreciate that. Can we ask the Minister of Works to come and explain to this House the issue of the spur so that hon. Ssempala together with his constituents can drive to their homes in peace? The Minister of Works will give a statement on Wednesday.

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bafaki just lay it on the Table on behalf of the team so that it is available for members.

3.40
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): On behalf of the Speaker, I lay on the Table a report of the second Uganda-Netherlands Business Convention in Amsterdam. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask hon. Lyandro Komakech to give two minutes’ highlights and then we move to the next item.

3.41
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, in August we raised a question for oral answers regarding power outages in Gulu and the surrounding areas.

Currently in northern Uganda, beginning from Gulu, you cannot in anyway rely on Umeme to the extent that we use it for only 15 days. In a year, I think we are using only half a year of power supply in that part of the region.

To-date, the Minister of Energy, together with Umeme, have not bothered to come to Parliament to give an explanation based on the question for oral answers that we issued through the Clerk -

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and colleagues. In 2014 I raised the same and it is almost turning into economic sabotage. No business that requires electricity can be done in Gulu.

It is either Umeme is carrying out maintenance on the Lira-Gulu line or power has gone off because of rain. In a week you receive apologies like four times, meaning that out of the 30 days in a month, we only have power in Gulu for 15 days.

When you calculate that in a year, Gulu and the surrounding districts have power for only half a year. Businesses are all being transferred either to Lira - I cannot understand-

THE SPEAKER: No, this is the same thing.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, this is sad because Hared Group of Companies is pulling out of Gulu because of this situation and we are losing jobs for our young people.

I pray that the Minister of Energy takes this as a matter of serious concern and responds to it with immediate effect because residents of Gulu Municipality are threatening to close the Umeme office in Gulu on Monday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow is Thursday. This issue is really critical. If Gulu is going to become a city, how shall we live or invest there when we cannot rely on its power? This is really serious. That question is long overdue; it was sent in August and now it is November. The minister should come and answer, tomorrow, on the issue of the power of Gulu Municipality.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEND THE RT HON. REBECCA ALITWALA KADAGA FOR CONSISTENTLY UPHOLDING AND PROTECTING UGANDA’S CULTURAL VALUES DURING THE 139TH INTER PARLIAMENTARY UNION ASSEMBLY WHICH TOOK PLACE IN GENEVA

3.45
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): “WHEREAS the l39th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) was held in Geneva, Switzerland from 14 to 18 October, 2018 under the theme: "Strengthening the Global Regime for Migrants and Refugees: The Need for Evidence-based Policy Solutions";

AND WHEREAS, the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga led Uganda's delegation that included hon. Mourine Osoru, hon. Abdu-latif Ssebaggala Ssengendo, hon. Rose Kabagyenyi, hon. Esther Anyakun, hon. Paul Akamba and hon. Francis Mwijukye to the 139th IPU Assembly;

NOTING THAT during the said IPU meeting, members of the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights proposed on amendment to rules that could make it impossible for the General Assembly to change or debate anything passed by the Standing Committee;

NOTING FURTHER THAT such an amendment would be an avenue through which debate on the rights of Lesbian, Gays, Bisexuals and Transgender who are commonly known as homosexuals would be entertained by the General Assembly, thereby disregarding views and values on same sex marriages by African, Arab and Asian representatives;

RECALIING THAT the Rt Hon. Speaker took a firm decision and rallied various delegates in different geopolitical regions to support the motion, which could allow the Assembly to intervene in the choice of topic for discussion;

CONSIDERING THAT the Rt Hon. Speaker has consistently and eloquently exhibited leadership, courage and firmness at earlier IPU Assemblies, for example, at the 138th IPU Assembly in Geneva, Switzerland where she objected to the unfair move of tabling homosexuality on the agenda and of the 127th IPU Assembly in Canada where she famously rejected the forceful imposition of foreign sexual practices on Africans which are contrary to our cultural norms and values;

APPRECIATING the brave performance by the Rt Hon. Speaker in defending cultural norms and values of Africans in general and Ugandans, in particular, which norms and values shape the future direction of this great nation, and above all, aspire to uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by this Tenth Parliament to:

    1. Congratulate the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda and urge her to remain firm in her persistent commitment to uphold African values.
    2. Appeal to members of IPU and the international community to respect cultural values and aspirations of each member state.
    3. Urge all Ugandans to wholly remain firm in defence of our values and opposition to foreign sexual practices such as homosexuality.
    4. Urge Ugandan officials who engage in international business on behalf of Uganda to, at all times, promote her interests rather than those of other nations.
    5. Urge Government to identify and deal firmly with Non-Governmental Organisations which serve as the main conduit for dissemination and promotion of homosexuality and other decadent practices in Uganda”.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several Members of the House. Can you justify the motion?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, it is not an exaggeration to state that on the moral scale, our country is in a deficit to a degree that we have not seen before. Uganda’s moral foundation is under severe erosion to an extent that it is barely recognisable by many Ugandans including some of us in this august House. 

As a result of this, the character of our country is under threat and changing slowly but surely.  Forces which are behind the seismic degradation of our country more rapidly are to blame for the ongoing state of affairs. They, themselves, are morally wanting and decrepit, arrogant, vicious, organised and backed by some powerful governments and international organisations around the world.

The overall intention of this repressively, oppressively forces is to shape our society and the rest of the world to suit their morally wanting ways. They do not want us to live by our values, which values are, by and large, so far served us through establishment of our social and moral order, which in the particular case of this motion, is in agreement with the Creator of the universe.

Madam Speaker, the forces in question are known for their anti- God’s stance as well as misguided and selfish efforts to turn the world’s social, political and economic order upside down. Their quest for a new world order, which they desire to dominate is concealed in their demands such as adoption of Western type of democracy and human rights, the latter implying that one is free to adopt values unrestrained even by the law of the land. They are not bothered by what other society’s values, norms, morals and laws are and one of their practices in Uganda is the sexual perversion of homosexuality where a man marries a man and a woman marries a woman and the two individuals choose which one of the two will become the opposite sex.

This sexual perversion is dominant, particularly in nations in the Western world but it is finding its way in our society. Advocates of homosexuality are hell-bent on forcing the rest of the world to accept the vice. In their quest to dominate the world, they have not hesitated to resort to applying unconventional methods such as bribery, threats and intimidations against individuals and Governments which oppose them. Uganda is not being spared their pressure to promote and eventually, legalise obscenities such as homosexuality.

With support from misguided Ugandans who suffer from a condition known as moral depravity and are willing to betray their country, proponents and practitioners of homosexuality are championing a relentless campaign to recruit Ugandans into accepting the vice. I am informed that there is a growing network of lesbians, gays, bisexual and transgender person in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, honourable members will realise that these are strange and new terminologies in our country. Collectively, the lesbians, gays, bisexual and transgender are known as homosexuals.

It is reliably said that they include lawyers, businessmen, chief executive officers of companies, directors and top managers of big companies, Government officials, pastors, sheiks, youths and common Ugandans.

As this vice creeps its immoral wings, it has been reported that there are several Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), which are funding mainly the youth for purposes of practicing the vice. These NGOs go to schools, universities, places of worship and communities where they hold so-called workshops disguised as sensitising the youth about HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases.

During these interactions, recruiters have ensured that they befriend boys, get their contacts and later start enticing them with gifts and money. As a result of this on-going repulsive shenanigan, our social and moral disposition as a country is being severely disrupted.

Madam Speaker, something drastic has to be done to prevent a Sodom and Gomorrah situation in our country. Bold and patriotic efforts that you have championed before must urgently be taken to roll back the work of promoters and practitioners of homosexuality.

A fierce battle for the soul of Uganda is currently raging in our very midst. It is between two camps; one camp believe that homosexuality is ungodly and abominable decision that does not fit well with our cultural, spiritual and moral tenets as Africans. An African or Ugandan for that matter regards homosexuality as a travesty against human procreation.

Madam Speaker, honourable members will be pleased to know that you belong to this camp. However, there is the other camp that believes that the fight is threat to humanity; that homosexuality is a human right that should be given social and legal legitimacy. The on-going battle between these two camps is being played out on both international and local stages.


Madam Speaker, recently, you were engaged in a monumental battle on behalf of majority of Ugandans. This battle took place in Geneva from 14 to 18 October 2018. Pro-homosexuality delegates wanted to include debate on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) persons on the Agenda of Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) with a view to introducing amendments to the IPU rules which would have made it impossible for the General Assembly to change or debate anything passed by the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights.

With your determination and tested leadership, you skilfully rallied other delegates mostly from the African, Arab and Asian nations to support a motion which would allow the General Assembly to amend different issues in the committee report that had already been adopted by a smaller group of pro-homosexuality delegates.

Madam Speaker, honourable members will be pleased to know that this is not the first time you have engaged in battles on an international stage on behalf of Uganda. Each time you have engaged in these battles, you have emerged victorious. For example, you secured victory for Uganda at the 127th IPU Assembly in Canada in 2012 –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the point of procedure. Is it procedurally right for us to continue labouring justifying an obvious motion where Members are eagerly waiting to participate? Aware of the time factor that we are very many who want to participate by congratulating you and then - is it procedurally right for the mover of the motion to waste our time? Why don’t we go to the subject matters? 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, hon. Buturo, you could wind up.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Then there is recent victory in Geneva. This motion, therefore, has two purposes. It is our way of saluting as well as commending you for your heroic service to our nation. 

In all the engagements, you have stood up against powerful promoters of homosexuality and won. The motion is also about assuring you that you are not alone in the on-going battles. You have an overwhelming support of Members of Parliament and the people we represent.

Madam Speaker, following the recent IPU Assembly in Geneva, the seeming headline in some of our media was that “legislators attending the 139th Assembly in Geneva had voted to ban debate on homosexuals’ so-called rights forever”. The news was both freeing and sweet when we got to know that the undisputed leader of these legislators was none other than our own, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga -(Applause)- never, to be the one to be intimidated, by the glitter and razzmatazz of an international stage or the presence of the representatives from some of the more powerful nations in the world. 

You championed a worthy and victorious cause. Your consistent stand to defend our identity and values will forever stand recorded on the anodes of not only this Parliament but Uganda as a whole.

Both your performance and leadership at previous international meetings and more recently, in Geneva has shown Ugandans your true character. You demonstrated your indomitable spirit of defending what is right. You also showed that you had the mantle to robustly, persuasively and successfully put your case before an international audience.

We saw in your performance foresight, resilience, patience, focus, boldness, alertness, tenacity, astuteness, ostensive mobilisation skills, knowledge, experience and deep sense of conviction. (Applause) These are critical qualities one needs to have when one is operating on an international stage. 

Had you not had these qualities in abundance, advocates of homosexuality would have carried the day and implications of the outcome would have been damaging and far reaching for many years to come. Your stand was in sharp contrast to that of some delegates who regard discussing and opposing homosexuality as a no go area.

During the Assembly, it is said that some delegates from some nations around the world feared to offend the homosexual establishment, which apparently willed enormous influence on many national governments as well as international institutions, agencies and organisations.

Madam Speaker, I urge honourable members and fellow Ugandans to emulate your example. I particularly urge Ugandan officials who from time to time represent Uganda in international fora to abandon timidity and fear whenever Uganda’s interests, values and moral character are in danger of relegation.

They should in all terms always say “no” against any form of cultural arrogance, exploitation, oppression as well as imperialism. We must always demand respect from those whose outlook for humanity is at variance with ours. 

As a matter of fact, promoters and practitioners of homosexuality need to know that human procreation cannot be sustained through homosexuality. Human beings come into being as a result of male-female union and never as a result of man-man or woman-woman relationship.

We must, therefore, make it clear that we demand respect for our beliefs and values. We must also make it clear that no amount of financial inducement or threats shall ever dissuade us from standing for what is right.

Madam Speaker, we are convinced that our moral standing on the question of homosexuality, one that you gallantly and fearlessly defended during your international engagement, is the right one for human procreation as well as survival. Homosexuality, which others are proud of is antithetical to human procreation and survival.

Even when we know that advocates of homosexuality are plainly wrong in advancing as well as imposing their moral depravity upon us, we have not sought to impose our values and outlook of the world on them. In the same way and in accordance with dictates of civilised conduct, they should not impose on us their repulsively distasteful sexual practices.

Finally, for your consistent and bold stand whose main import is the defence of our Africaness, our values, norms and humanity, I dare say that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob must be pleased with you. By distinguishing yourself as unrelenting fighter for our values, you are His true servant indeed. You have made Uganda proud and so, permit me to commend this motion to the honourable members. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope that the seconder of the motion, hon. Santa Alum, will use a few minutes.

4.06
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion.

I would like to start by congratulating you for focusing on what counts and defending our values as Uganda and Africa in general.

Indeed, as a Parliament and Uganda, we are very proud of you and the entire delegation that went with you for being fearless even amidst those people. You have touched a very important aspect of our life. Indeed, this is what God created us for. 

Madam speaker, you did not only defend the cultural values of our people, our country and Africa but also the religious practices of our people -(Applause) - Whatever angle you look at it, be it the traditional African religion, we are supposed to get married to men. Among the Muslim as well as the Christian practices, it is men supposed to marry women.

I, therefore, salute you for defending our religious practices and traditional values. (Applause) I would like to argue that your firmness and straightforwardness and uncompromising abilities and qualities are a very good example to many Ugandans and us leaders and also to all officials who go out to negotiate on behalf of the country called Uganda.

At all times, when we go out to negotiate or represent the country, we should remember the aspirations and interests of Ugandans and we should always represent the position of the country. Let me also call upon my colleagues; as leaders, we should not be fearful or threatened by this idea of aid withdrawals. We cannot exchange our cultural values with the aid or money that comes along with these vices.

I would like to also call upon my colleagues that, indeed, the issue of homosexuality is a threat to our nation. Therefore, let us be as vigilant as you and the delegation. 

Let us also try to sensitise our people in the community because there is information that there are some NGOs, which are conduits for bringing in money for recruitment and promotion of the vice in our country. I call upon colleagues; let us use all the platforms to do whatever it takes so that we preserve our values as Africans.

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention something about respect. As Ugandans or Africans, we do not impose our values onto others. I would like to appeal to the international community to make sure that they also respect us the same way we respect them. If homosexuality is good in their countries, let it be. We are saying that the way we are used to doing things is that of one man, one woman or one man and two women depending on the religion that one subscribes to. (Laughter)

Finally, I would like to ask Government; do we know our values? If we do, time has come for Government to check some of these NGOs. The Bill, which was before Parliament and because of the issue of quorum, it was not passed - it is high time Government brought it for us so that we do away with this vice once and for all. I thank and salute you and the delegation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have taken a bit of time on this issue. I would like to make two comments.

First, I would like to thank the members of my delegation because our instructions were clear that you remain in that committee from start up to finish. Usually, when people go out, that is how they smuggle items into the resolutions. I would like to thank all the members; hon. Mwijukye, hon. Akamba, hon. Anyakun, hon. Mourine Osoru, hon. Kabagenyi and hon. Sebaggala. 
It is important that when we go for these meetings, you stay until the end. For them, they sit and when the Africans leave, they smuggle these things in.

Secondly, under the IPU, we are enjoined to promote rights of universal scope. Our case was that this was not a right of universal scope; so, you cannot bring it here. It is not the work of IPU to defend this kind of a right. That is what I wanted to add.
 

4.14
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I highly support the motion to pay tribute to the Speaker for her stance on issues related to homosexuality. 

From the Biblical perspective, Genesis Chapter 1:28 and the following says:

“And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." 

This can only be done when there is conjugation between a man and a – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: It is one minute. Hon. Alero, conclude.

MR ALERO: Madam Speaker, this can never happen in a lesbianism relationship where a woman gets married to a woman. It can never happen in bestiality; when a man gets married to a goat. It can never happen in homosexuality where a man gets married to a man. 

I, therefore, appeal to the Uganda Communication Commission (UCC) to regulate issues related to social media where some of these issues are smuggled in for our youths to copy and involve themselves in immoral activities. Social media, pornographic materials and blue movies should all be regulated. 

I thank you. Congratulations, Madam Speaker. 

4.16
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. First and foremost, I thank your parents for producing us a very wise lady to come to Parliament. I also would like to thank the people of Kamuli District. No one would say this but I would like to say that you are a real Speaker. As the people of Kamuli, I would like to say we shall always bring you back.  (Applause)

As I sit, I also would like to request the Parliamentary Commission- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you. I would like to request the Parliamentary Commission to budget for a helicopter of the Speaker of Uganda because she is a busy person because we need her in her district but she is also needed everywhere. However, the means of transport she has cannot enable her to move everywhere. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.17 
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you. As the Vice Chairperson of the Women Caucus of the Pan-African Parliament, Eastern Region, allow me to pay tribute to you for your courageous, outstanding and high integrity and for displaying that protecting and ensuring African social cultural values is inborn. 

I was with you some time back, I saw this in you when you were in NRC. When you came to that chair, from day one, I knew you were going to make us proud. I know, on behalf of the women movement according to the African Union’s Agenda 2063 you have our support. 

As African women and on behalf –(Member timed out.)

4.19
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank you for promoting Uganda’s values and norms. Our cultural values contribute to our social harmony. National Objective 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is clear on the protection of the unit of a family and National Objective 25 is about the preservation of our heritage. 

Uganda is bound by the international convention on economic, social and cultural rights, which was ratified by Uganda in 1987. This recognises everyone’s right and a State’s right to freely participate in their cultural rights. The same applies to Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. So, as a nation, we should be free to make choices in the promotion of our cultures and norms.

Finally, I would like to talk about the issue -(Member timed out.)

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to congratulate and thank you and the entire delegation. I would like to assure you that when you spoke at that conference, you spoke for all of us and on behalf of Ugandans. I would like to thank you for being consistent on this subject. 

I just would like to make one point on the medical science of homosexuality. When we passed the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 in this House, medical officials from the Western world wrote a letter to the Government and in their submission, they were saying homosexuality is inborn; that one is born a homosexual. I would like to say we have studied this subject matter. Actually, Dr Bitekyerezo and I wrote a technical paper, which we presented –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I would like to assure the Members that there is a wealth of scientific evidence, which shows that homosexuality is just a behaviour, which is learnt in adult life. You are not born homosexual. There is no iota of evidence that shows that there is genetic predisposition of homosexuality. Then, the question you should ask yourselves is; if homosexuals do not produce children because of the nature of their relationship. So, how do they increase in numbers? They increase in numbers by recruitment. There is a deliberate policy by the LGBT to recruit especially in Africa. They are doing everything possible. That is why they want to smuggle information into our documents and so forth.

Therefore, Members of Parliament should be very firm in resisting these behaviours, which are external to us as Africans. So, there is no science at all that shows that genetically, you are born a homosexual. It is a behaviour which is learnt in adult life. Therefore, anything which is learnt can be unlearnt in adult life. I just wanted to give that assurance. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.22
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations on standing by Ugandans and raising the flag higher. When we watched you on television, you made us proud. 

That is not the first time. Even when we were in South Africa in the Commonwealth Parliament, you did the same. This is a very important matter that I thought both sides of the House should be properly constituted. It was on the Order Paper; so, where is the Leader of the Opposition and other people? 

Madam Speaker, a very distinguished lady from Uganda attacked you for the position you took. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR OBOTH: I heard hon. Winnie Byanyima attacking you - was her son born a homosexual? This is going to shift our debate. We need to know the political position of every political party in Uganda vis-a-vis homosexuality. (Applause) We are tired of people hiding and going to sell and trade off this country. Desperate people do desperate things. We do not want them to sell Uganda because of money at international level. Let us brace ourselves for the hard times ahead. It might be harder but we shall overcome. Homosexuals will do whatever they want to do but let us be strong. This country desires the – (Member timed out.) 

4.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating you for always being bold for Uganda. God brought you at the right time and you are the kind of leader that is wanted in this country. Looking at the time you have taken in the Parliament of Uganda, now you are the Speaker, I pray that you become the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, everything is just about time. God has his timing and the way you are moving and standing for the people of –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker. God knows that with the way you are standing for the people of Uganda, I think He has already planned it. He is moulding you in a way that is driving you towards that direction. I pray that you be bold and never fear. You spoke and defended Uganda outside Uganda; you should come back home and start defending Uganda from here and be the President of this country. Thank you so much. 

4.26
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me join the rest in supporting the motion. There are three things. First, congratulations upon assuming the position of the presidency. I would like to say that with all due respect, as the Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli, you have moved beyond the position of speakership. You have ascended to the position of the presidency and that is what we must fight to maintain. 

Abraham Lincoln one time said that among all the good qualities of leadership, courage is the best one. You have proven beyond reasonable doubt that you are the most courageous woman that this country has ever produced. You will be –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will be attacked by people that have failed to bring up their children, who have become homosexuals. For us, we are going to say that as a country, we shall uphold its motto, “For God and my country.” If you have failed to raise your child, that is your personal problem. Homosexuality is a non-partisan issue because even the Opposition supports your position. Thank you very much. We stand by you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, talking of courage, you know in those meetings, when we take a vote, we do it by roll call; they call country by country. However, there are people who disappear during that time. They call the country and there is nobody on the desk. They go and hide because they do not want to be identified with their position.   

4.28
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand as a member of the delegation to confirm what hon. Nsaba Buturo has just said; that you did great work in mobilising, not just Uganda, but the whole of IPU to vote for humanity. 

Homosexuality is not just against our beliefs but against humanity. If animals cannot do it, how can human beings do it? It is common sense. It is not a human right. It is just some form of sickness and I think these members of these countries need to be counselled. I would like to thank the members who have contributed on this; members of the delegation and above all the Speaker. It was not easy. We saw some of our neighbours disappearing –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Do not name them. 

MR MWIJUKYE: I do not want to name them but people were disappearing at the time of voting because they did not want to be seen. There was a risk of members of IPU being compromised. They were being given money. They told them that they would support them in the next election or that they will fight them. Therefore, it was not easy for somebody to stand up and fight internationally against homosexuality. As a Catholic, I am happy that everybody has realised that homosexuality is not a human right but it is just a sickness and we must fight it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.30
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to congratulate you for the work well done and I thank you for being bold and straight to the point. 

Madam Speaker, I would just like to thank you for the lobbying skills. As you have just said, most countries that disappeared during voting did not want to be associated with it but you lobbied the rest of these countries. It is very difficult to beat what has come from a committee in the main House but you did it. We watched that on Tv; you were so bold, courageous. You handled and beat it. I congratulate you for that, Madam Speaker. 

The issue of homosexuality is not needed. We saw the number of countries that supported your cause vis-a-vis the ones that supported you - your side was much higher and you won the case. The reason – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS JOY ATIM: We are saying your boldness, courageous ability and being straightforward is the reason you are being lifted from height to height. Of recent, we realised you have again been elected in the CPA in the highest position. We congratulate you for that, Madam Speaker. 

In the Ninth Parliament, the Homosexuality Bill was challenged because we did not have quorum. We collected signatures of very many members of Parliament for it to be brought back to the House so that we have the law. I humbly request your desk, Madam Speaker, that this law be brought back to this House so that we have a say on it as members of Parliament and we show the world over that homosexuality is never –(Member timed out.) 

4.32
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to add my voice to the rest of the Members here to congratulate you for doing us proud. I would like to forge a way forward on what is happening. When we say that we do not like homosexuality here, they tell us that they are sorry but we already have it happening, especially in our schools. 

During my counselling sessions, I have encountered a number of boys that are using pampers. As a country, we cannot entertain such behaviour that is destroying our children, especially the boys. I have a relative for whom we have to buy pampers, having been trapped into homosexuality practices. 

Madam Speaker, as we appreciate you, we need a – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.33
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. We appreciate the efforts that your delegation made; being patient and resilient to vote the way Ugandans expected you to vote. We congratulate you upon that. 


Madam Speaker, as we reject such evil acts that are intended to erode our moral fabric, we know that the proponents of these acts also work hard to sabotage this country because of our rejection of such evil acts. 

Therefore, as a country, we should prepare ourselves particularly beginning with our schools, that the Ministry of Education and Sports should put a mechanism –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KATURAMU: The Ministry of Education and Sports should put a mechanism to our schools so that this evil cannot penetrate in our youth. My second point is what hon. Nsaba Buturo presented, that there should not be any magnitude of financial inducement that should lead us to such acts.

We know that proponents of these acts are mobilising resources to propagate for homosexuality, gay marriages, lesbianism and bestiality. All these are evils that are geared towards eroding our moral fabric. We thank you very much, Madam Speaker and your delegation, for this noble effort. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of pupils from Nkoni Primary School from Kakuuto where hon. Robinah Ssentongo and hon. Christopher Kalemba come from. You are welcome.

4.36
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would also like to add my voice to thank and congratulate you for representing us very well. Amidst all the intimidations and challenges that you went through, you managed to stand firm and deliver the African values.

You must know that you have opened the way between Africa and those who are for homosexuality. You must know that there is mass recruitment of homosexuality in Uganda, especially in schools and some churches. We need to find a way of fighting this vice because I know they are not going to stop. (Member timed out.)

4.37
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to start by saying that mama weibale inho –(Laughter)- I know it is not a parliamentary language but because of what you have done for this country, you deserve that appreciation mama. (Applause) I pray that God gives you a special place in Heaven in the near future for doing all the good work that you have done in this world. 

You ably guided us in the last Parliament and we sailed through with our Bill. However, we were hit on technicalities of quorum.

It is time now that I pray and I appeal to you mama to bring that Bill. Let us bring that Bill. (Member timed out.)

4.38
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to appreciate you for boldly and promptly coming out and speaking your mind. You can have an idea but sometimes, to get out openly and condemn such things becomes very difficult. 

This is not your first time but the second time. I saw you on television speaking boldly about it. We are very proud of you. I know as hon. Gilbert Olanya has said, in the near future, it might not be 2021 but you will definitely become our first female President in Uganda. (Applause)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, (Member timed out.)

4.39
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues to congratulate you for being a courageous woman and someone who has mentored very many people not only in Uganda but the whole of Africa. 

I know that I have limited time because I was to talk about you, I would talk about you from the time I met you at the Conference Hall when I was a Primary Two child. You were extremely smart and I admired you from that day. However, I would like to call upon this House today, to give the Speaker of this Republic a standing ovation. Thank you very much, 

Madam Speaker, as a representative of the Ugandan delegation, the issue of homosexuality on the continent is an issue, which is hot on an international agenda including the Pan African Parliament. However, we are proud that being an African -(Member timed out.) 

4.41
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank God because He created you in his own image. He made you to grow up in a very simple way. He has brought you to the level of becoming the Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. In addition, you are showing the whole world that Uganda is an independent state that cannot be played with. A country that stands with values and it understands that God is the source of life.

I would like to read one verse from the Bible. Leviticus 20:13 says: “If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.” The consequences are very serious. I would like to congratulate you and the people of Kamuli for the job well done. My people from Ngora are actually proud of you. As we talk now, they are listening and watching and saying congratulations, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much and may God Bless you.

4.42
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, there are important things that Members of Parliament must know. One of them is consistency. Our Speaker is very consistent. She is the same in the morning and at night. She will say the same during the day and even in the darkness. This is a very important point that Members must note. 

She is not like a chameleon. Most politicians, especially in Uganda behave like chameleons; they keep on changing colours and positions. We would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you have always been firm on the issue of homosexuality. I think -(Member timed out.)

4.44 
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to salute you for supporting the order of nature. As a Christian, I would like to quote the book of Genesis 19:4-11, where the Holy Scripture outlaws carnal knowledge against the order of nature. That is why even the least in the kingdom of God follows this law. A he-goat looks for a she-goat, a bull looks for a cow, a cock looks for a hen. (Interjections) (Laughter) 

We would like to salute you, Madam Speaker, because you have protected the –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I congratulate you for your courage. You did not care about the ramifications on your would-be global ambitions. You put the country first. In the same way, I presume that this is in line with the formation you received from your home and the schools you attended. 

I, therefore, implore the House and all of us that we should fast-track the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a subject on ethics and values in schools so that we can pass on some of these values that this generation cherished. If you look backwards, the generation –(Member timed out)

4.46
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for always standing with the African people and the Ugandan people outside this country especially in protecting and defending our cultural and traditional norms. More so, against this kind of funny marriage where a man marries another man and a woman marries another woman. It is actually a very backward and bad practice. It is against our cultures and we thank you for representing this first constituency; this is your first - (Member timed out.)
4.47
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, allow me add my voice to thank and congratulate you at the same time. 
The Christianity we think and talk of today came from the West. If at all in the Bible it is written that God had to wipe away Sodom and Gomorrah because of this kind of practice, then they must have forgotten. 

Madam Speaker, you are a mother of very many. We would not wish to see our children and children’s children messed up. We are grateful that you stood firm and defended our country and the black man and woman. 

My prayer now is, as you projected your cameras, how do we zoom down where we are? As we are trying to defend ourselves outside, here in Uganda, the practices are happening. 

As Parliament, together with you, we have to devise and design a mechanism of making sure that this kind of practice is curbed out and our children are not corrupted into it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank you at this time. 

You remember in the Eighth Parliament when hon. Bahati started this issue against homosexuality, it was as if it was for hon. Bahati alone. The whole world wanted to eat him up. They even blocked him from moving out of this country. 

I am happy that even a journey that will take thousands of miles begins with one step. I am happy that today, something that we started in the Eighth Parliament and people were bitter about has come out successfully. Congratulations.

Secondly, in the Bible and in the Koran, you remember when the people of Sodom and Gomorrah decided to go homosexual –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice to those that have already congratulated you and say that indeed you have done us proud as a country. However, I would like to say that although same sex marriages and sex is a criminal activity in Uganda, it is being practiced and our children are being recruited.

There was a research that was carried out in 2013 and it says that about 12.2 per cent of men having sex with men are infected with HIV/AIDS. These people will infect our husbands, they will infect our children and at the end of the day, it is increasing the prevalence of HIV and AIDS in the country. We need to be critical on our budgets. I remember sometime back, the Minister of Health was asking for lubricants and we asked, “What are these lubricants for?” And they said they are for the men who are having sex with men. We really need to be critical on our budgets; there is no way we are going to spend our resources to buy lubricants for men who are having sex with men, yet we are saying this activity is criminal in the country.

Therefore, as Members of Parliament, we need to be very critical on some of these budgets that come to our committees. We need to scrutinise them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking you and congratulating you upon making Uganda a very proud country. 

Like the other Members have said, we read in the Bible that when God saw that Adam was lonely, He put him in a deep sleep and by the time he woke up, He had made for him a beautiful wife. Maybe God would have made an alternative and said that maybe a man would be the right choice for Adam but He did not. It is a shame for those Ugandans outside there who think homosexuality is a human right; shame upon them indeed.

Secondly, we should know as Members of Parliament that this is not a battle for only the Speaker of Parliament. Let us add our voices to her voice. Let us write –(Member timed out.) 

4.53
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating you for standing a real African with pride; showing the world that you are God fearing and your wisdom and your concern for the good of all.

I am made to know that there are many people who are recruited into the act of homosexuality and they are paid according to the number of persons they mobilise and recruit. The more persons you mobilise, the more payment you get.

Since you know that we are desperate for money and money is normally taken as “sabuni ya ro” in Kiswahili, meaning that any person can accept to do anything; people are desperate and they can get into it.

Madam Speaker, I suggest that the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity carries out a survey to assess the number of institutions that are engaged in this act so that we come up with resolutions to actually deal with them.

I would also like to call upon Ugandans to join hands together to continue the fight against the act of homosexuality. Let us condemn it and deal with it accordingly. Thank you.       

4.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I would like to take this opportunity to commend you for being brave and saying no to homosexuality, amid the so-called developed countries that think that homosexuality is a right. 

Africans and Ugandans believe homosexuality is inhumane and unnatural and we shall continue to defend this. We shall not bow down because of poverty to act against our values. We shall continue to defend our culture and we would like this law to be brought here quickly. They are laughing at us because the law is not here. Let us bring the law and pass it because they are already practicing it. They are misleading our children in religious –(Member timed out.)

4.56
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations upon the tremendous work you have achieved by fighting for our cultural values. Honourable members, when a member of your team goes above and beyond duty, you need to make her know, see and also appreciate the effort.

We know the efforts you are putting into doing your job and we appreciate it. You are an asset to this country. Take a moment to reflect on the accomplishments and take pride knowing that you are an important member of our team.

My prayer is that we need a policy or an award programme to cater for such cases. We also need the necessary legislation to deal with the promoters of the uncultured values. Thank you very much.

4.57
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I wish to thank the people of Kamuli District for voting wisely and bringing to this House such a wonderful and strong lady in the name of Rebecca Kadaga.

On behalf of the people of Katikamu South constituency, I wish to thank you for always defending our cultural values. Thank you very much and God bless you. (Applause)
 
4.57
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank you. However, my worry is that there are some NGOs in our constituencies offering bursaries to primary and secondary school pupils and students but we do not know their motive. 

They do not offer these bursaries to vulnerable children; they just pick at random, whether one is rich or not. They do not offer bursaries to the bright children in any school but they give them to every child who is willing. I wonder what their motive could be. 

Why can’t we first investigate these NGOs offering such bursaries to see that – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to the rest who have congratulated you. When in a foreign country, it is not easy to speak what you think is right for your own country. I see a courageous woman in you; I see a leader.

It is not easy, when in a foreign country, to speak against the people in that country. You need to be courageous. You need to consider so many things. However, even if they are the people who give us aid in this country, you said, “No” because you did not want to follow their cultural values. 

Madam Speaker, as a leader, you showed the children of this country that whatever it takes, you follow the right –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MR JOHSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to congratulate you. You have made us proud but more so, you have done proud the bishops and religious leaders who usually invite you as chief guest.

That Sunday, Bishop William Ssebagala of Mukono Diocese said, “All of you should stand up to salute the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda.” I was attending church and I also felt very proud that I belong to the Parliament, which you chair. Congratulations! May we continue to be proud of you so that we take the gospel to many other schools and children so that all of us can have Christian morals – (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buyaga East, I would like to extend my sincere thanks for your stand, which has brought Uganda and Africa pride. Our culture reminds us that we are supreme. It gives us our identity. It gives us our strength that we are very proud of your kind of your work.

Ugandans are very proud of the stand that you took. The only challenge we have in Uganda today is lack of a vivid and clear mechanism to ensure that our culture is upheld and to say no to the conditionalities that come with certain donations from western countries. We also need to look at these other conditions and –(Member timed out.)

5.02
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, there is a verse in the Bible that says, “I save you that you may bless others.” I thank you for being a blessing to Uganda and Africa. I thank you for being a blessing to whoever is against these practices that are inhumane. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition? 

5.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I think you should give me three minutes. First of all, I congratulate you. It is said that the beginning of wisdom is to know God and the motto of our country is, “For God and my country.”

You have been holding a very hot potato in your hands but you never feared to continue holding it and it made you shine all over the world. It is not only in Uganda or in Africa but all over the world. You have made us so proud and as women - who knew that women would shine the way the Rt Hon. Speaker is shining? (Applause)

Congratulations but my prayer is that whatever you desire on this earth, God should bless you with. God should really grant you whatever you desire on this earth; God should make you successful and fulfil your desires. 

I know one of your desires is to conclude the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which has dragged on for a long time but God should also bless you with what you have not mentioned to us. I say all this, for God and my country and for everybody. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have taken more than one hour on this matter; 27 Members have contributed. If we had time, we would give everybody an opportunity. However, we have a number of Bills to handle. 

I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The question is that the House do approve the motion as presented.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Thank you, very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we stood over three clauses; clause 2, clause 75 and clause 199. Clause 199 was because it was related to clause 75. Let us hear from the chairman and go back to schedule 11, which was also related.
 
Clause 75

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, clause 75 is about management of plastics and plastic products. The committee recommends that we replace the entire provision as follows;

(1) 	The import, export, local manufacture, use or reuse of categories of plastic carrier bags or plastic products made of polymers or ethane and polypropylene is prohibited except for plastic carrier bags or plastic products made of polymers or ethane and polypropylene of above 30 microns and those listed under schedule 11.

We recommend exemption of those which are for industrial, agricultural, medical use, research and science and those used for sanitation and construction.

(2) 	Subject to sub-section (1); “the minister shall, in consultation with the Authority, lead agencies and relevant stakeholders establish criteria for the documentation, handling, storage, recycling, reuse and disposal of plastics and plastic products.”

(3) 	Any person who manufactures or imports plastics and plastic products shall, as a precondition for continued operation - 
(a) 	ensure that recycling was part of that person’s active operations
(b) 	label the plastics or plastic products
(c) 	put in place a mechanism that is satisfactory to the minister to buy back or remove from the environment plastics and plastic products.

(4) 	The Uganda National Bureau of Standards established under the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act is hereby mandated to enforce the provisions of sub section (1).

(5) 	A person to whom sub-section (3) applies shall annually report to the Authority on their compliance with this section.

(6) 	The Authority shall certify whether the person in sub section (5) has complied with the provisions of this section. 

Madam Chairperson, as a committee we robustly justified our proposal -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, please complete the other two sections at the back.

DR KIWANUKA: We are withdrawing No.7 and No.8 because they are on plastic levy and we withdrew the amendment on it. I believe that we robustly justified our recommendation.

It took us a long time to reach this settlement; it involved a wide range of stakeholders and some of the discussions involved the Prime Minister. 

I would like to emphasise that this was the unanimous position of the committee. The report was signed by 23 members and there is no minority report. We sincerely believe that this is the best harmonised way forward on this matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable members. It was only the minister who had an issue yesterday; everybody else had agreed. 

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, I report that we have now harmonised it with the honourable minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: She is the mover of the Bill; let us hear from her.

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, I was satisfied with the explanation of the committee and I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 75 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 75, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 199

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 199, the committee recommends that we insert a new sub clause (3) as follows: 

“(3) the minister may, with the approval of Parliament by statutory instrument, amend schedule 1.”

The justification is to require the minister to seek Parliament’s approval in amending schedule 11 that deals with plastics and plastic products. We also believe that it will provide stability in any further development in this sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 199 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 199, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 11, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, in clause 2, we wanted the definition of “protected areas.”

DR KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 2, under the interpretation, we propose to insert the following new definitions:

“Environmental practitioner”, which means an Environmental Auditor or Environmental Impact Assessor and any person certified and registered by the board to conduct Environmental Impact Assessment studies for environmental audit. 

“Ex-situ,” which means conservation outside the natural habitat of the biological organisation.

“Fragile Eco-system,” which means important eco-systems with unique features and resources and these include deserts, semi-arid lands, mountains, wetlands, small islands and coastal areas. 

“In-situ,” which means conservation within the natural eco-system and habitat of the biological organism.

“Plastics,” which means a synthetic material made from a wide range of organic polymers such as polyethylene that can be moulded into shape while soaked and then set into a rigid or slightly elastic form.

“Polythene,” which means a synthetic plastic material made up of numerous simple chemicals called ethane or ethylene and is used for packaging.

“Polypropylene,” this means a thermo plastic polymer used in wide variety of packaging applications including woven and non-woven bags.

“Wetland,” which means areas of marsh, fen, peatland or water  whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary with water that is static or flowing, fresh, blackish or salty where soils, plants and animals have become adapted. I beg to report.

MR MWIRU: I would like to propose an amendment to clause 2, specifically on the definition of “wetland” to read, “Wetland means areas permanently or seasonally flooded by water where plants and animals have become adapted and gazetted as such.”

Madam Chairperson, when you look at our areas in Busoga, if we were to go by the chairperson’s definition, all the land we have would be wetlands. 

I saw it when we tried to bring that land under the Registration of Titles Act; the Office of the Commissioner of Land Registration has been mapping almost all the land we have as wetlands. However, this is the land where we were born and our animals have been grazing on it. 

That means even land that is seasonally flooded would become a wetland. I am qualifying the areas to be gazetted as wetlands. The areas must be identified and the process of gazetting takes place. That is the justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, do you have an objection to that qualification?

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we accept his amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended variously as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The title, agreed to. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Environment Bill, 2017” and passed all clauses with amendments and also passed 11 schedules. I beg to submit.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report, adopted. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 2017

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Environment Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the National Environment Bill, 2017 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Honourable members, I would like to congratulate the minister and the committee. The Bill has been with us for quite a while. Thank you so much for the work done and thank you, Members, who supported this Bill. (Applause)

Do you want to thank the House and thereafter, upstairs? –(Laughter)

5.22
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am particularly humbled, this being my first Bill in Parliament, to have it through. I thank everybody for their support. We were particularly humbled when some Members from the Opposition said this was one of the most commendable reports. They are not my words but that is what was mentioned. 

Thank you, colleagues on the committee, with whom we worked so hard. Some of the clauses were contentious especially the one that we have just passed. It is just amazing that we managed to get it through without much acrimony. I think it is a result of behind-the-scenes work that was done in trying to get things harmonised. 

Thank you very much, for your support. You can end up upstairs at your cost. (Laughter)

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I am very grateful for the support we have received from the House on behalf of my ministry. This has been a very important Bill and we actually had a deadline of 30th November. I am very appreciative that I have been able to hit that deadline and I must say that this has been our Bill; there has been no Opposition and no Government side.

This shows that this issue of the environment touches all of us and I appreciate all the support. I know we have pulled a lot of strings but as you are aware, the environment is also very harsh. Therefore, it is very healthy – (Interjection) - my appreciation through the “sitting” is very possible and we are going to arrange it and we shall inform you. 

As a ministry, we are very ready to work with you to see that we implement this Act. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUGAR BILL, 2016

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Sugar Bill, 2016 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Has the motion been seconded? Give us a rationale why you want this law.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, the purpose of the Act is to provide for the development, regulation and promotion of the sugar industry; to provide for the establishment of the Uganda Sugar Board and related matters. 

The overall objective of the National Sugar Policy, 2010 was to have a sustainable, diverse, harmonised, modern and competitive sector to meet domestic, regional and international sugar requirements.

The provisions of the National Sugar Policy could not be effectively enforced as they only provided guiding principles and the sector continued to have challenges due to an ineffective regulatory framework. The existing Sugar Control Act, 1938 is obsolete and can no longer effectively regulate the sector because the sector has greatly expanded both in volume and size due to the complex operations.

The enactment of the new sugar Bill is to ensure effective regulation of the sugar industry and enhance its sustainable development for socio-economic development and transformation of the country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing this Bill to be read for the second time. We are taking over from the previous committee to report and all the summaries, minutes, the Sugar Policy and the Sugar Bill were taken over and I beg to lay them on the Table.

This report contains two reports in one; I will read the main report and my vice chairperson, hon. Mangusho, will read the second part of the report.

Madam Speaker, we have not altered the report. We have brought the same report that was processed and I will read it for the Hansard. Honourable members, as the minister has justified, this Bill is essentially to organise the sugar industry and create harmony within the industry.

I am not going to read the object of the Bill because the minister has already justified. I will go to the findings of the members of Parliament, their observations and maybe recommendations.

The National Sugar Policy

The National Sugar Policy was adopted in 2010. The overall objective of the Sugar Policy is to institutionalise harmony among all the sugar industry stakeholders in order to promote and sustain steady industrial growth and development, and transform and diversify the sugar sector to become a competitive and modernised sector. 

The objectives have been laid down; I am not going to read them. They are many and I hope that Members will read through. I will go straight to the committee’s observations.

The committee observed that whereas the National Sugar Policy was well intended and the principles of the Bill were majorly based on it, there were implementation challenges. These challenges arose from the fact that the policy could not apply to most operational sugar mills since they had been licensed way before its formulation and therefore, the key policy measures could not be implemented. As a result, the policy could not achieve its overall objective of institutionalising harmony among all the sugar industry stakeholders. 

The committee recommends:

Licensing Sugar Mills

According to the Uganda Investment Authority, there are 32 companies in the sugar industry, majority of which were licensed between 1993 and 2017. Companies that were licensed before the Sugar Policy of 2010 are 22. Twelve were abandoned, seven are operational and three are not yet in production. 

The establishment of many factories to process sugar and its related products was a positive sign. However, licensing these factories without a proper source of raw materials has led to distortions in the sugar sector. The Uganda Investment Authority did not consider, as critical, the requirement of nucleus farms for applicants seeking to operate sugar mills. 

Zoning of Sugar Mills

Clause 21 provides for sugar mills to be certain distances apart. Sub-clause (1) mandates the Board to ensure that there is only one mill in a zone before licensing it and not to license more than one sugar mill in a zone and that is sub-clause (2). 

A zone was defined under sub-clause (3) to mean an area of a radius of 25 kilometres measured from one mill to another.

Among the policy measures the Government provided for in the Sugar Policy was that sugarcane growing areas shall be planned within a radius of 25 kilometres. In addition, a new sugar mill shall not be licensed within 25 kilometres radius of an existing mill. 

Thirty per cent of the area within this radius shall be used for cane growing and the remainder of the land shall be reserved for food security and other activities. This cane radius will enable factories to expand and enjoy economies of scale.

Another sub-clause: Stakeholder's views

The committee received proposals from the trade ministry to introduce a new sub-clause to read, “There shall not be inter-zone transportation of sugarcane unless authorised by the minister on the advice of the Council.”

The committee established that: 

    1. The proposal for the 25 kilometre zoning radius of mills would unfairly strengthen existing large scale millers over small scale millers yet there is in existence a standard policy on liberalised economies to promote competitiveness and efficiency. 

    2. The committee further established that if left unchecked, large mills would monopolise the sugar industry leading to eventual closure of smaller ones. The Bill, as it stands, would impede growth and development of small scale millers. 

    3.  All out-growers who own 68 per cent of Uganda's sugarcane estate do not support zoning. They decried late harvests of sugarcane contrary to contract agreements with the millers and an 18 per cent interest rate charged by old millers on farm inputs and strained out grower-miller relationships.

Observations

Whereas the committee recognises the value of fair competition in trade and its contribution in ensuring product quality and customer satisfaction, the policy measure that new sugar mills that exist within a 25 kilometre radius of existing mills shall not be licensed would create and sustain monopolies and disregard the principle of fair trade terms and conditions.

The committee recommends that whereas Uganda runs a liberalised economy, Government should intervene to protect small scale industries from unfair competition. The law should be enacted in such a way as to ensure fairness and competitiveness of all stakeholders in the sugar industry.

Absence of nucleus farms

The Sugar Policy mandates Government, through the Uganda Investment Authority, to issue licenses to new sugar factories with a nucleus estate of at least 500 hectares or sizeable land to enable the factory to financially break even, to grow cane and produce sugar.

The committee, however, established that without due regard to nucleus farms to ensure sustainable supplies of sugarcane, the Uganda Investment Authority issued operating licenses to majority of the sugar mills. Most sugar mills were reported not to own land as fall back positions in the event of low supplies from out-grower schemes.

The committee observed that majority of the sugar mills are operating but without certainty of constant supplies of sugar cane from out-growers. The situation is exacerbated by breach of supply contracts between out-growers and sugar mills, theft and poaching of sugarcane.

The committee recommends that for a sugar mill to be licensed by
the Board that this committee is going to create, it must be conditioned to own a nucleus farm of not less than 2,000 hectares. 

The committee further recommends that sugar mills that do not own nucleus farms should, within three years, acquire that acreage.

Establishment of the Sugar Board

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes the establishment of the Uganda Sugar Board as the governing body. The Bill proposes the Board to be a body corporate with powers to sue or be sued and do all acts and things that a body corporate may lawfully do.

Stakeholders' views

    (a) The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers' Association

During consultations, the committee found out that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the sugar millers under the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers' Association are against the establishment of a sugar regulator through a Sugar Board. They informed the committee that the Board would be expensive to maintain and bureaucratic and therefore would lead to delayed decision making. 

The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives also informed the committee that it was the Government’s decision to stop establishing statutory bodies. The minister further informed the committee that the Government made a decision to stop establishment of statutory bodies. The minister and the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers' Association instead proposed the establishment of a Sugar Advisory Council; a non-autonomous body, which would be supported by technical staff from the ministry responsible for trade.

    (b) Millers Association of Sugarcane, Uganda Sugarcane Growers' Association, Mayuge and Kamuli Districts Local Governments

The above informed the committee that the sugar industry needs a regulator and not a mere advisory council. Just like other important sectors of the economy, it was necessary to establish a body that would fairly and professionally license millers and other players, regularly monitor licensed players and carry out other regulatory activities. The establishment of a Board will foster healthy competition among sugarcane players and also ensure sustained sugar production.

The committee observed that:

    i) There has been lack of strategic and regulatory institutions to coordinate and harmonise business transactions for all sugar stakeholders. As a result, that undermined business collaboration that is necessary for growth of the sub-sector across the entire value chain.

    ii) There exists a lot of mutual suspicions among the various stakeholders, especially the millers and the cane farmers, on issues relating to pricing formula, sugarcane growing and purchasing agreements. The committee believed that cooperation among the various stakeholders, especially the millers and the cane farmers, will be enhanced by a strong regulatory body.

    iii) The Advisory Council, as proposed by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers’ Association, would only play an advisory role to the Sugar Sector and is presumed inadequate to address the enormous challenges surrounding the Sugar Sector.

The committee recommends for and supports the establishment of the Sugar Board that will ensure effective regulation of the Sugar Sector.

Composition of the Uganda Sugar Board

The committee was informed that the Bill puts Board governance powers in the hands of millers at the expense of growers with the intention of continued exploitation of growers. The representation of the millers and out-growers should be equal.

The committee is of the view that representation of out-growers should be increased for purposes of decision making and equal representation. Representation of out-growers on the Board should be increased from two to four.

Sugarcane pricing

Clause 25 (1) provides for the formula of determining the price of sugarcane. The formula is spelt out in the Third Schedule as follows:

Price of sugarcane = C x R x D. The minimum shall be 40 per cent. We shall look at the formula later.

Observations

The current formula only recognises the weight of sugarcane supplied by the farmers and does not consider the by-products from sugarcane for example electricity, ethanol, bio gas or fertilizers and molasses.

The committee established that the average world known recovery or rendements per 100 tonnes was 10 per cent that ranges from nine to 11 per cent and in the formula, this was put at nine per cent.

The current price paid by the millers for the sugarcane was net of taxes, which was not reflective of the market price.

The committee recommends that the formula be revised to include the other by-products of sugarcane as these accrue better returns to the millers, with improvement in technology.

Further, it is the considered position of the committee that the minimum sharing ratio, in the returns, be revised to 50 per cent for fairness.

The need to form cooperative societies and out-grower associations

The committee found out that most out-growers and out-grower associations in Uganda are not organised in well-defined structures to enhance their productivity and competitiveness in local, regional and international markets.

The committee noted efforts of Atiak Sugar Project in Amuru District, which has organised over 1,000 rural out-growers of which 600 are women with their families under the out-grower cooperative societies. These cooperative societies will empower farmers and enable them to access credit.

To aid the management of out-growers and out-grower associations, there is need for them to be formally registered and recognised by the Government. This will attract policy and any other forms of interventions.

The committee observes that farmers not being organised has led to low productivity in the sector, vulnerability to uncompetitive practices and low bargaining strengths.

The committee recommends that in order to ensure a sustainable sugar industry, Government should organise farmers into cooperative societies.

The National Sugar Research Institute

The committee observed that while sugarcane is a strategic crop and key to national development, Government has not given it the required attention in terms of research and development. Government has only invested in agricultural research for a few crops like bananas, coffee and cassava while ignoring the rest including sugar and to my knowledge, tea.

The committee was informed that since 1987, the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers’ Association has been developing varieties under the sugar technology and so far, 937 varieties have been tested in a period of 20 years. However, only three varieties have promised good results for commercial production.

Committee’s observation

The committee observes that due to inadequate research in improved varieties and agronomical practices, the sugar sector has witnessed a drastic fall in nuclear tonnage yield from 120 to 90; and for out-growers from 80 to 50 tons per hectare of harvest.

Committee recommendation

The committee recommends that Government should prioritise the National Sugar Research Institution with a view of promoting the sugar industry.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, subject to the proposed amendments, the committee moves that the Sugar Bill, 2016 be adopted. I beg to move.

The second part of the report shall be read by my vice chairperson, hon. Lawrence Mangusho.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Let us receive the minority report.

5.46
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Lawrence Mangusho): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to present the minority report. Pursuant to rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, we hereby present a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority members of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

2.0 	Area of dissent

We dissent with the majority report of the committee regarding the recommendation to approve the Bill with amendments of clause 22 and the consequential amendment of clause 32 of the Bill. Of course we have inherited this whole report, so it should be noted by the members. 

Clause 22 requires certain mills to be certain distances. 

Clause 22(1) of the Bill provides that in licensing sugar mills, the Board shall ensure that there is only one mill in a zone. 

The Bill, under clause 22(3), defines a "zone" to mean an area of a radius of 25 kilometres measured from one mill to another.
However, according to Clause 22(5), the requirement of a 25 kilometre radius does not apply to a sugar mill existing immediately before the commencement of the Act.

In relation to clause 22 of the Bill, the committee noted, in the majority report that:

    a) It took cognisance of the value of fair competition in trade and its contribution in ensuring product quality and customer satisfaction and observed that the policy measure that new sugar mills that exist within a 25 kilometre radius of existing mills would create monopolies.

    b) Majority of the sugar mills are operating but with uncertainty of constant supplies of sugarcane from out-growers and that the situation is exacerbated by breach of supply contracts between out-growers and sugar mills, theft and poaching of sugarcane.

From the observations, the committee recommended that the requirement for certain sugar mills to be 25 kilometres apart be replaced with the mandatory requirement for sugar mills to establish nucleus farms of 2,000 hectares before licensing to ensure constant supply of sugarcane.

3.0 	Dissenting observation

3.1 	National Sugar Policy, 2010
According to the National Sugar Policy, 2010, Government, through the Uganda Investment Authority, was supposed to license new sugar factories with a nucleus estate of at least 500 hectares or sizeable land to enable the factory to financially break even, grow cane and produce sugar.

The policy also required sugarcane growing areas to be planned within a radius of 25 kilometres.

These measures were intended to harmonise sugarcane growing and ensure that established and new sugar mills have sufficient acreage to grow and expand their operations.

3.2 	Stakeholders' views

All the sugar millers, through their umbrella organisations (Millers Association of Sugarcane (MAS) and Uganda Sugarcane Manufacturers' Association (USMA)), informed the committee that the idea of zoning is necessary for proper regulation of the sugar industry.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and USMA informed the committee that zoning of sugar mills was deemed critical in the policy and in the Sugar Bill for purposes of managing the Sugar Sector. They proposed that a cane zone should be an area of 25 kilometre radius allocated to a single mill for growing sugarcane and the distance between any two mills should be 50 kilometres apart. 

This was based on the technical understanding that sustainable sugar and sugar production requires a stable environment and long term planning due to the long gestation period of sugarcane as a plantation crop.

On the other hand, sugarcane farmers were concerned that the zoning policy would call for 'ring-fencing' of markets.

The dissenting Members observed that:

    i) Having more than one mill in a zone creates an unrealistic surge in demand of sugarcane, which in turn results in extremely high pressure on the available cane in a particular zone. The consequences of having more than one mill in a zone include: loss of yields due to the harvest of immature sugarcane, loss of recovery (sugar produced out of cane) due to crushing of immature sugarcane, higher costs of production making Uganda to have one of the highest costs in Africa, loss of revenue to farmers due to lower yields, loss of revenue to manufacturers due to underutilisation of capacity and low recovery and loss of revenue to Government due to lower tax revenue, among others.

    ii) In order for the requirement of sugar mills to be at a certain distance to achieve its intended policy and legal objective, it should apply to all sugar mills, including those already existing. This would go a long way in addressing the disharmony existing among sugar industry players. As a result, this will require sugar mills, which are currently established within the radius of the earlier existing sugar mills, to relocate to other areas.

    iii) Zoning of sugar mills should not affect sugarcane out-growers who are not under any contractual obligation to sell their sugarcane to a sugar miller in the zone in which their sugarcane farms are located.

Whereas, in the Bill, it is the view of the majority to provide a requirement that sugar millers should have a sizeable nucleus estate before licensing and whereas this is commendable, that recommendation should not replace clause 22, which requires sugar mills to be 25 kilometres apart. Both provisions are pertinent in view of the need to address the challenge of shortage of sugarcane. This will ensure sustainable supply of sugarcane as a raw material of sugar and the by-products of sugar. 

We recommend that;

    i) Clause 22 of the Bill should be amended to provide for relocation of the existing sugar mills, which are within the 25 kilometre radius of the earlier established sugar mills;
    ii) Clause 22 (5) should be deleted; 
    iii) Government should provide land for relocation and bear the cost of relocating the affected sugar mills. 

Conclusion 

Honourable members, we implore you to support the minority view on the areas of dissent. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the original copy of the minority report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and vice chairperson for both presentations and thank you for ably picking up the pieces from the old committee. Honourable members, I do not know whether you would like to study the two reports first and we debate tomorrow. I think we need to study the implication of the proposals from either side. 

There are a number of positions in both reports that I think we need to study, appreciate and understand the implications. I would like to adjourn the debate to tomorrow. Use tonight to read and then tomorrow at 2.00 p.m., we will start the debate. Thank you very much. 

I would also like to remind the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that you have been pressing us for the Investment (Amendment) Bill so you should also get ready. Prime Minister, they have been harassing us for these Bills and we are ready but it is the Government, which is not here. 

The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

