Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 7 November 2019

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I hope that the relevant officials will find time and come to the House. However, I have three matters of communication.

First, as I indicated on Tuesday, I would like us to proceed under Rule 26(4) today so that the first two hours of the day are devoted to the issues of the backbenchers. There are a number of questions and I really hope that the ministers will come and we deal with those questions and then also deal with matters of national interest.

Secondly, I would like to inform the Members that the Ministry of Internal Affairs will not be able to respond to the questions, which we had intended to give them. This is because today and tomorrow, we have two presidents; the President of South Sudan and the President of the Democratic Republic of Congo. The two presidents are in the country and the ministers are involved in managing these visits. I direct that they respond next week to your issues.

The third matter concerns our conduct within the Chamber and also in the committees. Members are expected to observe a certain standard of conduct both inside and outside the House –(Applause)– and the behaviour of Members should at all times enhance the dignity of Parliament and its Members in general. This calls for conduct, which is not derogatory to the dignity of the House or inconsistent with the standards that Parliament expects of its Members.

Rules 69-91 of our Rules of Procedure govern debate, behaviour and our general conduct. Rule 83 prohibits the Member from using unparliamentary language. This entails the use of offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.

Rule 84 of the Rules of Procedure provides for general behaviour of Members to be guided by a Code of Conduct under appendix (f). The purpose of this code is to assist Members in the discharge of their obligations to the House, their constituents and the public at large. 

I am disappointed that yesterday, there was a very big display of breach of rules 83 and 84 of the Rules of Procedure. I do hope that Members will desist from that conduct. Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner that will maintain and strengthen the public trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never to undertake any action, which may bring the House or its Members into disrepute. Over the last two days, there are some Members of this House, who have brought this House into disrepute in the committees.

I am aware that the committees are quasi-judicial institutions and we know that we are expected to carry out investigations. In doing so, we must observe the rules of national justice. Under Rule 86 and 87 of the Rules of Procedure, it is my responsibility to ensure that order is observed in the House and in the committees.

On Tuesday, when the Minister of Education and Sports appeared before the Committee on Education and Sports, one of our members, hon. Francis Zaake, conducted himself in a very disreputable manner and this was repeated yesterday when the delegation from Makerere University came. 

Although, we are allowed to attend committees where we are not Members, we cannot take on the role of prosecutor. From what I have established, when Members were given an opportunity to put questions to the management, hon. Zaake demanded that his issues be addressed first. He kept on interjecting when the vice- chancellor was speaking, accusing him of not addressing his concerns. He further ignored the chairperson and members of the Committee on Education and Sports. 

Despite several attempts by the chairperson of the committee to control him, hon. Zaake continued in a very unruly manner and failed to obey the chairperson. He was actually uncontrollable.

I have been informed that at one point, hon. Basalirwa had to intervene to calm him down and told him to conduct himself in a proper manner but this was not hitherto. Unfortunately, he did not end in the committee, I have viewed footage of the departure of Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe from the committee room but hon. Zaake followed him; heckling him, insulting him and threatening to beat him right up to the steps of this House.

My view is that hon. Zaake has prima facie conducted himself in a manner unbecoming of a Member of Parliament and has breached our code of conduct and therefore, lowered the public trust in this institution.

I, therefore, refer this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for further investigation and they should make appropriate recommendations to the House within two weeks. 

Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, you have ruled that this matter goes to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Is it procedurally right for hon. Silwany –(Interjection)– hon. Anywar be calm, at your age you should not be doing what you are doing - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are the Speaker of this House and you are the authority in that Chair. You have given an opportunity for a Member to make a submission. The colleague has risen up on our Rules of Procedure – I was making my comment as per your ruling, quietly. Is the honourable member in order to allude that Members of my age and his age have no right to speak in this House? Is he in order to demean us to that level?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order because I have just talked about unbecoming conduct in this House. I made three communications. I do not know whether hon. Silwany wants to talk about Rule 26 of the Rules of Procedure or he wants to talk about the visit of President Felix Tshisekedi; that is why I allowed him because I do not know what he wants to talk about.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, much obliged. I think if someone is holding the Floor and others are making comments like she was making - have you not heard her? You are the one inviting other comments because I did not stand here to comment about her age; it is none of my business but I was only reminding her that if I am of that age, there are things I would not do.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, this is the conduct I have just cautioned you about and that is what I started with. Honourable members, I think the first part of my business is being interfered with. I need the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Is the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities here?   

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, you have just made a very important statement that does not only touch on the integrity of this House but raises fundamental issues in so far as the temperament, character and upbringing of some of the Members in this House is concerned. I wish you had spoken when the House was full. Some of the Members who should listen to this very important instruction are not here. I pray, therefore, that at an appropriate time you make this fundamental statement so that some of our colleagues, who are fundamentally flawed in their ways of doing things, listen to it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it becomes necessary, I will repeat it. I was saying that the Executive appears to be frustrating my work. I gave notice on Tuesday that I wanted the ministers here today to respond to Members’ questions.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are sorry that our colleagues are coming in late. However, a few of them are on the way.

THE SPEAKER: If we raise the matters of national concern, I do not know who will listen to them.

MR BAHATI: Two of us are here and we can answer the questions that appear on the Order Paper. The others are coming. We are making calls for them to come.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first two questions that require responses have been on the Order Paper for over five months. In your communication, you made mention of the character of members of Parliament in this House and this also includes the character of the ministers. The character of some of the ministers is unbecoming. They do not respect your Chair.

If the ministers continue like this, how will Parliament proceed with its business yet we need responses from Government? It is already beyond 3.00 p.m. and we see only three ministers, moreover they are junior ministers. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right for you to take stern action as far as the behaviour of some of the ministers is concerned so that the House moves.

Sincerely, we cannot move because we do not have the ministers to respond to the issues of the citizens of this country. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are concerned because you had even given notice and it was captured on the Hansard and circulated to the media. In particular, when matters of police brutality arose, you directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come today and brief the country about the continued violence and the police brutality.

You added that the House should be informed about the roadmap and how Government is following the roadmap by making the necessary preparations, procedures and processes for the enjoyment of freedoms and for each political group to know how they should play by the rules of the game. The whole country has been waiting. However, when you look around, you do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs, you do not see the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, you do not see the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and you do not see the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. We are at a loss.

Madam Speaker, how do we proceed, as Parliament, when matters of extreme public importance are scheduled to be handled by this House and those responsible are not here? May I propose that in view of this – fortunately, there are state ministers here – we could have a five-minute suspension so that these matters are handled, not anywhere else but by this House?

Members, if this House fails to discharge its business, the only thing you should expect is violence and violence can only breed violence. Therefore, it is only proper that we have such matters debated. It is a shame seeing on the screens and media the mothers of this country being manhandled and treated the way they are being treated. When we sit in this House as if the country is at normalcy, that is the highest deception we can have as a country. 

Therefore, it is important, Madam Speaker, that your ruling is respected. Whether you are small or whatever others think you are, you have made the ruling in this Chair and we have only that one Chair in this House and country. We cannot sit here and have rulings and decisions being made in vain. Otherwise, everybody would behave the way they want.

Honourable members, it is only proper that the sanctity and authority of this House is restored. You cannot have refuge anywhere. (Applause) This is the bastion of democracy. This is the cradle of the rule of law and the House where we legislate for the good and peace of this country called Uganda. Whatever political shade of opinion we may belong to, ultimately, we are all here to do the job we were elected to do for the good of this country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I humbly move that this House be suspended for five minutes so that those whose businesses are rightly on the Order Paper – and were scheduled to appear – come and we make progress in this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, members of Parliament have three major roles: legislation, oversight and representation. On Thursdays, the first two hours – under Rule 26 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament – are on the representational role of the members of Parliament and this is what the Government is trying to avoid handling.

Therefore, I am going to suspend this House for 15 minutes and if they are not here by then, I will actually adjourn. The ministers must come and respond to the concerns of the citizens of Uganda, through their representatives. (Applause) 

The House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.11 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding­_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Mellisa Nakwero Primary School. Are you the ones or you are from Lulwanda? Oh, these children are from Lulwanda Children’s Home Primary School in Mbale. They are represented by hon. Werikhe and hon. Connie Galiwango. You are welcome. (Applause) They are very smart, as you can see.

I also welcome pupils and teachers of Mellisa Nakwero Primary School. They are represented by hon. Ssemujju and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause) I am sure they are also smart.

Honourable members, I suspended this House for 15 minutes so that the Government could come. However, it appears that the Prime Minister and his Cabinet have abdicated their responsibilities. We are not going to massage the Cabinet. I gave them notice of the business of today. The issues Members raised must be answered. In the circumstances, I am adjourning the House until next week. House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
