Thursday, 6 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We have in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery, the President of Rotary International, Mr Burton, with his wife - (Applause) – and several other representatives. We shall be giving you their names, but they are here to be present when we pay tribute to Rotary International for the work done for humanity.

Hon. Kasamba had something brief; two minutes.

3.06
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the many people - Ugandans and some of them were even Rwandese - who had settled in Tanzania and who were expelled by the Tanzanian authorities in the Karagwe area. They are over 4,265 people who were deported in Isingiro District at Kikagati Border Post and they were transferred to Sango Bay area in my constituency and that is the Mutukula area. 

They have been camped there into a transitory camp under the management of the Office of the Prime Minister but there are quite a lot of inadequate supplies in terms of food, sanitation and health facilities. Over 1,000 of these returnees are children and I appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister and government agencies and donor agencies to come to the rescue of these people. And also, the Minister in charge of East African Affairs to make sure that they come up with a statement in as far as what is happening to the very good relationship we have had between Uganda and Tanzania and the spirit of the East African Community. 

The health situation is so bad that there is one police constable who is a nursing officer who has been managing a nursing aid post for the 150 police constables who are manning the Sango Bay area. She is now handling a case load of almost 70 to 80 health problems related to these people who were put in this camp. I beg for immediate Government response. I would like to lay on Table some of the documents, which will help Government. I have already communicated to the relevant agencies so that immediate action can be taken to address this alarming situation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I lay a brief report on the urgent matter of national importance over the 4,265 people expelled from Tanzania, together with an accompanying report from the camp commandant, part of the management team which is managing the situation on the ground, so that Government can take immediate action. I lay on Table. Thank you very much.

3.08
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the situation described in the report is being handled by Government. In fact, yesterday, we had a review of such problems in the country and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is actually taking necessary action to settle some of these problems.

However, some of these problems like Cholera and so on depend on the hygiene of the individuals and the community. If we do not look after ourselves properly it may not be difficult for Cholera to attack us. So, as Government is trying its best, we shall also urge the community to at least prepare themselves and look after themselves.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I think the problem is that these people are not in their homes. They were expelled from Tanzania and they are in a camp. So, they cannot organise in a normal way. That is the concern of the Member for Kakuuto. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No; I am aware that these people were expelled from Tanzania and what they are doing now is as a result of that expulsion. However, there are no facilities immediately where we put them like pit latrines and so on but definitely, much as they were expelled from Tanzania, they could be able to dig pit latrines for their survival.

DR LULUME-BAYIGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Matia Kasamba was very clear when he raised the matter of urgent national concern and we expected that Government would make a formal statement. The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister would have come here to the Floor of Parliament to state when that formal statement is going to be made or to direct the Minister in charge of East African Affairs to make a statement; or the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness to describe the situation as is so that Parliament can make a resolution about it. Is he in order to blame the victims, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I think what we need is a statement from the government on what they are going to do because these people did not volunteer to leave Tanzania. They did not volunteer to be where they are. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I did acknowledge the expulsion of these people from Tanzania. I also informed the House that yesterday, we met at the Prime Minister’s Office and discussed the whole situation demanding the attention of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness including the one at the Congo border. You do not see that a lot of refugees are coming in. So, we are not really sleeping and we really know exactly what we shall do there rather than being told what to do. I said last time that if you see people swimming and you think you can also swim because you have seen people swimming, then that will be a problem. You are going to drown - (Interjections) - Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we expect a statement on this matter from Government on Tuesday next week. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I think we have said that action is being taken overall including those people but I will ask the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to come and make a report to this House so that this House is brought up to date. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to announce that the Committee on Science and Technology will be having a sensitisation meeting on Friday on the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill which, as you know, was a product of this House. The meeting was due to start at 9.00 a.m. and end at 4.00 p.m. but as I indicated yesterday, we are having the President here for one hour so I hope you can start after the President has left the precincts.

I now do have the full list of the guests: Mr Ron Burton and his wife Jetta Burton. They are there. (Applause) Then we have Rotary International Director Mr Knaack and his wife Susan; Rotary International Trustee, Mr Sam Owori; District Governor District 9211 Mr Emmanuel Katongole; Rotary District 9211 and the country leaders. You are all welcome. (Applause) They could all stand up. They are all there. I see Mr Kyemba, they are many. Hon. Sebalu. The whole team there is Rotary. So, you are welcome. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    (I) REPORT ON THE HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM IN SRI LANKA

THE SPEAKER: Chair, health committee? Next item

    (II) REPORT ON THE FIELD VISIT TO WEST NILE REGION ON THE HIV/AIDS PROGRAMME

3.16
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. The report is ready. We are having a meeting tomorrow to append our signatures. 

    (III) REPORT ON BENCHMARKING VISIT TO THE ICT SECTORS IN GHANA, TANZANIA AND KENYA

3.17
MR VINCENT BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas our report is ready and we have agreed on the draft, we have not appended the signatures.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEND ROTARY INTERNATIONAL FOR PROMOTING HUMANITARIAN SERVICE, ENCOURAGING HIGH ETHICAL STANDARDS IN ALL VOCATIONS AND HELPING BUILD GOOD WILL AND PEACE IN THE WORLD

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi – and we should have this debate done in 30 minutes.  

3.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commend Rotary International for promoting humanitarian service, encouraging high ethical standards in all vocations and helping build good will and peace in the world, in accordance with Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Copies of the motion have been prepared and I request that they be circulated to hon. Members:

“WHEREAS Rotary International is a worldwide organisation of business, professional and community leaders who provide humanitarian service, encourage high ethical standards in all vocations and help build good will and peace in the world;

AND WHEREAS Rotary was the world’s first service club and the first Rotary Club was founded in Chicago, Illinois USA on February 23 1905;

AND WHEREAS Rotary is renowned for its wide membership coverage and is now composed of approximately 1.2 million service-minded men and women belonging to more than 34,000 Rotary Clubs in virtually every nation in the world;

NOTING that Rotary came to Uganda in 1957 and today Uganda has 75 Rotary Clubs with over 2,400 members all around the country and is currently part of the Rotary District 9211 comprising Uganda and Tanzania and is approximately 70 percent of the district in terms of membership;

FURTHER NOTING that Rotary Clubs meet weekly in local areas across the world and their membership reflects a wide cross section of community representation with interesting and informative programmes dealing with topics of local and global importance;  

CONSIDERING that Rotary’s focus areas include water and sanitation; basic education and literacy; peace and conflict resolution; economic empowerment; maternal and child health among others; and Rotary Clubs address critical issues at home and abroad by providing healthcare and medical supplies, clean water, food, job training, youth development and education to millions of people in need;

FURTHER CONSIDERING that Rotary is committed to Polio eradication as it works with the national and international health organisations toward the goal of eradicating Polio around the world and Rotarians, through their clubs and personal contributions, have raised over $2 billion for the campaign against Polio;

COGNISANT that the Rotary Foundation is an essential arm of Rotary which each year provides some $100 million for international scholarships, cultural exchanges and humanitarian projects large and small that improve the quality of life for millions of people;

APPRECIATING that Rotarians in Uganda through their clubs are implementing many projects in their communities in areas of water and sanitation; economic empowerment and health concerns among others; and currently in Uganda is constructing a Rotary Cancer Centre at St Francis Hospital Nsambya; supporting annual open heart surgeries under their Gift of Life programme; conducting annual Rotary family health days around the country; and carrying out quarterly breast and cervical cancer awareness and screening campaigns among other programmes;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that because of the high profile of Rotary in Uganda, three Rotary International Presidents have visited the country in succession over the last three years, and present among us as you have already introduced is the current Rotary International President, Ron D. Burton and his dear wife and other distinguished leaders of the Rotary Family; and President Ron Burton is a member of the Rotary Club of Oklahoma, USA  and he is visiting Uganda to get a first-hand experience of the achievements of Rotary in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
    1. Parliament recognises the positive impact that Rotary has made in Uganda and the world over;
    2. That Parliament congratulates the District Governor, Mr Emmanuel Katongole, who is with us here for pioneering the new district 9211 comprising of Uganda and Tanzania;
    3. That Parliament appreciates the Rotary International President Ron D. Burton for honouring Uganda for its outstanding Rotary achievement during his maiden visit to Africa. 
    4. That Parliament commends Rotary International for initiating the future generation by activity engaging the youth in various Rotary activities.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Motion seconded.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you know, there are many honourable members of Parliament who are Rotarians and Rotary is a very popular subject in the Parliament of Uganda. I want to briefly justify the motion that I have just moved. The Rotary family in the world has a membership of about 1.2 million people. 

Rotary as an organisation was started with a vision of one man called Paul Harris and we have the “Paul Harris Fellows” in Rotary being people who have made very great contributions towards the Rotary cause and the Rt Hon. Speaker is one of the Paul Harris Fellows. I want to thank you for the support – (Applause) – she is actually a Rotarian and greatly supports the cause of Rotary. 

Paul Harris formed the first Rotary club in Chicago on 23 February 1905. He brought together professionals with diverse backgrounds to meet and exchange ideas and form meaningful and lifelong friendship. And the name Rotary derives from the practice where these professionals and experts would meet in their various offices on a rotational; that is how the name Rotary came up. 

Rotary is organised in three main parts: we have Rotary International, whose President is here; we also have the Rotary Foundation which is the arm that mobilises funds for the cause for Rotary but most importantly, we have the clubs at the local level. And as you heard in my motion, we have 75 clubs and almost every district in Uganda has a club and they are very many around Kampala. In these clubs, members meet weekly for one hour for fellowship basically to reflect on some of the community challenges and see how to improve the quality of mankind in this world. 

If we are to talk about the achievements of Rotary, we would need a whole week as Parliament to enumerate them. But basically, Rotary addresses the life of the under-privileged, the vulnerable population and the poor of the earth. So, the resources which are mobilised through voluntary contributions by Rotarians and other people of good will go towards supporting the poor, the underprivileged, the vulnerable, the wretched of the earth – people who do not have the basic services. That is why we moved a motion to commend the work of Rotary over the past 100 years. Rotary has done a very great job. 

Rotary is guided by a non-partisan and non-sectarian ethical guide and most of you who have interacted with Rotary are very familiar with it. 

As I wind up my justification, I want to state the Four-Way Test, which Rotarians know very well, which guides the work of Rotary and I want to commend it to parliamentarians. It goes like this: 
    1. Of the things we think, say or do, are they the truth? The things you say here in Parliament, are they the truth?
    2. Of the things we think say or do, are they fair to all concerned? So, are we promoting fairness as parliamentarians?
    3. Of the things we think, say or do, do they build good will and better relationships?
    4. Of the things we think, say or do, do they benefit all concerned? 

I think the Four-Way Test, as it is used mainly by Rotary, is extremely applicable to the work of parliamentarians and I want to call upon honourable members of Parliament to reflect on the Four-Way Test and see how applicable it is to our work. When you stand up to speak, are you telling the truth; is what you are doing helping Ugandans and so on. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is a misconception in the outer world that Rotary is for the rich; that is not true. The motto that Rotary uses is “Service above self.” For you to be a Rotarian, you must have a heart to serve others, not the material wealth. Rotary requires that all Rotarians and people of good will find ways to improve the quality of life for the people on earth. That is what motivates people to be in Rotary so that they can make a contribution towards improving the welfare of others. 

I therefore want to call upon members of Parliament and urge you to join Rotary and serve mankind. I also welcome the President of Rotary International, his wife and other leaders who have chosen to come and visit Uganda and particularly, I would like to thank the President of Rotary International for his exemplary service. He has been in Rotary since 1979 and it is documented that when he joined Rotary, in his early years in Rotary, he made sure that his children attend Rotary fellowships so that they grow within the family of Rotary. 

He has also made sure that his family are part of Rotary and has done a very good job in taking the message of Rotary to the whole world. 

For leadership in Rotary, usually we consider three things: integrity, expertise and commitment to service. That is why people are elected in Rotary and that is why the distinguished ladies and gentlemen that we introduced have these qualities, and I myself, am also a past President – (Laughter) – I am a past President of the Rotary Club of Kabarole in Uganda. I thank you very much and I urge honourable members to support this motion so that we commend the work of Rotary International. 

3.32
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to salute the President of Rotary International because I am a Rotarian of Bukoto Club, which is in Uganda District No.211. I thank him for having chosen Uganda among the countries which he should visit. 

I support this motion to pay tribute to Rotary International because of its objective, “Service above self.” I think honourable members of Parliament can easily become Rotarians provided whatever you say is the truth; it builds good will and is fair. 

Madam Speaker, we have several challenges in the sense that by 2015, we were supposed to have reached the millennium development targets but I think we may not achieve it. I would like to appreciate Rotarians in the whole world for helping Government in providing healthcare. Most of the cancer screening and the centre for cancer, which they have talked about have been through the initiative of Rotarians and I would like to ask Members of Parliament that even if you have not joined Rotary, the fact that you have some of your voters suffering from cancer, you can donate - even if you are not a Rotarian - then later, we can put you on board and you become Rotarians. 

Madam Speaker, Rotary looks at sanitation programmes and community service. We have children who are orphans but they are being assisted by Rotary clubs. I would like to really appreciate that the reduction of poverty and Polio to an extent has been through the 1.2 million Rotarians world over - (Member timed out.)

3.32
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Rotarian by faith because my political party DP believes in all these things they have listed here; that is the Four-Way Test of the Rotarian clubs. That is truth and justice, and it is our motto. 

I want to support this motion because all of us are beneficiaries of the kind hand of the Rotarians. In my constituency, schools have been given water tanks; old people who could not afford a home for themselves have been given houses by Rotarians in Mukono, who always gather for their meetings at Collin Hotel every Wednesday. 

In particular, I want to thank the Rotarians. From what I saw in The New Vision last week, they organised a clinic for people who have defects of the heart especially the children and they conducted an operation to restore health to children who had problems of heart disease successfully for 20 of our children, and it was the first operation of that kind to be held in Uganda. 
We want to thank everyone who contributed in particular now that the President of Rotary International is here with us. 

Madam Speaker, if all of us would move with these objectives of the Rotarians, this world would have a difference. And I believe there is nobody who is so poor that he cannot give anything and there is nobody who is so rich that he doesn’t deserve a kind hand from others. All of us stand to gain from the kind gestures of others internationally and we want Government not only to end at thanking, paying tribute, but as the Government of Uganda, they can choose also to contribute positively towards the rotary activities particularly by taking these clubs to our children in schools - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the Students’ Guild of Nkumba University. I don’t know where they are seated. You are welcome. Also, join me in welcoming the students of Bugema University. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to commend Rotary International for a wonderful job they are doing for this country and the world. But before that, I would like to join you to welcome and thank the Rotary International President for putting off this time and coming over to share this moment with us. 

I feel I should also congratulate our own District Governor, Mr Emmanuel Katongole, for what he has done for this country in many areas. He is really a true Rotarian even as he talks, he moves, and in whatever he does. 
I want to congratulate him, and I want to thank him for the many things he has done for the underprivileged in this country. 

Madam Speaker, Rotary has touched almost all lives in this country. I don’t think there is anybody who does not remember how Polio used to torture almost every family in this country but as we talk today, because of the intervention of Rotary International, Polio is almost no more in Uganda - of course, with the support of the Government of Uganda. 

Rotary International has done quite a lot almost in every field, but as somebody with a background in education, I want to commend rotary in a special way for the work they have done in our schools. Madam Speaker, through their brain child the Interact Club, Rotary has built a spirit of responsible leadership in schools; they have built up the spirit of care and love for others. Through the Interact Club, the young boys and girls in this country are able to exchange a hand of love and friendship to the underprivileged. They are involved in things like caring for the sick, looking after the elderly which are things that were meant for the aged. That is a very good spirit –(Member timed out_)

3.40
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Uganda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion that has been read by hon. Chris Baryomunsi. I just did not hear something mentioned about the Rotaract. I am actually a Rotaractor because for the young generation, there is something said that when you want to learn to eat with the elders you have to watch how they eat. In this country, we have something called the Rotaractors and these are the young Rotarians groomed to join Rotary. I actually belong to that club and as a youth leader, I have been in the Rotaract Club since high school and we are doing a tremendous job through the Rotaract club. What we do is go to schools and support because we don’t have the money. 

We used to think that Rotary was for the rich people but as soon as we joined the Rotaract Club, we started supporting voluntarily and giving in kind –(Member timed out_)

3.41
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a former first President of the Rotary Club of Kabarole and the first Assistant Governor for our region, I feel it is in order for me to come and support this motion; add to the voice in support of Rotary and welcome our President of Rotary International. You are most welcome to Uganda. We love you and we love the work of Rotary!
 
Madam Speaker, Rotary has complemented not only in terms of Polio eradication but also other service delivery areas within our country, for instance, in the water sector, Rotary has done quite a lot in extending water to our rural areas. When it comes to education, many of our young people have benefited. When it comes to people who are sick, with very bad cases - (Member timed out.)

3.43
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion to pay tribute to Rotary International and to add to the voices of my colleagues to welcome the President of Rotary International, Mr Ron Burton. He is known for his simplicity, for his commitment to Rotary and I just want to make one request to our President here. I am a proud member –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, half a minute but conclude.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. The request I was making to the President is that when you look at the membership and the clubs we have in Uganda, we actually already have 70 percent of the membership of this district. So, Uganda in itself qualifies to become a district of its own. So, let us instead release Tanzania to have their own district and I know if it comes here with Uganda, we shall have even more districts and more governors. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to pay tribute to Rotary International. I am one of the beneficiaries of Rotary work in Uganda because way back in 1987, when I was giving birth to my second born, I preferred to go to the general ward where the Rotary Club of Jinja had renovated and equipped instead of going to grade A although I was entitled. That time I was worked on very well. The conditions there were very good and actually, I never felt a lot of pain while giving birth – (Laughter) - because the conditions were great. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   

3.46
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to congratulate the President of Rotary International and to also thank hon. Chris Baryomunsi for this motion. I fully support it. I come from Arua where Rotary is also doing wonders. I joined Rotary through the Interact Club as a charter member of Caltec Academy and I am still a Rotarian although I also joined another service club called the Wise Men International.

I would like to make one or two appeals to Rotary International, particularly on behalf of the youth in regard to HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B. These are two of the current challenges we are facing in Uganda and we are told for Hepatitis B, the treatment and vaccination are very expensive. I hope the President of Rotary International will carry our message. While they sit together with World Health Organisation, something can be done and thought out in regard for this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to Rotary International as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $34,050,000 FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) FOR FINANCING ENHANCED NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY THROUGH INCREASED RICE PRODUCTION PROJECTS

THE SPEAKER: What is the minister doing? No, hon. Members, you know this report was presented. It was also debated. Was it not debated? No, information from the Clerk is that it was debated and it was waiting for taking a vote. That is what I was briefed. Okay, let us go to the other matter while you establish whether it was debated or not because this is the information I have from the Clerk that it was debated. 

3.49
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fred Mbagadhi): Madam Speaker, what I do remember is that this report was presented. I did present this report on the Floor and I do vividly remember that it was partially debated. That is all I remember - (Interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I have got the copies of the minutes for that day. It was debated, not by very many people - by eight people - but what was remaining was to put the question. Yes. 

Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the resolution as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 72,940,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (ADB) FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT (FOUR) FOR UPGRADING OF THE KIGUMBA-MASINDI-HOIMA-KABWOYA ROAD

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Chairperson. Go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $20 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE DRY LAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA
 

(Motion expunged from the records)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us go back to item 6.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 72,940,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (ADB) FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT FOR UPGRADING OF THE KIGUMBA-MASINDI- HOIMA-KABWOYA ROAD

THE SPEAKER: I think it is the Chair to report, isn’t it? 

4.30 
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. In this Parliament, we debated extensively the other time when a loan request was brought to do some roads in the western part of this country. There was an extensive debate and this Parliament resolved that we pass that loan and we said that next time when they are bringing loan requests, it should cover all the areas of the country. Today, again, I see that they have brought a loan to cover the western parts of this country. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance because there was a very heated debate here. Are we going to keep proceeding like this or we get a loan that makes the country have equitable development? We are about to again enter another exercise for passing loans to develop the already privileged areas yet other areas like Karamoja have not even seen half an inch of a tarmac road. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I do not know which part of the country is going to be handled. I do not know the reasons. Let us hear from the chairperson and maybe we will understand why.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your patriotic ruling. When I was a young boy during Amin’s time, I heard a promise of this Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima Road. When Nyamurunga came back from Tanzania, he promised this road and the government I serve has been promising this road. I would want to say I am happy that after so many years, the most important road in the country from the days of the railway connection from the Namasagali-Masindi Port to Butiaba has finally seen the light of day.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I want to present a report on a Government request to borrow UA 72.94 from the African Development Bank for financing the Road Sector Support Project (RSSP)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, just hold on a bit. Hon. Magyezi is bringing to my attention something which we may have overlooked in relation to the other loan for Karamoja. You go and sort the issue. Just go there and tell us the problem. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point is on the amount we have approved for the loan - the amount for the Karamoja project - I am on page 10. The motion was for US$20 million and when you look at page 10, the IDB loan amount is US$20 million and ISFD loan is US$5 million. These are two separate loans with different terms. 

When you look at page 9, it is very clear. The amount required from IDB was supposed to be $15 million and the one for ISFD was $5 million. The total is $20 million. So, we are supposed to approve two separate loans, one of $15 million from IDB and a second one of $5 million from ISFD. I think, Madam Speaker, we need to correct this one.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the Chair to explain. 

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg for the indulgence of hon. Members. The loan that we are talking about is the loan of $20 million. The $15 million is supposed to be acquired from IDB and the $5 million is supposed to come from the ISFD. But going by the document, I think there was a mix-up and there was a problem with the printing because on page 9- (Interjections) - hon. Members look at page 9, we have IDB providing $25 million. Then we have $5 million from ISFD. So, that means even when you come to page 10- (Interjections) - yeah that is what I am saying that there is a problem; it is just a printing error but -  because even on page 10, we have IDB with its terms and conditions and then we have ISFD with different terms and conditions - (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, the Chairman is misleading this House. In fact these two loans have different terms and conditions. For example, the IDB loan is for 25 years and the grace period is seven years. And when you look at the ISFD loan it is for 30 years and the grace period is 10 years. They have varying service charges. 

Is the Chairperson therefore in order to continuously mislead this House when we are supposed to pass two different loans, given the technicalities and terms therein?

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, in what form did you present your request?

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, the loan request was for $15 million from IDB and $5 million from ISFD. That is why the terms and conditions are different. 

MR MBAGADHI: Madam Speaker, I do agree with the hon. Members that there is a problem with this page because out rightly, we are supposed to be borrowing $20 million in total - that is the fact- and of this $20 million, we have $15 million from IDB and $5 from ISFD. But when you look at the terms on page 10, they are different. You get the loan maturity period of 25 years and in ISFD we have - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague Chairman should be decent rather than drag on an argument that cannot be sustained. I think he needs to concede. Actually it is not only on those pages that he has referred to where there is a gross error made; even on the final page, page 16, where their prayer is contained, they are clearly asking this Parliament to pass $20 million from IDB and no mention is made of the other funding agency. I think they need to go back and look at this report again and correct it; and since we have already debated, I would request that we defer the decision of this House on this particular matter, unless as a House, Madam Speaker, you can help us to expunge some of the misinformation given by the committee.  

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. We have already passed a motion for $20 million. I think what we need to do is separate the vote, put the question on the IDB money and put the question on the other one. Yes, I think that would help.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As far as I know, the Islamic Development Bank gives loans without interest. But when you look at this loan, I do not know who negotiated for this loan at the interest of 2.5 percent. It is a very big one. 2.5 percent from Islamic Development Bank? This cannot be true. And the next one of $5 million, the interest rate is 0.75 percent. 

This country is continuing to borrow and borrow. Just $20 million which we collect in taxes and we are aiming at paying very high taxes on these loans! This country can collect this money. The money that is stolen is more than $20 million. While I sympathise with my neighbours in Karamoja, this country should not be taken for a ride.  

And secondly, when you look at the servicing - $2.5 million for servicing the loan in this country, surely that is too much and they are putting only $3.57 million on the road infrastructure in Karamoja. How are people going to reach Nakapiripirit to do this project? It is impossible! For some of us who have been to Karamoja- So we should look at this loan strictly; look at the interest rates and then look at the road sector in Karamoja. How are they going to carry out this entire project in Karamoja?

And taking into account that we have had a big scandal in the Prime Minister’s Office, where we lost PRDP money, we are giving this money again to be handled by the Prime Minister’s Office! I beg to sit, Madam Speaker.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, as much as I am in agreement that two questions should have been put because these are loans from different institutions, I want to inform the House that the Islamic Development Bank does not give interest-free loans. We have just passed a loan for the bridges in northern Uganda and there was interest on it because this loan has got administrative costs etc. So, nobody should confuse this House that the Islamic Development Bank gives free money. That is not true –(Interjections)– it was 2.5 in this House, for northern Uganda bridges and we are going to construct 14 bridges.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, can you move - the Islamic- yes hon. Kyanjo.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to implore my colleague, the Minister, to go and find out the terms of Islamic banking and bring in a record which will give us a clear record of what they charge, rather than claiming that they charge interest. This is not true. Parliament should not be seen to be doing something that is internationally known.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, are we dealing with Islamic banking or Islamic Development Bank? The principles are different.

MR KYANJO: But the fact that they do not charge interest remains; my fear is for anybody else all over the world to hear Parliament of Uganda talking as if we are not aware of the modern world. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give information to hon. Kyanjo that the money he is talking about from the Islamic bank facility has some charges. Those charges may not be interest but they are administrative. Therefore when you are servicing the loan, you are not expected to pay back the exact amount of money that you borrowed. 

So, it is true that there are costs and it is also true that –(Interjections)– that is different, the information I am giving him is that this money is not free; it accrues some administrative costs which we have to pay. 

MR MUKITALE: I want to seek your indulgence, hon. Members: in table 1, the committee shows the actual total project cost of $24.9, $15 million of which is from IDB, $5 million from ISFD, plus the Government of Uganda counterpart funding of $3.4 million. 

When we get loan requests, the motion is moved by the Ministry of Finance and the brief to Parliament includes the terms and conditions. So, I would like to request hon. Members that as the Speaker has rightly requested it is possible to put two questions: one for IDB and one for ISFD. The terms were already given to us; I think the problem is that you all do not have copies of the brief to Parliament right now. But the Minister of Finance put before Parliament the terms and conditions. I know honourable members got copies from the table where we sign from –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you hon. Chair. I do not know whether you know that the figure you have given us, $24.9 million, as the total financing of the project does not rhyme with the figure in table 3 of $24.88 million. There is a difference of Shs20 million which is not explained. The disbursement plan as given in table 3, if you took time to add up those figures, it actually comes to $24.88 million, not $24.9 million. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that we defer this so that we can get full clarification from the Chair and the Minister. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at table 2 on page 9, table no.1 and table no.2 have the same component. But again table no.2 shows that IDB funds allocated to the project component come up to $20 million. Meanwhile, table no.1 talks of $15 million. You look at the components; the activities indicated there are the same. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, table no.2 is a summation of IDB and ISFD. That is why it adds to $20 million. But it will be strange, in the practice of this House, to approve two separate loans in the same motion. These must be two separate motions because the loans are different. 

THE SPEAKER: That is what I said, that can we have two separate motions? The Chair can move the one for the IDB first, we vote on it and then we move to that of ISFD so that the resolution comes specifically. 

4.49
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fredrick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move a motion that this House –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for this House to borrow two loans, one at 0.75 percent and another one at 2.5 percent, without the House being told that the people who are giving the loan at 0.0 cannot give us the whole loan amount? Are we in order to vote before we are told that these people have refused to give us, to the extent that we are borrowing one expensive loan and another cheap loan? Is it in order for the Chairman to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: The Chairman deals with documents which have been brought to him; it is not the Chairman who decided where to borrow the money from. Let us hear from the Minister of Finance. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, different banks have their own different terms and conditions. When you look at Islamic Development Bank, they do not use the word “interest”, they use the word, “service charge” and they give a percentage for service charge. That is why it is clearly stated here as a “service charge”; they have not mentioned anything here to do with interest. And that is how it was even when we were borrowing for the bridges in northern Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Committee on National Economy has both Members of the ruling party and those from the Opposition. You instruct your Members to make those points in the committee because they are there and they are part of this report. Please move.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I do stand to move a motion- 

THE SPEAKER: Clarification from hon. Kiboijana.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I still seek for clarification on the total of the two figures as far as table no.1 is concerned. Table 1 gives us the total figure as $24.90 million and when you go to table no.3 and add up the $4.88 million under year one, the$6.03 million under year two, the $5.56 million under year three, the $4.57 million under year four and the$3.84 million under year five, it gives you a total figure of $24.88 million. When you subtract the two figures, the figure in table no.1 and the figure in table no.3, there is a difference of US$20 million. How justifiable is it?

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, I think the problem we are grappling with here is referred to as “rounding errors”. I think when you have, in one case, 24.88 and in another 24.9, basically I think this is simply a rounding error and it is up to the committee to point out to Parliament which one of those is the correct figure.

MR MBAGADHI: Madam Speaker, there was a concern being raised by Members on a procedural issue that which rule- but I want to refer to the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, that is Rule 50: “Motions without notice.
(1) The following motions may be moved without notice-
    a) Any motion by way of amendment to the question already proposed by the Speaker.”
Like the situation we are in.
“(b) An adjournment motion for purposes of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance.”
The first one does apply; that is why I brought this rule.

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. You have realised that we are borrowing this loan from IDB and from ISFD. If you check table 1, IDB is giving $15 million that is supported by 60 percent; and ISFD is giving 20 percent meaning that Government of Uganda will give 14 percent and the communities a total of one percent. But if you went to table 2, you would realise that the overall loan that we shall get from both IDB and ISFD will be a total of $20 million. And they are calling it 100 percent, the whole thing, meaning that the Government support and the community support will not be included in this project. That is the difference. You will find that the whole thing will be only the $15 million and the $5 million from the ISFD, totalling to $20 million; and that is only 80 percent- the 60 percent and the 80 percent, meaning that the other 14 percent and six percent of Government of Uganda and the community has not been included. Can we have clarity on that? That is what is bringing us the problem. 

MR MBAGADHI: Madam Speaker, I clearly said that I do concede that on pages 10 and 11 there was a printing error. Specifically with this loan we are talking of $20 million - $15 million from IDB and $5 million from ISFD. So, in this case I do urge honourable members that we go by the decision of the Speaker to move two motions.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the resolution will have to be specific so we need actually two motions: one for the $15 million and one for the $5 million.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $15 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE DRY LAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA 

4.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fred Mbagadhi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion on this floor, that this House approves the request by the Government to borrow $15 million from IDB for the financing of the Dry Land Integrated Development Project in Karamoja region. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put a question that this House does approve the borrowing of the $15 million as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 5 MILLION FROM THE ISFD TO SUPPORT THE DRY LAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA
 

4.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fred Mbagadhi): Madam Speaker, I stand on this floor to move a motion that this House approves the request by Government to borrow $5 million from ISFD for financing the Dry Land Integrated Development Project in Karamoja. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House does approve the borrowing of $5 million as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, first of all, let me start by thanking hon. Raphael Magyezi for helping the House to see shoddy work that was done which would have been a great embarrassment to this House. At least personally I would like to thank hon. Raphael Magyezi for that. 

I would like to use this opportunity to encourage all of us Members of Parliament to be vigilant and scrutinise some of these things, which obviously would embarrass us -

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving a submission? 

MR OTADA: That is just a preamble, Madam Speaker.  The guidance I am seeking from you is that we have just had an amended motion for $15 million and $5 million respectively. I want to ask for guidance in regard to the motion which we had already passed of the $20 million and the $5 million. What had become of that motion because now these are two substantive motions that have been passed by this Parliament? May I be guided?

THE SPEAKER: The first one will be deleted.

MR OTADA: May I move that the first motion for the $20 million from Islamic Development Bank and the $5 million from the ISFD be expunged from the records of this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER:  No. The other one was joint. You are now mixing them up. 

MR OTADA: So can we have a proper motion drafted?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I direct that the other motion be expunged from the records.

5.01
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was moving, and I am moving, on behalf of the Committee of National Economy to report on the long awaited financing of the Kigumba-Masindi - Hoima-Kabwoya Road. I would request that when this report is being given to Members, the annex headed “UNRA brief and responses” should also be given to Members to help them look at them concurrently. 

This loan request was brought before the committee and we did interface with the Ministry of Finance; scrutinised the brief to Parliament and interacted with the Ministry of Works and Transport. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure did move with that on National Economy on the ground to Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima. We also interfaced with UNRA. 

The committee made reference to the Road Sector Support Project- I am on page 2 below- the draft loan agreement and interfaced with the ministry. I would like to request that I move straight to page 4 on 4.0 alignment of the project to country strategy.

The RSSP IV is closely aligned to National Development Plan (NDP) which sets out the country medium term strategy, development priorities and implementation strategy. The project is anchored on two main pillars namely, infrastructure for development and improving capacity skills development for poverty reduction. Roads have been prioritised in the NDP because of their bearing on rural agricultural production and its relevance to poverty reduction and economic growth.

The project is also within the context of Uganda’s 10-year road sector development strategy. The RSDP is critical in achieving the objectives of the NDP. It identifies critical transport infrastructure that have a high development impact for the reduction of poverty and support to the country’s vision of becoming a middle income country by 2030.

Project Objective 

The main objective of the project is to improve road access to socio-economic facilities and quality of transport service levels in western Uganda by upgrading the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya 135 kilometre stretch from gravel to bitumen standard and thereby contributing to an improved standard of living.

Colleagues just the day we went for recess we were also discussing loans for other regions.

Description of the Project

The road to be upgraded is located in western Uganda, running through the districts of Kyenjojo, Kibaale, Hoima and Masindi and ending up at Kigumba Town Council. I am happy now you say I summarise because I have talked about Kigumba which is on the way to- (Interjections) - exactly.

The map is on page 5. Kigumba starts from the UN of Uganda- the main component where all parts of Uganda and Africa do exist is Kigumba. 

Component 1: Civil Works 

This component involves the upgrading of the existing gravel road to bitumen standard in two contracts: lot 1, Kigumba to Bulima, 69 kilometres; lot 2, Bulima-Kabwoya, 69 kilometres and the provision and installation of one weighbridge. 

The two sections are part of the road section which is part of the 238 Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba Road that is currently a gravel road originating from Kyenjojo Town through the towns of Hoima and Masindi and ending at Kigumba. 

Colleagues, I believe most of you have passed that rough road.

The road works for both lots shall comprise upgrading existing class B gravel roads to class II bitumen standard of seven metre wide carriageway and 1.52 metre wide shoulder on either side; with a gravel sub-base graded to crushed stone base and double bituminous surface treatment. Also to be included are the associated drainage and ancillary works as well as implementation of environmental and social mitigation methods. 

Component 2:  Consulting Services

The component will include the following: 
    • Design review and construction supervision of civil works for the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road. 
    • Feasibility and detailed engineering design studies of the multi-national Uganda Kenya Road Kapchorwa-Suam- Kitale.
    • Feasibility studies for Rukungiri-Ishasha Road, 78 kilometres.
    • Construction sector transparency initiative.

Madam Speaker, the effecting of this project allows other projects like you have seen, including the remaining part of Kabwoya to Kyenjojo; the Rukungiri-Ishasha Road and the cross border Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road. It is part of the consulting works.

    • Preparation for the one stop border post study for Bunagana, Kyanika and Lamia. 
    • Technical and financial audit
    • Road safety audit.

Component 3: Capacity Building

To ensure effective management of portfolio and capacity enhancement of the road sub-sector, a study on comprehensive capacity needs assessment of UNRA will be undertaken in order to utilise this component.

Component 4: Compensation and Resettlement

This component makes provision for compensation and resettlement of project-affected people in accordance with the Resettlement Action Plans. 

The project cost is as follows: 

The project cost estimate is UA 95.5 and is equivalent to $144,926,025 million, which is equivalent to Shs358.67 billion

The cost of the project will be financed by the Africa Development Fund and the Uganda Government counterpart funding. The financing from AfDB resource under ADF-12 is equivalent to UA 72.94. 

Colleagues, this explains the difference between the UA 72.94 on the motion for borrowing and the UA 95.5 actual cost because that includes Government counterpart funding which includes resettlement and land acquisition. I hope that figure is resolved at this point in time.

The financing detail by source of finance and summary breakdown of the project costing by component are presented in table 1 and 2.

So you can clearly see, Madam Speaker, table 1 giving you the source and the amounts. Table 2 clearly gives you the components, costing, financing by components. The civil works which take a total of UA 71.36; consultancy, UA 4.58; road subsector studies which has a subtotal of UA 1.98 and the base cost of UA 81.81 and then you come to contingency of UA 6.92. Of course you can see they have factored in the three percent and seven percent just in case of price escalation. We did demand for details of the escalation. 

The loan terms and conditions on page 7 as given to us on the brief to Parliament and the project appraisal document; loan amount UA72.94: here we are talking about the borrowed funds; the UA 95 is inclusive of Government counterpart funding. The loan period is 50 years; repayment, 40 years. That includes the grace period. The service charge is 0.75 percent per annum on amounts disbursed and outstanding; commitment fee of 0.5 percent per annum. 

I must also labour to explain here that the longevity of the borrowing makes it concessional on top of the 0.75 percent concessional rate. I had a concern that the longer the loan the more dangerous it is. I thought I should explain that concessional loans should have the lowest interest rates and should be for as long as it can. Like you are borrowing for more mortgage, wouldn’t you chop for two years? 

In addition to the entry in to force of the loan agreement, the following conditions are attached - the conditions are clearly attached here. In the interest of time, since we still have other business, can I move to observations if it is okay, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yeah. Just go to the title and the recommendation. The rest the Members will read.

MR MUKITALE: I will also request you to record this document. The committee has full details of questions asked at committee stage and responses from UNRA.

Observations and Recommendations

Partial Funding for the Entire 238 Kilometres Road Network

The committee observed that –(Interjections)– you can move a motion to put a question and I stop reading.

THE SPEAKER: No, read partial funding or the entire etc. Then you read the recommendations, cost overruns.

MR MUKITALE: Yes. The committee was concerned that the whole stretch up to Kyenjojo was not funded at once. We recommend that Government should expedite efforts to upgrade from gravel to bitumen paved surface, this remaining section of Kagadi-Muhororo-Kyenjojo given its importance, and to ensure completeness of the entire route because now it leaves a murram vacuum.

Cost overruns

The committee observed that according to the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statement for UNRA for the year ending 30 June 2012, road project files from 2008 to 2012 that were reviewed revealed that UNRA spent Shs150,761,999,999 and Euros 38.406 to pay for the cost of financing the various road construction and maintenance projects as a result of the revision of the contract. These cost overruns were caused by delays in implementation of projects and revision of works. Such revisions point to weakness in feasibility studies and road designs undertaken or even weakness in contract administration and supervision and the agreeable unit cost of construction by the authority, which in turn leads to such huge costs.

The committee recommends that UNRA ensures that for all lined up future road construction projects, proper feasibility studies and designs are undertaken, acceptable cost estimates are given and adhered to and that project implementation timelines are adhered to in order to minimise such overruns. 

Delays in completion of road projects: The committee observed that one of the biggest challenges that hinder improvement of road network across the country is failure of contractors to deliver projects in time. In some extreme cases, contactors abandon road works half way; failure of contractors to meet targets is facilitated by lack of capacity, a major handicap facing the road sector in Uganda. Besides lacking adequate and appropriate equipment and human resource, many construction firms do not have ideal management skills.

The committee recommends that UNRA expedites the implementation of the envisaged new methods that will bar contractors who do not finish a predetermined percentage of work within a certain timeframe from undertaking new projects under its jurisdiction. The committee further recommends that the government should gradually build capacity for local contractors to make them competitive. 

Colleagues, we were told it is a very detailed process of blacklisting a contactor and that is why we are saying, why don’t we build our own capacity to take over some of these projects? 

The PPDA Limitations: The committee further observed that under the existing PPDA Act, terminating a contract for non-performance of a contractor by Government is a very tedious and intricate process that takes no less than a year even where a contactor abandoned the site. In addition, many contractors do shoddy work because they are shielded by the PPDA law from losing their contracts. So, because they know they are protected by the law, if you took any action against them, they have that complacency. 

The committee recommends for the revision of that part of the law. The law should make a clear distinction between work and service contract to avoid such pitfalls. This will make it easier for UNRA to terminate contracts of non-performing contractors. If you have done well on works, you can be cleared for work but terminated on services if you have a problem. 

Poor implementation of road safety furniture on projects: The committee observed that on a number of road projects, road safety concerns are not considered the priority during execution of civil works. Furthermore, occupational health safety concerns for a number of road projects are not adequately addressed due to lack of protective gear for workers, among others. Safety guards, if neglected, cause adverse effects to the environment and the population.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with UNRA, should ensure that adequate safety measures for this project and other on-going and future road projects are effectively provided and enforced.

Projects designs and bills of quantity should in future incorporate such measures to prevent, minimise and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social effects of projects for contracts where the safety furniture is included in the bills of quantities.

Final payments should be withheld until there is compliance. There are enforcement challenges during the implementation phase.

Quality of works: 

The committee observed that in the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statement for UNRA for the year ending 30 June 2012, the quality of works on the projects audited was generally good with some instances of poorly executed work. Where the quality was wanting, there was inadequate quality control over the materials used, especially aggregate for filling of roads. The case in point is Tororo – Mbale - Soroti Road contracts. 

The taxpayer continues to lose billions of shillings through shoddy road works. The committee, therefore, recommends that UNRA and project consultants should be more vigilant in assuring quality of materials used on road projects. Supervision should be taken seriously and any substandard material rejected outright and such contractors penalised. All road projects should have functional laboratories accredited by the UNBS and road construction materials tested in a timely manner.

Supervision and contract management: The committee observed the slow improvement in supervision and contract management by UNRA, due to high project to UNRA staff attachment ratio. They are not very visible on the ground. A project engineer handling more than four projects is overstretched. These staffing gaps continue to impact on the effective supervision of projects.  A number of projects continue to be supervised by hired consultants in some circumstances; there is also laxity among UNRA staff and consultants who have not taken their supervisory responsibility seriously. 

The committee recommends that UNRA expedites the recruitment of more staff and further ensures that consultants and UNRA staff take supervision of road projects very seriously. UNRA staff and consultants that fail to take their supervisory responsibilities seriously should be made individually culpable for losses arising thereof.

High cost of road construction

The committee observes the high cost of road construction in Uganda in comparison to similar projects in the region. The situation is worsened by lack of generally agreed unit rates for different classes of roads. The committee is aware of different classes but can we have a unit cost? Because sometimes the excuse is that it is different classification and different land ownership and the types of works rehabilitation and construction. We should know if it is a new road, rehabilitation and if it is a repair. 

The committee recommends that for future road projects, the government explores new technologies with potential for cutting down the cost of road construction such as the use of recycled technology and adoption of enzyme technology for stabilisation of road pavements. 

In addition, fixed contract rates and acceptable unit rates for different classes of road projects should be explored by UNRA. The provision under which these rates could be varied should only be under clearly and well-laid down circumstances.

High accident rates: The committee observes that there is noticeable improvement in the road conditions with significant reduction in journey times. The blot of this achievement remains accident fatality rates which are still very high by world standards. We are ranking very badly in terms of the accident rates.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Chair, members can read these things. Can you just say the subject and the recommendation?

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the establishment of the National Road Safety Authority and vehicle master test centre as a way forward. 

Let me go to recommendations before I conclude. 

We recommend that Government expedites the much-needed residual reforms in the transport sector, including legislative amendments to the existing laws, for example, the URA Act to remove the binding constraints that hinder the good performance of the Uganda Road Fund. This matter has been brought here by the infrastructure committee, the finance committee – we need to improve predictability of follow of road maintenance funding. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee noted Government efforts in improving rural infrastructure in order to improve agriculture productivity in the country which is essential for social and economic development of the nation. The project will support the effort of Government in poverty reduction through improvement of road infrastructure in rural areas in order to provide all-weather access for the supply of farm inputs to major market centres thus enhancing productivity, competition and incomes of people in line with the National Development Plan. 

The up-grading of Kigumba–Masindi–Hoima–Kabwoya road will support the expected increase in traffic related to oil exploration and production in the Albertine Graben. The proposed project offers enormous distance and journey time savings for traffic to Fort Portal in south west Uganda, eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and in areas of Kigumba, Gulu, Acholi, West Nile, Sudan and the DRC. 

The distance between Kyenjojo and Kigumba via Kampala is approximately 485 kilometres via the proposed road. So, you would save 251 kilometres. Once the proposed project is completed, transport costs would reduce by 50 percent. 

The committee therefore recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow Units of Account SDR72.94 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank for financing the Road Sector Support Project IV. Thank you for listening and I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair. 

5.27
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion and this loan as the committee Chair presented it here. It is true that these are some of the loans that should come on the Floor of this House because the people of West Nile do trade a lot in their produce and I am sure improving this road network will make business easier and the flow of foodstuffs to the regions will also be made cheaper. 

My only concern is in regard to committee observations. On the issues of implementation, many loans have been brought to this House and eventually passed. But the period taken to execute the projects for which these loans are procured is a nightmare. So I want to implore the Ministry of Works which is going to implement this project to ensure that as soon as all the processes are finalised, the money is put to use. We do not want to hear that a loan of this magnitude has been passed and is sitting idle on a certain account. 

We are happy with the Vurra–Arua–Koboko–Oraba Road; it is on schedule. I was there when the ground breaking was done and I also witnessed the procurement and passing of the loan. So, if we move at the same pace, then we will not lose out as Ugandans. I implore the Government that once loans of this nature have been brought and passed by Parliament –(Member timed out_)

5.29
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee and I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I rise to support this loan without reservations. But I have two or three concerns. If you have gone through the road described under this project, you would not hesitate to support this loan. The road in its current state is deplorable - very difficult to pass through. In fact, the structure of the soils would not make a gravel road sustainable along that axis.

Secondly, I would like to ask my colleagues not to look at this as a road only for the western part of the country. In fact, it is an important link through the west, linking the southern to the northern part of the country. So I think this is a national road. (Applause)

My concern though is about the unit cost per kilometre of road works. At the moment it stands at $1 million per kilometre. I have consistently said that this is very high in my view. Just to give you an idea, the amount of money we would save, for example, by bringing that cost down to about $700 which is reasonable over that distance of 240 kilometres of road works to be done, is about $72 million and I think that money, if saved, can go into other ventures in this country. 

So, I think Government and my friends in UNRA need to be concerned about bringing the cost per kilometre of road works in this country down –(Member timed out_)

5.32
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this loan. To me this is a very noble cause that should be supported by all. Having said that, I want to note the very good recommendations by the Committee on National Economy; however, when I consider the quality of their work, I know that their recommendation stops at just penalising the bad contractors. I wish to implore hon. Members that such contractors should be blacklisted for a period of not less than five years so that they can learn that what they offered in form of sub-standard work is unacceptable to Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, this raises another issue of some consultants who happen to be part of the staff of UNRA. I keep wondering whether this does not result into conflict of interest on the side of maybe one or two consultants whom, at a certain level in another committee, we met who happened to be staff and consultants at the same time. 

Another issue I wish to raise is the issue of speedy compensations on those affected by the construction of these roads. Many times compensations take a long time and it stresses the people affected. There are examples along the Ibanda-Kazo Road of people who have not been compensated in spite of the fact that the road has been long finished. So I wish that this issue of speedy compensation be put into consideration –(Member timed out_)
5.34
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the committee’s report to borrow the amount of money which is meant to finance the road sector with specific reference to the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road. 

Madam Speaker, this road is long overdue; this is the only road that connects the northern region with the great Kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara and with the great Kingdom of Tooro. 

I want to state, in support to the committee’s report, that under compensation and resettlement, whereas we support this loan, I want to urge the government that in most cases as hon. Kiboijana has stated, when you do not compensate the people who are settling along the road, whom you are going to displace, and wait to compensate them after the construction, in most cases these people end up losing out. We have a case of the Umeme people who connected the power line from Lira to Kigumba and to Masindi. Up to today, those people have never been compensated. It is my preferred position that our people get compensated before the road works begin. 

I also want to urge Government that as the constructors take on the work, the access to people’s residences- the bridges - should be put in the plan. For the road from Kafu to Masindi we raised these concerns after the road had been made because there was no access to people’s land. People would just cross and some would jump the bridges. Up to today you have to go up and then down; there are no access bridges. So in the plan, we want to ask the Government to make sure that this is included so that our people do not again suffer.  But otherwise - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. As you will appreciate, we have so many settlements along our trunk roads in the country and it is impossible to provide access to every household along the road. It becomes very expensive. And so I think as we go out, my colleague, we need to educate our people that this is absolutely impossible. It will be so costly. Access to main areas like schools and trading centres may be possible but access to every household will be prohibitive in terms of cost.

5.38
PROF. BALTZAR ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and thank Government - at long last. I am saying “at long last” because since I came to Parliament the issue of this road from Kigumba to Kyenjojo was always a subject matter by Members of Parliament from Bunyoro region. At one time, this road was high up on the agenda of Government. It used to be referred to as a tourism road connecting Kabalega National Park and Queen Elizabeth National Park. I am very happy that now money has been found and something is going to be done. 

Madam speaker, my biggest concern which was also raised by the committee is the quality of the road. If you move now on the road between Busunju and Hoima, the road is fast deteriorating. There are patches which have been applied on this road which, to me, is a shame. For a new road to be patched up! Maybe when this Kiboga to Hoima road was being designed, we did not envisage heavy vehicles which are moving along that road to the oil region. But now that this road is being made, can we take advantage and maybe redesign it if it has not been done? And when the Kiboga Road - are we going to find another contract to have this road remade? 
So, the quality of this road must be taken into serious account - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay one minute for the lost counties.

PROF. ATWOOKI: UNRA which is being given a lot of responsibility as of now has no substantive executive director and board. What is the problem? 

Secondly, this UNRA we are talking of which has got a lot of responsibility, if you people know what is happening in your constituencies, it has no equipment for road maintenance. All the equipment is old and obsolete. So, what are we going to do to this UNRA which we are giving responsibilities and they are not even maintaining roads because they have no equipment?

5.41
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I support the motion, and I congratulate the ministry for coming up with this project. This is a real national road because it is going to add a lot to the national economy and to the people of Uganda who trade in these various areas right from South Sudan up to Fort Portal, where I come from. 

Madam Speaker, much as we congratulate Government for doing a good job there are some few issues which the committee has pointed out especially to do with the national road safety. We have now got the Fort Portal-Bundibugyo Road; it is a very good road but with sharp corners and now we have started realising accidents on that road. So, I am looking at how Government can come up with a master plan. Much as we are having a whole macro-plan for the road network in the country, this should go hand in hand with the structures that protect the road users. 

We have seen a lot of negligence when it comes to road safety. I am a Member of the Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety and I have a lot of evidence about what I am saying. Our hospitals - Mulago Hospital is over stretched. Even our own referral hospitals like Buhinga Referral Hospital has no capacity to cope with the accidents. We are seeing many of these inexperienced drivers get on the road without proper licences and training and this is very costly to human life. If you look at the amount of money we lose as a country by losing quality human capital on our roads, it is appalling. But we do not factor in these calculations and many of the active people who are dying on the roads are the bread winners - in most cases they are the bread winners but they leave orphans, they leave widows and sometimes it is us the politicians who have to suffer with the cost of paying school fees as you all know what you experience in your constituencies. 

So, much as we are looking at these road networks and the growth of the economy, we should also look at the soft part of it and this is looking at the laws - the enforcement mechanism of the traffic laws in this country –(Member timed out_)

5.44
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the committee and I rise to support the motion, which has been moved. 

First, I want to clarify that western Uganda is equally underdeveloped like any other part of the country - (Interjections) - yes. I only need to invite you to places like Kanungu and other areas to see that what obtains there is what obtains elsewhere in the country. This is in response to hon. Otto’s comment.

Madam Speaker, recently a team from ADB visited Kanungu for a pre-financing mission on the Rukungiri-Ishasha-Kanungu Road and one of the comments they made was that Parliament was delaying to pass this loan and this was going to affect the loan for the Kanungu road.

I just wanted to urge the committee and Parliament that we should reduce on the bureaucracy. I think the bureaucracy for processing these loans is too complex that by the time the civil works start a long period will have passed. Let me hope that the minister will work very hard that after Parliament has passed this loan, the people affected by this road see the civil works commence.   

I also want clarification from the minister why when you request for a loan like this, you add components like capacity building for UNRA. Now, this loan will have this component; another loan will build capacity. What kind of capacity are you building? Maybe that is why the unit cost for some of these loans goes up - because you include aspects which could be avoided. We want to see money put on construction of the roads.

Madam Speaker, I see one of the components is to carry out feasibility studies for the Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road and Rukunguri-Ishasha Road. That road was designed - I think there was another design and now you are doing a feasibility study. What we want are civil works to construct this road not studies and designs and so forth.   

I want the minister to assure the people of Kanungu that you are going to work on this road - Rukungiri-Ishasha-Kanungu-Nyashenyi Road because we would also like to see a tarmac road extended to Kanungu so that for the first time we see how a tarmac road looks like in Kanungu. Otherwise, we support this motion and we would like to urge Government to expedite the process so that the construction can begin as soon as possible. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, majorly, I see support. Do all of us really have to speak on this matter?  I do not hear any objection.

5.48
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the proposal by Government to get a loan from the African Development Fund. This is very timely. Right now in Uganda we are in a season of a road construction boom. If you go to the north, if you go to the south, wherever you go, something is happening on the construction of roads. And for this we thank the government and we are excited. 

But after six, seven, eight years, what will happen to our roads? When we travel abroad we envy the quality we see there. One of the members has said maybe because it is the region; they were not anticipating the heavy traffic of oil but even in areas where there is no heavy traffic for oil vehicles, our roads do not last long. We would like the ministry- since this is a long term project for Uganda- to ensure that the roads we have are quality roads. 

Secondly, there is the issue of contractors. We are talking of blacklisting contractors. Why do we hire contractors who do not have the capacity? Why do we wait? Is there no committee to ensure that a contractor who lacks equipment or who lacks capacity does not get the contract? This does not only affect the roads here. If you go to the districts where we have the UNRA roads- the roads you call Central Government roads- we have many contractors who lack capacity. And this makes the citizens very restless because the roads take a longer period to complete than they should have simply because the contractor lacks capacity. What is the government doing about these contractors who have no capacity?

And lastly, these new roads we are getting, whichever contractor is given the contract to write signs on the roads, does not know the local languages –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay half a minute to conclude.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You find a local name of the place called Nyamitanga, being written as Nyamitongo. That means the tourists who are new on that road will lose direction. Can we attract tourists by having the right names for the villages on our roads in this country? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.51
MS LYIDA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my friends in thanking the committee for their report. I really want to appreciate what they have cited- the quality of this work and then the delays. We should look at all that as a country. 

I also rise to support what hon. Chris Baryomunsi has said that on the reports we are seeing consulting services, and this service of the works that is going to start they are saying feasibility studies and detailed engineering to be done on Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road. 

I also wanted to inquire from the minister because when we look at the ministerial statements that we had this year and even the other ones of the last financial year - it was written that the design is already complete. Now, I am wondering, is it detailed design now that is going to be looked at or is it because we are going to extend to Kitale? May we know when - what we are looking forward to is that actual work- the civil works- when are the civil works going to be worked upon? That is what we really want. That is what people are looking forward to and we shall really be grateful. 

Otherwise, I stand to support the motion that this loan be passed for these roads. And what I am only looking forward to is when are we looking at the loan to work on this Kapchorwa-Suam Road, because we have been here now for how many years and no roads, nothing really. There is no loan that we have passed that is going to the Sebei region. Hon. Minister, I am looking forward to that. I thank you.

5.53
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. However, I have the following points or proposals to note.

Madam Speaker, this road is 238 kilometres. I have seen they have got a loan for 135 kilometres. I would like to know: What is the fate of the 103 kilometres from Kabwoya to Kyenjojo and yet it is the same road? Shall we have done good work? And if it is to be done, where is the funding? 

Secondly, I will propose that –(Interruption) 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The funding of this road is in two stages. We have now got funds for Kigumba up to Kabwoya. For the one of Kabwoya to Kyenjojo, negotiations have been completed with the World Bank and we shall soon also be getting money for that. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you. There is need for construction of bypasses in Masindi Municipality because the way the road enters the municipality will cause a lot of accidents if it passes through the town - even Hoima and Kagadi. The Minister for Works should take note. 

Thirdly, there is need to preserve the environment, so planting of trees along the road reserves should be incorporated within the contract agreement for those who are going to work on that road so that we can integrate environment protection and road development –(Member timed out_)

5.55
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee but I will only say that I will painfully support the motion, and I am even becoming emotional about it is because ever since I joined Parliament – I do not know whether it is a culture - we have passed many loans and I have never heard of any loan going to the eastern part of the country. Let me say it like that.

Now that I have got the chance and the minister concerned in charge of roads is here, I want to bring it, for once, to his attention that we have three roads in central Busoga–Buwenge-Kaliro, Kamuli–Kaliro and Iganga-Kamuli. The Iganga-Kamuli Road goes through Luuka and at times it is that road that the Speaker of the Republic of Uganda uses when she is connecting from her district to the eastern part of the country.

Mr Minister, I have been in touch with members of UNRA in the eastern region but they keep on promising that next financial – when will next financial year come?

I do not agree with the committee recommendation that the government fast tracks the establishment of the National Road Safety Authority and vehicle master test centre –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the Chair for the motion and I strongly support it because I use that road and it is so bad that it needs to be worked upon. What I want to know is: What will be the lifespan of this road because some roads in this country are worked upon and before the contractor hands over, the road is already damaged? What will be the lifespan of the road?

Two, I want to know from the Minister for Works when are you going to work and upgrade Masindi-Apac-Kitgum road? This road has been talked about before some of us were born and up to now, they say, “Next financial year.” It is like somebody has put for you a chicken in a calabash and tells you, “After you shave your hair, I will slaughter that chicken for you and you eat,” and when you open the calabash, the chicken runs out. I hope you are not doing that to the people of Apac and Lango.

Finally, I want to raise an issue on the money for consultancy. Why should we waste Shs4.58 billion on consultancy as if we are not training our engineers? Why can’t we train our own, empower them, employ them and consult them so that they can design for us long lasting roads? Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Bunyoro is almost bursting if he does not speak. (Laughter) 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR BUNYORO AFFAIRS (PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE) (Mr Ernest Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must say I am the happiest man this evening because this road is long overdue. I support the motion and I thank the committee because of five reasons.

The first one is that this is a principle access road the Albertine region and all of you know the importance of this region to this economy. Two, upgrading this road will open access to the region and will not only benefit the oil industry but will also benefit the tourism and agriculture sectors. This road will be a link to the principal towns and centres in the region. The other reason is that it will be a strategic link between the Northern corridor, specifically the South Western Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Eastern DRC and Kampala-Gulu-Juba corridor. Finally, opening up this road will improve access to markets, social services, health services and will also provide employment opportunities to the people in the region. 

Therefore, having heard from the debate, all the Members seem to be supporting this motion. I now move a motion that we put a question to this motion. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion has been moved but before I put the question, I just want to say something about the lifespan of the roads and the question of quality. I do not think it is fair to say that Hoima would not expect big trucks and that is why the road was made in that way. 

Three years ago, I represented this Parliament in Ghana at their Golden Jubilee celebrations; the roads we were using were built by Kwame Nkrumah and there were no potholes. Fifty years and the roads were still there!  So, what we want is quality. We are borrowing money, we must have quality-(Applause)-I now put the question that this House do approve the loan.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to say something? You are going to assure us about the quality? 

6.02
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on behalf of my colleagues, hon. Byabagambi and hon. Chebrot and my staff to say that we are very mindful of the quality of work. We have taken stringent measures to ensure that quality is attained.

Madam Speaker, you have talked about the roads in Ghana; in Uganda we are building flexible pavements and what you are talking about are rigid pavements which are different. Rigid pavements can go to 50 years plus but it is very difficult to have the flexible last more than 20 years.

I am hearing questions of, “Why don’t you go for rigid pavements?”It is a question of cost. If you move in the whole world, there are very few countries where you can find many kilometres of rigid pavements. Most of us in the whole world are moving on flexible pavements. I thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the World Bank has done research and found out that the cost of roads per unit in Uganda is more expensive than in any country in Sub-Saharan Africa. This is very clear. The cost of one kilometre of a road in Uganda is more expensive than in all other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. (Interjections)This is the World Bank research. And therefore when you tell us that the roads in Ghana you cannot do it here –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am forced to put my colleague, my good friend, to order because I am seeing him misleading the House. In the last Parliament, we had a conference sponsored by the World Bank and African Development Bank on unit costs and they found that actually in East Africa the Ugandan unit cost was a little bit higher but not outrageous – (Interjections) - I have a report which I can table. And when it came to road maintenance, they found that the road maintenance unit in Uganda was the cheapest in East Africa.)And I am happy to note that some of the Opposition Members were there: hon. Amuriat, you attended that conference at UBOS building. 

But also, to add on to this, before I move to the point of order -(Laughter)- it is well known and well documented and proved that the unit cost of the Ugandan roads has tremendously reduced from one $1 million to $700,000 per kilometre, giving Uganda now the cheapest in the whole region (Interjections). The reasons are very clear that by that time, we did not have many contractors. 
Secondly, we have introduced what they call parallel evaluation committee in UNRA which is not even stationed in Uganda and this has reduced the unit cost to $700,000. And I am seeing the trend going down even further. But so far, we are the cheapest per unit cost in the whole of East Africa.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, to satisfy the House you should table the figures of the whole of the East Africa – all the five countries, you table them here. (Applause)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well obliged, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
