

Thursday, 19 November 2020

Parliament met at 3.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As you are all aware, our country and the citizens are bracing themselves for electoral processes at different levels of governance, which will ultimately see them exercise their constitutional rights; to vote and to stand for elective positions.

Whereas the ongoing electoral processes are intended to promote and achieve constitutionalism, democracy, rule of law, political stability and sustainable development, a lot of detestable events including but not limited to riots, gender-based violence, murders and property destruction have taken place, since the commencement of the political campaigns. 

As Speaker of this House, I register and express my indignation and sadness at such events happening country wide. Many of them have been orchestrated by candidates or their supporters, at different levels of society. This should not be condoned. 

The media reported demonstrations happening in various parts of the country over the arrest and detention of presidential aspirant, Kyagulanyi Robert Ssentamu, that took place on Wednesday, 18 November 2020 in Luuka District, while on his campaign trail to converse for support. 

In Kampala alone, it was reported that at least four people lost their lives, and many others sustained injuries during demonstrations. Business in Kampala Capital City, other cities and metropolitan areas came to a standstill, as demonstrations took toll on the day’s activities. 

I would like to call upon the candidates to reign in their supporters and encourage them to exercise restraint from indulging in destructive activities, which will result in further loss of lives and property, as well as livelihoods.

I would also like to appeal to the various state agencies and operatives to execute their duties and responsibilities as they should for the various legal regimes establishing them, while at the same time, exercise restraint from violating human rights.

Indeed, the Secretary General of the United Nations cautioned states not to violate human rights under the guise of enforcing Standard Operating Procedures under the COVI-19 pandemic.

I would like to appeal to the Electoral Commission, as a body mandated by the Constitution to manage electoral processes in Uganda, to institute mechanisms possible to ensure that adequate civic education is provided to deter the citizenry from engaging in such destructive behaviour. 

They should also guide on how meetings should be conducted. It is clear that the ongoing demonstrations and related matters are a direct replica of the inadequate civic education conducted by the Electoral Commission. 

I, therefore, would like to urge Ugandans and to remind them that there is life after elections. Uganda belongs to each and every one of us and the ongoing electoral processes should not come between us, but should unite us for a common good and a better Uganda; today, tomorrow and for eternity. Thank you. 

Now, there were some two matters of national concern - Yes, hon. Okupa.

3.32
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following your communication on the events that are unveiling – of course they escalated yesterday and today. Some of our colleagues found challenges this morning as they were coming here. I can give an example of hon. Mwijukye here. If it was not for his obvious face he would have lost our Parliament car when he reached Rubaga, as he returned from Buhweju. People are charged because of what happened; following the arrest of hon. Kyagulanyi, alias Bobi Wine. When they opened the car and saw him, they said, “This is the person who speaks for us”. That is what saved him as they let him go.

This shows us that when we are in this House and are visible - and speak for the population, you can survive! It is not about just speaking here. It is about speaking for the population. Madam Speaker, it is even worse than that. Hon. Asuman here has also just told me his experience. He was in Nalufenya, trying to get our colleague out of detention. He will speak for himself, but the things he came across from Njeru up to Gayaza – there are various roadblocks manned by youths, then there are those manned by the police - they are setting tyres on fire.

I think we shall call for calm. There is a need for restraint from the forces like you have stated, such that the situation does not degenerate. I was shocked to see it on the TV yesterday; one of the people that were shot said, “No my sister, I would rather die if that can result into a better life for you”, as they were trying to carry him to hospital. He was bleeding but not bothered. If we push Ugandans to that level, then we shall degenerate to a level that is close to domestic terrorism, which can be very dangerous for this country. 

I think that we must come in together at this moment; the Electoral Commission, the Government, the candidates and let this animosity stop. 

Madam Speaker, you were in this House when some of us - a number of Ugandans were proposing to postpone elections because the excitement that political campaigns bring - sometimes it is very difficult to control people. However, we were defeated and now you can see the events that are unfolding. 

If you do not have a heavy escort, you cannot go to the village. You and I go to the village and know this. It is only those who have enough security that can be able to turn people away.

Colleagues here can bear witness. Hon. Bahati can testify. He experiences the same thing when he goes to Ndorwa. We have all seen this. You cannot stop people unless you have security like the one the President or the Army Commander have. That is the only way you can stop people from advancing to you. 

So how do we manage in this situation? I think time has come for us to calm down, either Government says they must save the lives of people – when you see people in Owino; it is a different case. Either we say, stop campaigns and just wait for 14 January 2021 and vote, or we still cancel the elections. 

If it stays this way, we are going to see a number of colleagues, the presidential candidates arrested, others like hon. Muntu and hon. Tumukunde have stopped campaigning, even in Ntoroko where there were just a few people, you find the soldiers stopping the rally. Who is giving these directives to stop other presidential candidates even where there are no crowds?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we call on the Government to sit with the political actors and have a harmonious way of handling things. Otherwise, we are going to lose more people. We have already lost four people and we do not know what has happened today. 

People cannot access town easily. People have to carry hon. Ssentamu’s poster in the car in order to survive. People cannot drive government vehicles because they have been damaged. 

We would like to call upon the security offices and the Government that is supposed to be in charge, to reign over this matter. And if we are to continue to have elections, let us have peaceful elections. Let us have a harmonised way of campaigning, or we suspend campaigns until the 1st or 2nd of January then we campaign for two weeks and people vote because there is also the risk of COVID-19. 

We have lost colleagues and we shall lose more people not only members of Parliament because we are now mixing. The presidential candidates are moving all over the country spreading COVID-19 even to areas they have never reached. Come mid-December, you will see a different matter. In the interest of saving lives we could suspend campaigns –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my senior colleague for talking about campaigns. In the US, before the presidential candidates started campaigns, the infection rate was low but when the US President went full blast, as we speak now every day over 120,000 onwards are being infected and they have suffered.

As hon. Okupa said the projection will be dangerous. Remember over 145 have died. The infection rate will increase like it is happening in the US because of the presidential elections. There must be a solution to this problem. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this morning when we were raising the issue of masks – it is only half of the country that has masks. How do you expect candidates to canvass for votes and meet people when they do not have masks and yet we provided for the money? Something must be done.

3.40
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The situation is worse and right now the information that we are being given by police that so far four people were killed yesterday - to me we need to investigate.

We have information from various parts of this country that there were people who were killed in Masaka, Jinja, and other various parts of the country. In Kampala a young boy of 15 years old was killed in Kalerwe. He had gone to pay for power but was killed and is being buried today in Gayaza.

I know that the numbers that were killed yesterday are more than what the police are telling us. The Electoral Commission should have control because you have candidates moving around the country and it is their mandate to guide.

They have now left control of the electoral process to the security operatives. That is the cause of what is going on. Unless we demand for the release of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu and those who have been arrested, the situation is not going to be stable - unless there is justice for all sides.

I appeal to all religious leaders, especially through their inter-religious council, to condemn, guide and ensure that this political process is guided as we pray to the Almighty God that we have a successful election. Otherwise, it is as if we are in a war; look at the city right now, many people have already closed shops and banks closed at 2.00 p.m. for fear.

Unless the Government calms down and there is justice within the Electoral Commission; unless these candidates are given equal opportunities, we are seeing elections that are only in favour of President Museveni - not other candidates - and yet they are all vying for one position.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Onyango, there is something that bothered me; yesterday I read that at least four candidates collided in the same districts - two in one district and two in another.

I thought that the Electoral Commission had sat down and harmonised the programmes; how can candidates be in the same district at the same time on the same day? I think there is something not working well.

3.43
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The situation in this country is becoming quite absurd but what is worrying me most is the conduct of the demonstrations.

Right now, it is becoming hard to differentiate between the demonstrators and the security operatives. Yesterday, on my way from town to my place of residence in Mukono, I encountered four roadblocks; two of them were purely for police because they were in uniform and you would identify that they were security forces. The other two had people in civilian clothes and very violent. They do not care who you are and have intentions of robbing.

Government needs to take charge; the situation is alarming in the whole country, not only in Kampala. In Busia, I hear that yesterday the situation was tense.

Why does security take the law into their hands and shoot local people? I would like to give an example of the person who was yesterday killed in Mukono. The young man was running up and down and not that he was being violent or trying to attack a security personnel but he was simply shot at.

I would think that you need to direct Government to have a statement on this matter. Citizens cannot continue losing their lives when we have a democratic Government. President Museveni was voted by the people; he is in power until May when a new President will be sworn in. He is still the Commander-in-Chief. Why should we have a scenario where local citizens are being shot?

Leave alone the blasting of teargas but live bullets. Yesterday Kampala, Mukono, Jinja, Busia, Masaka was in a terrible state. Every town in this country was almost on fire and live bullets. I would like to move a suggestion for Government to respond on this matter. Otherwise, by the time we shall have elections in January we shall have lost thousands of people if things continue to move at this pace.
Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to be realistic as a country. We cannot say that we are guarding the public against infections when we are the ones almost promoting it.

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, a number of restrictions were lifted by the Minister of Health and some of the restrictions that were lifted included the opening of mobile markets. If you can lift a ban on a mobile market - on Tuesday we had a mobile market in Mukono and there was traffic jam from morning up to late in the evening. There were thousands of people - you know how mobile markets are conducted.

However, when it comes to a political rally, you are saying, “Only 200 people.” I do not understand the rationale. As the voice of the people in this country, we need to caution and find out why the Government is moving in such an unorderly manner. We need these questions to be answered. I thank you.

3.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have just alluded to the guidelines of the Independent Electoral Commission pertaining the candidates not clashing in campaigning venues. However, in the campaign trail of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Sentamu in Tororo on Tuesday, I witnessed that very close to where we had been allocated the campaign venue, Dr Tanga Odoi, the chairperson of the NRM Electoral Commission, was also addressing a mammoth crowd, I understand campaigning for candidate Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I wondered why he had to be there in advance in order to block our candidate from launching his campaign in Tororo.

Madam Speaker, what also perturbs me is the irregularities by the security forces. The security personnel that were deployed, like in Luuka, to arrest to hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Sentamu, were anti-terrorism police.  I wonder whether hon. Robert Sentamu has turned into a terrorist so that they deploy anti-terrorism police to arrest him.

Moreover, if you subject their actions to scrutiny, they are the ones perpetrating terrorism; acts of maiming and killing. Reports in the newspapers are mentioning four people but we lost five in Mbale on Sunday. I actually attended the burial of one of the victims on Monday, who was intentionally hit by a fast-running police patrol vehicle and he died instantly.

Madam Speaker, I have heard from the spokesperson of police that they are now holding whoever commits any crime among the forces personally culpable and I wonder whether this is walking the talk. This is because recently, the District Police Commander (DPC) who committed all those terrorist acts upon the cultural leaders in Mityana, had his services merely transferred to another district in Bunyoro. It is the kingdom there that resisted and sent him back.

The truth is that the police are the ones perpetrating these terrorist acts and going unpunished. Something must be done; at least a resolution by this House to ensure that these perpetrators of terrorism do not go unpunished.

3.52
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are the custodian of the Constitution and the laws that govern this country. If we leave the country to move the way we are moving now, we are heading somewhere where we shall regret heavily.

We have left everybody to come on the radio and say: “We are now going to run elections like this.” Yesterday, police also gave their guidelines and now they are going to set their own rules and laws. The other day, the chairman of the Independent Electoral Commission was talking of 70 people, the Minister of Health came up with 200 people and I think tomorrow Fr Lokodo will also come back and use the ethics line and say: “We can now seat 500.” (Laughter) - We cannot move like that.

Where I come from, when you produce twins, you chose how to celebrate. You either celebrate traditionally or go to church. The moment you accept to use the traditional means, you welcome whatever formula and words that will come. If you do not want, you go to the church.

Madam Speaker, we were here and said that if we have to go for elections, then let the elections be the way they are ran. I am not advocating for hon. Kyagulanyi but in Luuka, the organisers of the function for hon. Kyagulanyi set up tents days before when the whole security team was watching and people even converged one by one. How do you wait for the candidate to arrive and you begin shooting people like that?

This did not only happen to hon. Kyagulanyi. It is going to happen to most of us here because according to what we heard the police saying, they are going to tighten and do their own things. We cannot move like that, Madam Speaker. I request that you hold a meeting with either the Independent Electoral Commission or whoever is concerned. Otherwise, you are going to see more dead bodies tomorrow. 

Yesterday, I was about to be a victim. My madam was driving my vehicle that had my stickers. I am an NRM flag-bearer. When she reached Kireka, it was disaster. She was only lucky that as she reached, there were some people that saw the poster and knew Kibalya. The mob came and these people protected the vehicle. They protected it until security came and saved her. She would be dead.

We cannot move like this. If we have to go for elections and look for votes, let everybody look for votes the way he feels he can get votes. If the President feels he can get votes by sitting in tents, let him sit in tents. If we feel we can get votes by looking for supporters, let us look for them. 

We know the environment. We opened elections in the COVID-19 environment and COVID-19 did not find –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The arrest of hon. Kyagulanyi Sentamu that happened on Wednesday could have be avoided if our security were sensitive and could sense danger and find a better way of dispersing the crowd or talking to the presidential candidate. However, it seems there is connivance in the police because in several meetings that we have seen, they wait for you to gather and the police come after an hour as if they do not have ears on the ground.

Secondly, the Independent Electoral Commission should be a little bit more serious and come out clearly. All of us are candidates in various positions. You do not carry out rallies and have no convoy but you see other people coming in convoys and they say: “It is not our duty as Independent Electoral Commission. It is the duty of police to control.” Really, who is to control who?

Madam Speaker, if we are to have stable and fair elections, the Independent Electoral Commission should come out clearly. They can give us a two-day or three-day break and say all candidates stop and they organise seriously because right not they are out of control. 

Madam Speaker, when you see rallies for Members of Parliament, they are not in conformity with the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). What is happening? Should we all go for rallies?

When you look at the riots - Yes, there is a problem but do you mean the police cannot control it without firing bullets? If they are seen on the ground early enough, they can control it. Otherwise, it seems the police are benefiting from this. Maybe they are being given extra funds to have this continue yet Ugandans are suffering. 

There are very many business people who are now suffering. I came from Mukono but good enough, all those people know me and so, they could not stop me. I just waved at them. However, those that they do not know are suffering. They are mounting roadblocks.

Madam Speaker, shall we continue like this? Shouldn’t we deploy security, as we talk to the Electoral Commission to solve this problem? Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you very much. Unfortunately, the Prime Minister is not here but I hope the senior ministers have heard. There is grave concern about what is happening in the country and it seems there is no central management of the process. The police, candidates and supporters are each doing their own things and the Electoral Commission is asleep. 

3.59
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, allow me to say praise God, because I am still breathing. (Interjections)

On Sunday, 16 November, my beloved body guard, Pte Ivan Kakai, from Namisindwa, was killed at 10.47 a.m. at a church compound in Sofia Village, Eastern Division in Busia Municipality at Divine Deliverance Healing Centre Church.

To my surprise, a Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officer, who was keeping me, was killed by Assistant Superintendent of Police, Patrick Javuru, the Head of Flying Squad in Busia and Corporal Chelogoi, the Head of Crime Intelligence.

When I left the vehicle, I entered church but just after six minutes, I heard bullets shot out. Immediately, my bodyguard passed running around the church bleeding and followed by the Head of Flying Squad, who was wearing a black jacket. 

At the end of the church was a fence. When my bodyguard hit on it, this officer went and shot him, while he was looking at him pleading for justice. The informers who were near told me they were five men. 

Four days before that, we were being trailed by some people who looked to be boda boda cyclists. They were two in number and they trailed us for almost all the evenings and days. Good enough, I had a lot of trust in my bodyguard. 

Madam Speaker, at the scene, where my bodyguard was killed, a crime preventer and informer of the police, Mr Abraham were arrested. They were the people who had been trailing us throughout. However, I was shocked that when I ran to complain to the nearest police station, which was almost 200 metres, all the policemen ran away from me. Little did I know that they were hiding the killers of my bodyguard.

Later, I ran to the central police station, where I got the District Police Commander (DPC) of Busia, Mr Moses. We ran back after 20 minutes to the scene, where my bodyguard had been killed and he discovered that the people who killed him were his men.

During the interrogation between the Regional Police Commander (RPC), DPC and I, I was also shocked, when the DPC said he commanded the operation, thinking that my car was being owned by the robbers. Imagine a car of the Member of Parliament to be owned by robbers. My question was: why didn’t you summon me? Up to now, I have not got any answers. 

Out of the five people, three have been arrested but the two are at large. They are all officers of crime intelligence. In fact, as I talk, I have no security at all. At night, I move to about three guest houses or lodges to look for where to sleep, for the safety of my life. 

Government knows that my life is in danger. I have written a letter to the Inspector General of Police (IGP) but up to now, no action has been taken. I pray that if this is not an intentional target on me – the chair I left, where I sat, was where my bodyguard sat and eventually killed. 

If this is not an intentional killing, then I do not know why up to now, Government has refused to deploy a bodyguard to keep my family and I. The police force has even up to now refused to make a statement on the death of my bodyguard, who is a UPDF officer. Therefore, I pray that I am helped by Parliament to have safety for myself, my family and the people of Busia. Otherwise, the death of my bodyguard has brought fear in Busia town and to me, as a person.

Madam Speaker, my last prayer is to request the House to pray for me. I also request the Speaker to direct the IGP to immediately give me security, as a senior citizen of this country and as someone who is a target for political assassination.

As I conclude, truly speaking, Uganda is on fire and something must be done. If the Chairperson of Electoral Commission and the IGP have not yet met in the same boardroom, they will fight because everybody is speaking his own words. 

I believe the promotion of pure democracy in this country is to allow free participation of everybody. If police finds it better, they should exchange their spokespersons. Mr Bukenya, the Spokesperson of Electoral Commission should be appointed as the spokesperson of Police and afande Enanga takes over, as the spokesperson of Electoral Commission. Otherwise, they are contradicting themselves and causing confusion in this country, which is leading to death of many people. This is actually bringing shame and reduction of support for my party; the National Resistance Movement (NRM). Many think that the police is doing it intentional so that the support of my flag bearer reduces, in all parts of the country. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the issues raised by hon. Macho are extremely serious. The Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to urgently examine the situation in Busia. First, he should ensure that hon. Macho has – the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here.

4.05
The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to register condolence to our colleague, for having lost a relative and suffered inconvenience without the state coming in quickly. 

I commit myself that as a senior minister in this Government, I will take this matter to the highest level possible to ensure that he gets the protection he is asking for.

The Speaker: I also urge you to ensure that those who perpetuated this death in broad daylight be apprehended and charged. It was 10.00 o’clock in the morning and apparently, they are known and their life is okay. Honourable minister, something has to happen.

First of all, we expect to hear from you on the protection of hon. Macho and a follow up on that case. If nothing happens, they will shoot another person and life will continue.

4.07
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the violation of the rights of one of our colleague, who is also a presidential candidate, hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi. 

Hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi was arrested from Luuka and driven to Nalufenya yesterday. Since yesterday, the police have denied lawyers, doctors and his family access to him. This morning, I was in Nalufenya and I rang everybody I know in police. They said that they have instructions not to allow anybody to see hon. Kyagulanyi. 

Madam Speaker, accessibility to a suspect is a basic human right enshrined in our Constitution, which should not be negotiated. Since his arrest, hon. Kyagulanyi has not had the opportunity to have any meal because even the food that we took yesterday, we were not given an opportunity to avail it to him. 

It is my humble prayer that the Minister for Internal Affairs explains the illegal directives that police is using to ensure that suspects are denied basic rights.

Madam Speaker, that is not only limited to him. Early this morning, another colleague of ours, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, was arrested at 1.00 a.m. Security forces broke his gate and tear gassed his house. He was picked and as we speak, he is in detention. His rights have equally been violated by security agencies and yet these are basic rights. 

Well, police has a right to arrest but when somebody has been arrested, there are constitutional rights that they must enjoy. Those rights must never be violated. The Minister of Internal Affairs should explain who is giving these illegal orders and directives of denying people, who have been arrested, access to their lawyers, doctors, family members and food. Is there an intention to have them die because of hunger? Are there motives that we do not understand?

Finally, there is a very big dilemma we are facing in the country with regard to these COVID-19 directives. It seems COVID-19 is only transmitted through political meetings. With due respect, Madam Speaker – and my brother, hon. Latif Sebaggala is here – we attended the burial of the late Mayor of Kampala. We were there in thousands, including two Deputy Prime Ministers and there was no problem. That function was manned by security.

When it comes to political meetings, we are told we should be 200 people. How do we explain that to the ordinary wanainchi? In Kamuli, at the burial of our colleague, people were in their thousands. We buried the late Dr Sheikh Anas Kaliisa in Ntungamo and people were in their thousands. 

I attended the burial of senior counsel, Shaban Bantariza in Bugweri and people were in their thousands. Now, when it comes to political meetings, the limitation of 200 applies. How are we going to explain this scenario to the wanainchi? 

Madam Speaker, we need to reiterate the point we made here before; either we have normal elections or none. There has not been any country that has held elections in this COVID-19 era and has had these limitations we are seeing here because they are not practical. 

We are seeing double standards being implemented. As we speak, there are NRM processions while the Opposition cannot have processions while police is looking on. Madam Speaker, we cannot live in a country of double standards. 

I think, as Parliament, we have to pronounce ourselves on this matter; on the issue of standards. I think it is high time that as a country, we open up. Let us have normal elections as we emphasise SOPs and social distancing but the idea of limiting public political meetings to 200 people has not worked anywhere in the world. It will not work and it will even present operational difficulties to the security agencies. I beg to pray.

Madam Speaker, in light of that, we demand for the unconditional release of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Mathias Mpuuga for the violation of their rights. There is absolutely no justification whatsoever for their continued illegal detention. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that the senior minister here has heard what is happening in the country. However, I would like to reiterate that the COVID-19 situation should not be used to violate the human rights of the people of Uganda. It is being used, in some instances, to do so and this is not right. 

The members who are incarcerated should be given access to their food, lawyers and family because it is a basic right; it is not for negotiation. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the first time. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. 

REV. FR LOKODO: May I also lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the same? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. Thank you. Let us go to item 4. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAYS BY GOVERNMENT TO RELEASE FUNDS APPROPRIATED FOR POLITICAL PARTIES WITH REPRESENTATION IN PARLIAMENT

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, the money for political parties was passed on to the Electoral Commission and I am reliably informed that the parties have received what they are entitled to. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I raised this matter, I was talking about delay of release of the money. Could the minister kindly clarify to this House how much was budgeted to be given to the political parties and how much was actually released? 

If the minister does not state how much was budgeted for and how much has been released then the picture will not come out clearly. We need to know how much was budgeted for and how much was released. 

Related was the issue of the instruction you gave, honourable minister. You instructed the Electoral Commission to distribute this money on numerical strength as opposed to the provisions of the law that called for equity in electoral times. That is information that the Chairman of the Electoral Commission gave me in my capacity as Chairman of IPOD. You gave this money with conditions that it should be distributed on the basis of numerical strength and yet this is an election year. We should have distributed that money equally, as per the provisions of the law. Just clarify on those two issues. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, clarify on the delay and then the actual disbursement.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, according to the information we have, this House appropriated Shs 20 billion and we have so far released Shs 15 billion to the Electoral Commission.

Regarding the law, on the second crosschecking, I think the honourable member of Justice Forum (JEEMA) was right to say that according to the law, this money should have been distributed equally in the year of election. Therefore, we expect that the Electoral Commission should comply with the law. Our part was to release the money and if the conditions that we put on the release were contrary to the law, the Electoral Commission has a duty to comply with the law. However, we have so far released Shs 15 billion out of the Shs 20 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Does IPOD still have a problem?

4.18
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, we should not allow the minister to go away with that statement. One, on the issue of remittance, we are talking about the delay. This is the time political parties need this money most, not any other time. Therefore, if you are talking about the additional five billion when is it coming?

Secondly, the duty of the Electoral Commission is merely custodial; it is a depository and a registry. The responsibility to ensure that we get that money equally is the responsibility of the ministry under the law.

The Electoral Commission is merely a holder but the decision on the distribution is yours honourable minister. Therefore, we want to find out because I raised this matter the other time and you said you know what to do if you want more money when I was complaining how you had given JEEMA only Shs 40 million and you took 12 billion. You said we increase our numbers, I was not talking about increasing numbers, I was talking about the law because when the law was being enacted, I was not here. Therefore, I was talking about implementation of the law.

Therefore, honourable minister, when is the five billion coming? He should also give assurance that when the five billion come, it will be distributed equally as per the provisions of the law and what you are going to do to correct the mistake that was made last time.

I forewarned you and Government when I was talking about this matter and it was ignored. The Electoral Commission is saying that it is you, the ministry that gave the condition that it should be distributed on the basis of numerical strength. 

What are you going to do with the Auditor-General because the law talks about this money being subject to the Auditor-General? How are you going to compensate JEEMA and other parties for that loss?  This is taxpayers’ money appropriated by Parliament but you are giving yourself authority to distribute it on the basis of numerical strength to the disadvantage of the other political players and political parties. How are you going to atone for that mistake? If we raised a legal challenge, how are you going to defend it? I think that is the bigger issue that we should be addressing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think at our next convenient sitting, you should come with a response to this issue.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, the member is very right because we should do things according to the law. I would like to promise this House that I will go and dig up all the details because I do not have them at my finger tips. Then, we shall issue a statement to this House and subject to your approval, if you wanted, I could even put this statement in the press for everybody to see but that would depend on the instructions you give. If you want me to come back here, I will come back. If you want it quicker than when we reconvene again, we should put that statement in the press so that everybody knows exactly what took place.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED MALAFIDE AND IRRATIONAL QUARANTINE FOR FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE FOR 15 YEARS IN ISINGIRO DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture, not here. Item five.
 
PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON EXORBITANT PRICES OF DIGITAL STAMPS ON ALCOHOLIC DRINKS BY UGANDA ALCOHOL INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
4.23
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This petition is moved under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure.

The petitioners are members of the Uganda Alcohol Industry Association bringing to your attention the exorbitant prices that are being charged by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) through SICPA on their alcohol products. 

Madam Speaker, the challenge here is that as compared to prices of digital stamps in other East African countries, what is charged in Uganda is too high and it makes the cost of production too high and makes them charge their final product highly as compared to the market prices in East Africa.

They pray that:

l. 	That Parliament resolves and urges Government that the prices for digital stamps on alcohol is revised by reduction from Shs l85 to Shs 55 that is charged on beer so that prices are harmonised.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Trade and Industry.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want some clarification. Good enough, the two honourable ministers of finance are here. Last financial year, the same matter came to this House and it was referred to the committee of finance - what happened? 

I remember contributing on the same matter and they must have done some benchmarking on this issue of digital stamps. I remember Uganda Breweries came here and I remember attending a meeting of that nature with the committee of finance.

I thought that matter had been resolved or the committee of finance did not complete that report because they are supposed to have done benchmarking in the neighbouring countries. These were the same arguments that were brought by the companies. 

I think, as of now, there are 187 alcohol industries that have registered. There is a new bulletin that has just been issued by the Commissioner General of URA. What could have happened to that because it was a petition also? I thought it had been concluded. We are going to send the same thing to the same committee which either did or has not done any work to it because URA went ahead and continued charging. What did our committee find out?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to crosscheck the outcome of the first petition but in the meantime, we send this to the committee on Trade and Industry for perusal and report back. If we find that the matters are the same, they should be consolidated and considered by one committee. The Clerk should give us a brief at the next sitting.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

I) ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 3 FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/21

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the addendum to Supplementary Schedule 3 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

II) ADDENDUM 2 TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 3 FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Addendum 2 to Supplementary Schedule 3 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

III) LIST OF UGANDAN SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS’ COMPANIES THAT WERE PAID AND THOSE VERIFIED BUT ARE PENDING PAYMENT

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a list of Ugandan South Sudan Traders’ Companies that were paid and those verified but are pending payment.

IV) TAX EXPENDITURE REPORT FOR THE PERIOD JULY TO SEPTEMBER 2020, FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the tax expenditure report for the period July to September 2020, for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

V) THE ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FY 2019/20 – FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the annual performance report for Financial Year 2019/2020 – Financial Intelligence Authority

VI) THE ANNUAL MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance Report for Financial Year 2019/2020.

VII) THE ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, all of them are there. Maybe I can go and formally do it. I beg to lay the Annual Budget Performance Report Financial Year 2019/20.

VIII) THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (FEES AND FINES) (AMENDMENT) NO.2 REGULATIONS, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you lay item 6 (I-VII) physically? You have been laying from there but now go and formally lay them?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, all of them are there. Maybe I can go and formally do it. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the whole list?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Clerk can confirm but ideally all the papers we lay have already been given to the Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts Committee (COSASE). Some of them are for the Budget Committee - 6(I) to 6(II) and 6(VII) are to the Budget Committee; 6 (III), 6(IV), 6(VI) to the Committee on Finance, 6(V) is to COSASE. Fiscal performance goes to the finance committee. I ask one of the ministers to stand in for the minister of ICT.

4.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table, the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) (No.2) Regulations, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are sent to the Committee on ICT and as you are aware, there is a timeframe for objections. Take that into account.

IX) A VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS

4.37
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that I go through the list first and then I can lay it on Table once. I wish to lay – 

    a) A compensation of project affected persons under the Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects and associated transmission lines. 
    b) The assessment of budget performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/2019.
    c) Assess licensing and enforcement of standards in downstream petroleum operations by Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 
    d) The implementation of Kalangala Infrastructure Services Project (KIS).
    e) Implementation of national content in the oil and gas sector.
    f) The impact of the Uganda Reproductive Health Voucher Project implemented by the Ministry of Health. 
    g) Implementation of Uganda Skills Development Facility (USDF) by the Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU). 
    h) The regulation and promotion of safe and reliable maritime services in the water transport sub-sector.
    i) The effectiveness of import inspections by Uganda National Bureau of Standards in the regulation and enforcement of product standards. 
    j) Production and productivity of the coffee sub-sector.
    k) Budget assessment of delivery of planned outputs by selected health sector institutions during the Financial Year 2018/2019. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are sent to the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE) for perusal and report back.

X) BASELINE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT/ASSESSMENT REPORT ON THE UGANDA INTER-GOVERNMENTAL FISCAL TRANSFERS PROGRAMME

4.38
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports for the following entities for the financial year 2017/2018: 

1. 	Hoima District Local Government 
2. 	Masaka Municipal Local Government 
3. 	Mpigi District Local Government  
4. 	Buyende District Local Government 
5. 	Mayuge District Local Government 
6. 	Luuka District Local Government  
7. 	Kaabong District Local Government 
8. 	Kabale District Local Government  
9. 	Kamuli District Local Government  
10. 	Koboko Municipal Local Government  
11. 	Bukwo District Local Government  
12. 	Rakai District Local Government        
13. 	Kumi Municipal Local Government  
14. 	Kitgum Municipal Local Government  
15. 	Napak District Local Government  
16. 	Lamwo District Local Government 
17. 	Gulu District Local Government      
18. 	Mityana District Local Government  
19. 	Pader District Local Government  
20. 	Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Local Government         
21. 	Masindi Municipal Local Government 
22. 	Kasese Municipal Local Government 
23. 	Jinja District Local Government 
24. 	Education and health sectors

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for perusal and report back. 

XI) SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON SPECIFIC MANAGEMENT ISSUES AT BUKOOLI COLLEGE SCHOOL, BUGIRI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL

4.40
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a special audit report on specific management issues at Bukooli College School, Bugiri Municipal Council. I beg to lay. 

XII) CONSOLIDATED VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON SELECTED URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED BY THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR THE ADDITIONAL FOUR PARTICIPATING MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

4.41
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a consolidated value for money audit report on selected urban infrastructure projects implemented by Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) programme for the additional four participating municipal councils in the financial year 2017/2018.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for perusal and report back.

XIII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

4.42
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statements of -  

1. 	The Africa Institute for Strategic Animal Resource Services and Development for the financial year ended 30 June 2016.

2. 	The New Vision Printing and Publishing Company Limited for the financial year ended 30 June 2020. 

3. 	Deposit Protection Fund for the financial year ended 30 June 2020.

4. 	The Microfinance Support Centre Limited for the year ended 30 June 2019. 

5. 	Environment for Development Initiative (EfD) MAK Centre for the period 1 January 2019 to 31 December 2019.

6. 	Uganda Land Commission for the financial year ended 30 June 2018. 

7. 	The Uganda National Oil Company for the financial year ended 30 June 2019. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) for perusal and report back. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 3 FOR THE FINANCIAL 2020/2021

4.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. The report is ready, unfortunately by the time it got ready, I could not find all the required members to sign it. In effect, I have only five signatures, which qualify under the COVID-19 rules, but not under our ordinary rules. Therefore, I do not know whether I could proceed to present the report or wait until I get the relevant signatures. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we do something different as I crosscheck on the eligibility of the report? Let me cross-check on the eligibility of the report.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $600 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TO FINANCE THE BUDGET DEFICIT FOR FY 2020/2021

4.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request to present items No.8 and No.9 together - one following the other. These are two reports with areas of commonality, especially on the background. If my request is granted -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, please proceed. Present item No.8 and then No.9 and they will go together.

MR BATEGEKA: Thank you. There are documents that I will lay on the Table with respect to the reports of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing, and up to US$ 600 million from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to finance the budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021.

When I am presenting the other report, I will not repeat the list of documents, which include:

1. 	The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $600 million from the International Monetary Fund to finance the budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021.

2. 	Report by the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing to finance the budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021.

3. 	A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing and up to US$ 600 million from the IMF to finance the budget deficit for financial year 2020/2021 (8 and 24 September 2020).

4. 	His Excellency the President’s approval of the project in a letter dated 18 November 2020. 

5. 	The letter from the Managing Director, International Monetary Fund, committing to discuss a Ugandan reform programme requested by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

6. 	Performance of the World Bank budget support loan for financial year 2019/2020. 

7. 	Medium-term budget framework of 11 June 2020. 

8. 	Supplementary Schedules No.1 and No.2 for Financial Year 2020/2021. Madam Speaker, these supplementary figures were presented to the House, discussed and approved.

9. 	Historical information in domestic debt (23 October 2020). 

10. 	Uganda Revenue Authority performance for the first quarter of the financial year 2020/2021, as at 27 October 2020. 

11. 	The Letter from National Planning Authority recommending approval of the loans. 

12. 	Minutes of meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow up to Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing and up to $600 million from the IMF to finance the budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021.

I will lay these documents on the Table after I have read through them.

I will start with the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $600 million from the IMF to finance the budget deficit for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

The methodology we employed included holding meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Bank of Uganda; Uganda Bankers’ Association; Uganda Revenue Authority; and the Private Sector Foundation. We also reviewed the documents I have mentioned. 

Background

During the start of Financial Year 2019/2020, the economy was projected to grow by 6.5 per cent and then by 6.3 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021. However, given the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic that affected the global and regional economy, the floods and the locust invasion. Uganda's economy is now reported to have grown by 2.9 per cent in Financial Year 2019/2020. 

This slower growth in the economy during Financial Year 2019/2020 was experienced in all the sectors of the economy. All sectors were affected, with consequences on the performance of the budget, which led to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presenting a supplementary request for financing that deficit. When you look at table 2 in the report - summary of funding pressures and projected budget shortfall - I do not think I need to go through the table, but the message is that there is a huge shortfall in revenue collections. 

The IMF loan is an interest-free loan of 10 years. The grace period is five years and six months. The repayment period is four years, six months. The interest rate is zero per cent. It is very low and concessional.

After considering this loan request, the committee had the following observations to make: 

1. Domestic Arrears

The committee noted that over the years, Government has accumulated arrears worth Shs 3.3346 trillion, as at the end of June 2019. During FY 2020/2021, only Shs 450 billion was provided to cater for domestic arrears; an additional Shs 223 billion has been provided for in the supplementary budget being financed by the current borrowing. At the current rate of budgetary allocation, of Shs 450 billion, it would take a long time - about seven years - to clear the arrears.

The committee recommends that Government of Uganda prioritises payment of all domestic arrears by providing sufficient budgetary allocation in the short and medium term; and as a way of stimulating growth, the domestic arrears to productive sectors in the economy should be cleared within a period of three years. In addition, Government should prioritise an additional Shs 100 billion for clearance of domestic arrears in the Financial Year 2020/2021 within the available resources.

2. Transparency and Accountability of COVID-19 Related Expenditure

The committee noted that Government allocated funds for COVID-19 related expenditure through Supplementary Schedule No.3 of Financial Year 2019/2020, which was not released as the expenditure was approved towards the end of the financial year on 26 June 2020. Votes had their funds appropriated through Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2020/2021, to enable them implement the COVID-19 related expenditure. In addition, the private sector made a number of contributions both in cash and kind towards COVID-19 related expenditures. 

The committee recommends that Government of Uganda should ensure that COVID-19 related resources are used in a transparent and accountable manner by undertaking targeted measures to strengthen public trust.

3. Performance of the Economy and Economic Outlook 

The committee observed that the economy had been severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the growth of the economy is dismal, - 2.9 per cent in Financial Year 2019/2020 - far from the target of 6.5 per cent, as a result of the COVID-19 containment measures to curb the spread of the virus, huge external and fiscal financing needs have emerged.

Uganda's external position has been characterised by a relatively large current account deficit that has been largely funded by the surpluses in the financial account, mostly driven by Government borrowing. The current account deficit means that the county is consuming more goods and services from the rest of the world than it is selling to the rest of the world.

The current account deficit is also a reflection of low national savings relative to investments, indicating that the country is funding her investments from savings from the rest of the world.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to improve the external position of the country, Government should embark on increasing productivity in the productive sectors, especially the agriculture and industrial sectors, in the short to medium term; unlock the constraints surrounding the oil production phase to boost export receipts; and attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDI).

In addition, Government should urgently expedite the implementation of Uganda's export promotion strategy to boost exports in the short to medium term.

4. Sound Fiscal Management to Ensure Fiscal Sustainability

The committee observed that Uganda’s public debt position is sustainable in the medium and long term. Despite the increase in sovereign debt, it is still sustainable although vulnerabilities exist. 

Standardised stress tests find Uganda’s debt could slide to an unattainable level due to the depreciation of the shilling associated with slow growth of exports. The stagnation in the growth of exports has posed a huge challenge for external debt sustainability. In addition, the slowdown in growth due to the COVID-19 pandemic is projected to further weaken the dynamics of debt stress indicators.

The committee also observed that a number of projects funded through borrowing are executed with lags in the project implementation schedules. The lags are attributed to a number of reasons, not limited to absence of counterpart funding and inadequate project preparation before implementation.

The committee recommends the following:

i) 	Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should explore new ways of enhancing domestic revenue collections in light of the COVID-I9 pandemic in addition to implementing the domestic revenue mobilisation strategies, so as to slow down the growth in debt arising from the need to borrow for budget support. 

ii) 	Government should strengthen public investment management to bring the fiscal deficit and public debt to a downward trajectory once the crisis abates, and also revert to plans of strengthening the budgetary process.

iii) 	Government should opt for sustainable options to increase foreign inflows through aggressive export promotion and import substitution strategies, as well as provide a conducive environment for Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) in the country.

5. Expenditure Contracts in Foreign Currency

The committee observed that the national budget is approved in Uganda shillings yet some spending agencies contract service providers in foreign currency, exposing them to foreign exchange risks.

The committee recommends that Government agencies should contract service providers in the currency approved in the national budget, irrespective of the level of imports that will be undertaken, to hedge against exchange rate risks.

6. Boosting the Lending Capacity of Uganda Development Bank (UDB)

The committee noted that part of the proceeds from the borrowing will go towards boosting the lending capacity of UDB to allow it provide affordable credit to private sector companies, and alleviate pressures in the balance of payment by generating local employment and manufacturing capacity. However, the committee was concerned that access to the funds under UDB was very bureaucratic and demotivating to a number of would-be beneficiary enterprises.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should further strengthen UDB’s governance to strengthen its delivery of the envisaged development impact on the economy.

In addition, UDB should develop systems that efficiently address the needs of the intended beneficiaries in a timely manner with minimum bureaucracy, create awareness of their services, and set up regional centres to bring services closer to the people.

7. Engagement of IMF to Extend Loan Maturity Period Under the Extended Credit Facility

The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, engages the IMF to consider reviewing the maturity period for the loans extended, from 10 to 12 years, to make them more concessional.

In conclusion, with regard to the IMF loan and subject to the recommendations herein, the committee recommends approval of the proposal by Government to borrow up to $600 million from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, I further request that we proceed with the next item so that I present the domestic borrowing loan and we discuss them concurrently.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SHS 4,307.3 BILLION THROUGH DOMESTIC BORROWING TO FINANCE THE BUDGET DEFICIT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

5.03
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I stated already, the documents to be laid on the Table – the ones we used to consider the International Monetary Fund (IMF) loan – were the same documents the committee considered when assessing this Government request to borrow Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Permit me to move straight to the observations of the committee on this request to borrow domestically - 

1. 	The committee observed that the trend of domestic borrowing has been high in the recent past. It has risen from Shs 627 billion in the Financial Year 2016/2017 to Shs 1,795 billion in the Financial Year 2017/2018, Shs 2,163 billion in the Financial Year 2018/2019, Shs 2,570 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020 and now to Shs 3,560.3 billion in the approved budget for Financial Year 2020/20121. The proposed borrowing of Shs 4.307 billion from the domestic market will increase the approved domestic borrowing by 121 per cent to Shs 7,867.6 billion.

With the additional borrowing of Shs 4,307.3 billion, the domestic borrowing will exceed one per cent of GDP to four per cent, way higher than desired in the third National Development Plan (NDP III), whose domestic financing strategy was to limit domestic borrowing to less than one per cent of GDP, to prevent crowding out of the private sector. 

The committee further noted that expenditure on external interest payments and amortisation are less than half of those spent on domestic borrowing due to the higher interest rates and shorter maturity periods associated with domestic borrowing.

The committee recommends that Government prioritises financing of the budget deficit through external financing that usually has longer maturity periods and lower interest rates, and with lesser effects on crowding out the private sector from the credit market.

2. 	The committee observed that the projected resource envelope for the Financial Year 2020/2021 excludes the World Bank loan that was approved to finance the COVID-19 related expenditure under Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for Financial Year 2019/2020. The actual loan amount of $304 million, which is about Shs 1,124.08 billion, was disbursed on 21 July 2020, implying it formed part of the resource for Financial Year 20201/2021 and reduces the projected revenue shortfall from Shs 2,507 billion to Shs 1,382.92 billion.

The committee noted that Government had made budget cuts on the approved budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 as a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, whereby some activities like travel abroad, which had been provided for, were now expected not to take effect. As such, efficiency gains worth Shs 1,421 billion were realised. This would, therefore, offset the approved budget from Shs 45,493.7 billion to Shs 44,072.7 billion.

In light of the above, the committee is of the view that the projected revenue shortfall of Shs 2,507 billion is covered by both the World Bank loan and the budget cuts. The financing pressures to be considered should therefore be those arising from the approved supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021 as well as the domestic debt servicing needs, which jointly amount to Shs 5,487.8 billion. Table 6 gives the details. I do not think I will go through it. I will just read the narrative. 

The committee further noted that borrowing Shs 4,307.3 billion from the domestic market will slow down private sector credit growth from 8.9 per cent registered in Financial Year 2019/2020 to 3 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the World Bank loan resources that were disbursed at the beginning of the financial year should be included in the resource envelope of the current financial year, which will eliminate the projected revenue shortfall that is a partial basis for the borrowing.

In addition, Government of Uganda should borrow Shs 3,258.5 billion from the domestic market, since the projected shortfall on the revised resource envelope is addressed by the World Bank resources, and the borrowing proposal would create an excess borrowing of Shs 1,048.8 billion.

Further, Government should prioritise the borrowed resources towards expenditure on productive areas that will stimulate economic growth.

3. Domestic Arrears

The committee noted that over the years, Government has accumulated arrears worth Shs 3,334.6 billion as at the end of June 2019. During Financial Year 2020/2021, only Shs 450 billion was provided to cater for domestic arrears and an additional Shs 223 billion has been provided for in the supplementary budget. At the current rate of budgetary allocation, of Shs 450 billion, it will take 7.4 years to clear the current stock of domestic arrears, yet the medium-term budget framework indicates a declining allocation in the outer years. Delayed payments to service providers hampers their growth and weakens the private sector

The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda prioritises payment of all domestic arrears by providing sufficient budgetary allocations in the short to medium term; and as a way of stimulating economic growth, the domestic arrears to productive sectors in the economy should be cleared within a period of three years.

In addition, Government should prioritise an additional Shs 100 billion for clearance of domestic arrears in Financial Year 2020/2021, within the available resources. 

4. Transparency and Accountability of COVID-19 Related Expenditure 

I think I should skip this because I have already read it in the other report. 

5. Need to Review Tax Exemptions

The committee observed that a number of tax exemptions have been provided for and are isolated cases that distort incentives to production and business. The tax exemptions in some cases have made imports become cheaper than the locally produced goods. A case in point being rice imports from Tanzania, where farmers are getting discouraged as imported rice associated with a tax exemption is making their rice appear expensive to Ugandans and thus discouraging investment in the same.

The committee recommends that Government reviews tax exemptions with a view of boosting local production and increasing tax revenues through a broadened tax base.

6. Need to Expand on the Domestic Revenues

The committee observed that part of the borrowing is to meet domestic debt service obligations to a tune of Shs 2,100 billion. The committee was concerned about the sustainability of borrowing to meet debt obligations, given the fact that the approved budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 had Shs 7,486 billion approved for domestic refinancing and Shs 3,023 billion for domestic interest payments. With this approval, the total domestic debt servicing budget will increase to Shs 12,586 billion in Financial Year 2020/2021.

The committee recommends that Government should enhance domestic revenue mobilisation as a sure means of reducing the fiscal deficit and ensuring that the debt service obligations are met on time, taking into consideration the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy.

To this end, tax administration should broaden the tax base to incorporate the informal sector that now accounts for the largest part of the economy based on the GDP numbers (55 per cent).

In addition, the tax base can be increased through measures that target organising supply chains into a market-driven approach and cooperatives, which would support GDP growth and hence widen the tax base.

In conclusion, subject to these recommendations, the committee recommends the approval of domestic borrowing of up to Shs 3,258.1 billion to finance the fiscal deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Just to make it very clear, the difference between what was requested for and what has been approved is the World Bank loan that had already been disbursed to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to report and lay on the Table the documents I read. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and Committee on National Economy for both reports. Honourable members, I have established that they have more than the required necessary signatures for eligibility to be debated on the Floor. You can make your comments, honourable members.

5.17
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they did and the good report. I stand support the recommendations of the committee for the approval of the loans.

The committee talks about issues of transparency and accountability in the report. These things are disturbing us. Last financial year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here and tabled requests against some expenditure and we approved those requests. They did not spend that money but came back at the beginning of this financial year and asked this Parliament to reconsider, which Parliament did. 

However, Madam Speaker, this money has never been released and we do not know what happened to it. It is not clear why Government keeps asking us to approve borrowing. In that particular case, they even had the money. They said they were caught up by time and that all they needed was for us to allow them reactivate the permission we had given them. We did this. To date, they have no money and the entities have not been paid because the Government has run broke. You have seen they are saying that Government can only pay wages plus money to some few votes, which is very dangerous. Why should Government pay salary to workers who are not doing anything? Why don’t we just send all workers home?

Madam Speaker, what is disturbing us is that Government keeps asking for money against certain expenditures, we approve the request - some of these are loans and others are grants but the money disappears along the way. I do not know why the committee chair shied away because he wanted to talk about the issue of accountability and transparency but for unknown reasons, he chose to shy away from it. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should address this pertinent issue before we can continue approving loan requests.

You are making the country very heavily indebted but we are not seeing where the money is going. You are not performing the activities for which you came to us to allow you to borrow, and you do not release money to those entities. What is going on? Something must be –(Member timed out.)

5.20
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to partially oppose some aspects of the borrowing. However, Before I do that, I would like to seek clarification from the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, my good friends, hon. Bahati and hon. Kasaija.

Madam Speaker, Government of Uganda has been giving money to Housing Finance Bank. When we go to this bank, they charge us interest just like Stanbic Bank and other private banks. Where is the profit that Housing Finance Bank has been making using Government money, so that we see if we can plough that money back? 

It looks like they get money from Government and then use it privately and the system of injecting it back – I tried to follow a committee report of Parliament of two years ago; it is completely unsatisfactory in the way they deal with profits that they make. It looks like in election years - for example in FY 2017/2018 - they removed money from the bank and gave it to political actors. I followed this up.

We want to be told. If you go to Housing Finance Bank, you will find statements on the wall regarding how much profit they have made. I wanted to photograph this to show you how much they have made, as this would reduce how much we need to borrow because they are using our money. That is my first concern.

Secondly, elections are on 14 January 2021. I appreciate the committee report and I will support up to about 70 per cent of the recommendations. However, there is no way the economy can pick up between now and election time; that is a lie. There are riots in the city; the images we are sending across the world are not good, so tourism will go down. Therefore, when we are borrowing, let us borrow knowing that the good season will come after elections, by the grace of God. Between now and elections, I do not see the political tension reducing. 

Be that as it may, this thing of borrowing Shs 336 billion to manufacture radios - check the second page of the supplementary, under vote 13 –

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish with the reports of the Committee on National Economy first. We are coming to that after. We are on items Nos. 8 and 9.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. I will get back to that. However, in the absence of this issue of the radios, which I will revert to, I think it is high time that the country borrows to meet shortfalls because of the political temperature. Therefore, in my opinion, it is healthy to borrow to meet the budget deficit but I will revert on the issue of the radios. Thank you. I support the committee’s recommendation.

5.24
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report and I support their submissions. However, I seek a few clarifications from the minister. 

It is true that the economy is not doing very well and many interventions have been made. We would like the minister to clarify. We gave money to Uganda Development Bank (UDB) - over Shs 1 trillion - by way of an emergency fund to support the private sector. Ruling out the bureaucratic processes of accessing this money, how much money has been disbursed to the private sector?

Madam Speaker, people have been going to UDB but if I am not wrong, not more than five people have accessed this money. Was this an economic stimulus to support the private sector to revamp the economy?

Secondly, money was given to the Microfinance Support Centre to support the SACCOs, again to revamp the economy and mostly small and medium enterprises in Uganda.  The bureaucracy to access this money is like passing through the eye of a needle, yet this was a special package, an emergency fund, given by Government to support its people and their businesses. 

We come here to seek for loan approvals, which are granted, but when the funds are given out to certain agencies, the response is very slow. At the end of the day, the effect will not be there. What, therefore, is the use of looking for these loans? I thought the loans are being sought to be able to immediately support our people. 

The committee has recommended in their report that domestic arrears be paid. When we were considering this financial year’s budget, emphasis was being made on payment of domestic arrears to enable suppliers and contractors who have borrowed money from banks to be able to revamp their business. It is still coming up here that most of these suppliers and contractors are not being paid. 

Mind you, these people borrow money and they pay interest on it. When the Government is paying, it does not consider paying them the interest. They risk their property, borrow money but Government does not come in quickly to pay them. 

The committee has recommended that Shs 100 billion be set aside to cater for domestic arrears. We are pleading with you, Madam Speaker; we pray that the minister considers the tobacco farmers in Bunyoro – his area. I do not know how many times they have been here, yet they have never been paid. 

The suppliers of tea seedlings from Kigezi and Bushenyi, who borrowed money from SACCOs and banks, have never been paid, yet we approved money to pay domestic arrears. There are also the traders who did business in South Sudan. These are our people whom we should be supporting at this critical time. 

As we support this –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When it comes to the money that we allocate for clearing most of these domestic arrears – You remember, last time we provided money to cater for those that had outstanding demands after supplying coffee seedlings. 

The information I want to give the honourable colleague is that Hajjat Watongola supplied coffee seedlings in 2018. She nearly cried at the offices of Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). You saw her here on the Floor lamenting. She borrowed money to supply those seedlings. She has eventually died without getting that money. That is what is happening. 

It is easy for the minister and his team to come here and ask to be given money to go and pay domestic arrears but when it comes to releasing that money to the concerned creditors, their hand is very slow to pick that money. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, additionally, in regard to the cooperative unions for which we approved payment here, last week the Secretary to the Treasury stopped the payment of these monies to the cooperatives. Teso Cooperative union is one of them. 

They owed this money to the cooperative unions and now the unions are stuck; they cannot hold their annual general meetings or even proceed with investments. It is very pertinent that when we approve money for domestic arrears, it is paid to those that Government owes. 

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, it is my request that as Government looks for money or contract debt, it should not crowd the domestic market. When they borrow from the domestic market, it is so attractive to the lenders because it is risk free. They rush for Government bonds and Treasury bills and this makes it very difficult for the private sector to access financing. I suggest that Government looks for external sources to finance their budget and leave the domestic credit market for the private sector. 

Finally, as hon. Okupa has said, ministries do their work and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to do work. For the money for cooperatives that we passed here, due diligence and all the work was done by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, money was approved here and cooperatives were supposed to be paid. Some were paid but when it came to others, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development raised a lot of issues, which were answered by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I thought the issues that had been raised were cleared by the internal department in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

It is becoming very difficult for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to pay out money yet when they come here, we approve it, it goes through all the processes but paying it out becomes a problem. We would like to be updated when we approve money. We would like to see the response of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in addressing the issues they bring to us. We clear them and then they are slow in responding. Thank you. I support the motion.

5.32
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

My attention has been drawn to the recommendation of the committee with regard to tax exemptions. I need to seek clarification from the minister on what informs their decision to offer tax exemptions in areas where the country seems to have a comparative advantage. 

In the report, the committee makes an observation in the area of rice. I come from a rice-growing area, Bugiri District. The rice is produced by Tilda, formerly Kibimba Rice Company. The people in that area survive on growing rice. It is a major economic activity in that area. 

Unfortunately, Government has been offering tax exemptions in regard to the importation of rice, especially from Tanzania as the committee report observes. This raises a very serious concern. As Government, as a ministry, why would you be offering tax exemptions in areas where we have local capacity, where we can boost production and have a comparative advantage? I need some clarification on that aspect. Otherwise, I have no reservation in supporting the motion.

5.34
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Madam Speaker, I must thank the committee for the good report. I do support the borrowing. However, I have some issues to raise concerning the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

One, there is the issue of counterpart funding. We have passed loan requests here; we get the money and then the Ministry of Finance does not provide counterpart funding and we start paying interest. This is something that must stop. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come here when they are ready with counterpart funding. If it is not there, do not come here. 

Secondly, the absorption capacity in these ministries is very low. If we requested Government to bring tabulation showing the absorption capacity, we would be shocked. What is the problem of not absorbing this money? Are we having round pegs into square holes or what?

This low capacity in absorption may mean that we have people holding positions they should not be holding. I wish we could look into this and see that this thing works.

Domestic borrowing is a problem to Ugandans who want to progress. If you have a small business and you want to collapse, deal with Government. Many have, those who survived used one trick, if the item costs Shs 1, you put Shs 10, but if you go with the right costings you will definitely collapse.

We need to do some research on these tax exemptions. Who gets it? If somebody tabulated these exemptions for 10 years to find out the people getting exemptions, you may be shocked.

I would request the Ministry of Finance to pick interest and get information from URA; we want to know the people getting tax exemptions; even some of these traders in Kampala get tax exemptions –(Member timed out.)  

5.37
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to pick up from where hon. Byandala ended. When we talk about tax exemptions, we are exempting powerful people, who are running powerful businesses, and because we are exempting them, it forces the Government to borrow money for running Government activities.

We are borrowing because of these exemptions; if we were not exempting some of these businesses, I am sure we would not be borrowing any money in Uganda. That is according to my simple economics and understanding.

Two, when we talk about the loans and the debt situation in Uganda, we need about seven years to make sure all the domestic arrears will be paid. Given this scenario, I am worried that this loan is going to be here for about four years and it will increase domestic arrears.

I agree with the committee but I would like the ministers of Finance to go on record and tell us why they are not paying domestic arrears. There are people who have done business with them but they are not paying them; they should tell us specifically today why they are not paying.

These loans are good if used properly and in time; there will be a change but unfortunately like some of my colleagues have said, the minister should assure the House and Uganda that when this money is approved, they will utilise it properly other than approving today and it takes about three or 10 years to start using it and that becomes a problem. I wind up with the first question I asked; why are they not paying domestic arrears even when we approved the money? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that there is general consensus -

5.40
MR SILAS AOGON	(Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the ministers, Government and all those who produced the report. Like the rest of my colleagues said, accountability is key and transparency is equally critical.

We have given resources most times, but I am interested in my district, Kumi. If we are talking about the budget deficit and now, we are financing using a loan, what are you going to do to make sure that we also feel the benefit of this loan?

Madam Speak, I have a health facility which has taken 10 years but it has not been completed and yet every day we are approving loans here. When shall we feel the benefit of these several loans that we are approving? Loans are good but the way we utilise them is very important. 

Honourable minister, you need to travel to Kumi to listen to my people. Talk to them yourself because when you are here you will not be able to get the questions that they would like to ask you.

The private schools’ teachers for instance are suffering immensely. They do not have resources; they are just there stuck and struggling. What are you going to do about them? We are talking about loans, but how did we arrive at this deficit?

Much as COVID-19 affected the country, where is the money that we saved from travel abroad? How much did we save from travels abroad and the workshops that we froze?

I thought that should have catered for the deficit that we are talking about. Much as COVID-19 struck the country, I expected the ministers to make a summary of savings that they made from travels abroad, workshops and seminars and several issues that we did not execute in the previous financial year so that we are assured of the source of the deficit and how we arrived at it.

However, I support acquisition of this loan but I would like to remind the minister about Lubowa -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do approve the proposal by the Government to borrow $600 million from the International Monetary Fund to finance the budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Text expunged on the directive of the Speaker.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us expunge the first part of that report. Okay, now I put the question that this House do approve the Government borrowing of Shs 3,258,500,000 through domestic borrowing to finance a budget deficit for the financial year 2020/2021?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, let us go back to item 7; this was the motion for adoption of the report of the Budget Committee on supplementary expenditure. I would like to respond to the query raised by the chair of the Budget Committee. 

On 2 April 2020, I issued guidelines to be utilised in the COVID-19 pandemic and in guideline No.8, I ruled that at least five members would be able to sign a report on behalf of the others in order not to breach the COVID-19 regulations. Therefore, in the circumstances, this report is eligible for presentation and debate. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.3 AND CORRESPONDING ADDENDUM 1 AND 2 TO SCHEDULE 3 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek procedural guidance from you. I know we are time barred and it is not very good considering our situation in the city. However, there were pertinent issues we raised to the Minister of Finance that even if we are time barred, at least you should caution them as our speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you allow the chairperson to present his report and then you can comment? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, I am lost in the procedure, because I raised an issue to the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Please take your seat and wait for the report.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you.

5.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.3 and corresponding Addendum 1 and 2 to Schedule 3 for the financial year 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, since the beginning of this financial year, we have so far received three schedules pertaining to supplementary expenditure. These schedules are summarised in table 1, on page 2.

In Schedule 1, a request of Shs 1.3 trillion shillings; Schedule 2, a request of Shs 2 trillion; and there was an addendum No.1 to Schedule 2, with Shs 389 billion; Schedule 3 with Shs 353 billion;  Addendum No.1 to Schedule 3, Shs 48 billion; and Addendum No.2 to Schedule 3, Shs 5.6 billion. Overall, to date, we have received supplementary requests amounting to Shs 4.224 trillion.

Madam Speaker, Supplementary Schedule No.3, which is the latest that we are handling in this paper, was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny and reporting thereto. We have considered this report and wish to report as follows.

In this report, part A will present the methodology, legal framework and preliminary observations, while part B will present the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule 3 for the financial year 2020/2021.

Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I beg to skip page 3. It is the usual legal framework that guides the processing of supplementaries. 

On page 4 - I will move straight to the preliminary committee observations.

The committee observed that the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 3 was laid in accordance with Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act 2015.

The committee observes that there is no clear source of funding for most of the supplementary expenditure requests. The reason being, we looked at the report of the Committee on National Economy and what we found was that the request for loan approval only relates to Schedules 1, 2 and debt servicing. It did not cover Schedule 3.

The committee observes that some of the expenditure requests do not pass the legal requirement under the Public Finance Management Act and Regulations of “unavoidable or unforeseeable”.

B: SUPPLEMENTARY REQUESTS THAT REQUIRE PRIOR PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL UNDER SCHEDULE NO.3 AND ADDENDUM I AND 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

Madam Speaker, Schedule 3 for the financial year 2020/2021 is over and above the 3 per cent legal requirement, and therefore, requires prior approval of Parliament in line with Section 25 of the Public finance Management Act, 2015 as amended, before the money can be spent by Government. 

Below is a listing of supplementary expenditure requests under Schedule 3 and corresponding addenda. The list is there - and it is based on this list that we have provided justification for the proposed funding.

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister; Shs 2 billion for the Integrated Intelligence Computer System 

Government of Uganda funded the Integrated Intelligent Computer System as a research project from 2010 to 2014. The Presidential Support to Scientists Initiative provided the funding for the research, and Uganda National Council of Science and Technology hosted and supervised this project. The project was later transferred to the Office of the Prime Minister in 2015. 

The committee was informed that the purpose of the research was to find a computer based solution to address a number of challenges affecting service delivery in the health sector. The committee was informed that this system and the Ministry of Health are working together, deploying the system in the regional referral hospitals of Naguru, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Moroto, Mbale, Nebbi, and Mityana.

The committee further noted that the project accumulated arrears totalling to Shs 2 billion, because they were not being paid. And the affected employees and suppliers have sued the project in various courts of law. To date, there are 10 court cases, of which three have judgments delivered.

In addition, His Excellency the President, since May 2017, has been issuing directives to the ministry to pay but in vain.

Committee Observations

    a) The project is stuck in arrears amounting to Shs 2 billion that include staff salaries and supplies. This has been the situation for many years. So, the staff affected have been suffering for all those years.

    b)  The survival of the project is in jeopardy and as such, the deployment of the system cannot proceed unless the project is relieved from any court cases arising out of the failures to meet its obligations to staff and suppliers.

The committee, therefore, recommends approval of this request to avoid further losses, owing to the numerous court cases which may prove to be very costly and difficult to win by Government. 

The sources of funding these arrears should be the approved budget on domestic arrears that Parliament appropriated in the financial year 2020/2021.

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Shs 1,000,000,000 for the establishment of an Embassy of Uganda in Angola. 

Having considered this matter, the committee has recommended that we defer consideration of approval of this request until the source of funding is established. The source has not been indicated and therefore we cannot approve expenditure where it has not been made clear.
 
Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Shs 5,000,000,000 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested for Shs 5,000,000,000 for implementing the electronic government procurement system (E-GP).

The committee was informed that the implementation of the E-GP system commenced in July 2020 and will support Government to carry out complete public procurement and disposal processes electronically. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development highlighted the benefits, which are listed there. 

The committee observed that the ministry knew that the project would start in June 2020 and therefore should have planned and budgeted for it in the financial year 2020/2021 annual budget since the expenditure was foreseeable. That is what the regulation requires. 

In addition, no source of funds to finance this request has been provided to the committee. It has two problems; the expenditure was foreseeable and for a supplementary request to pass, it must be unforeseeable.

The committee, therefore, declines to recommend for the approval of this expenditure. It can wait for the next budget.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands and Urban Development; Shs 6,000,000. 

The committee was informed that His Excellency the President agreed with the Archbishop of Kampala that Government acquires 20 acres out of the land belonging to the Archdiocese of Kampala but currently occupied by Nsambya Police Barracks. This is to pave way for construction of an ultramodern convention centre. The land was valued at a total of Shs 64 billion of which Shs 12 billion has already been paid as Government commitment. 

The committee noted that it is against this background that supplementary funding of Shs 6 billion is being requested to cater for part-payment to enable the church to undertake other development activities as agreed with His Excellency the President.

At the time of considering this request, issues relating to the ownership of the conventional centre were not ascertained and the source of funding was also not known.

The committee, therefore, has deferred consideration of approval of this request.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports; Shs 336.867 billion to cater for the purchase of radios.

Following the closure of institutions of learning on 20 March 2020 by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Ministry of Education and Sports designed a preparedness and response plan to COVID-I9 with a focus on overcoming challenges within the education sector such as supporting continuity of learning and ensuring safety and protection of learners while at home.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has requested for Shs 336.86 billion for purchase of nine million radios for supply to all Uganda homesteads as one of the strategies to support long distance learning, given that schools are closed due to COVID-19 pandemic except for candidate classes.

After interacting with the relevant ministers and technical officers, we made the following observations:
    a) The committee observed that the first phase of long-distance learning was conducted in May 2020. The committee was informed that an assessment on the effectiveness of long distance learning was undertaken. 

However, the report on the assessment presented to the committee fell far short in providing adequate information on the effectiveness of the radio-based approach to learning. 

The report enumerated a number of challenges as detailed below:

    i) That students and parents were not given an opportunity to ask questions directly during the radio programme.
    ii) The time seemed not to be enough for the teacher because at the time of summarising the lesson, the teacher was rushed to enable him conclude the lesson.
    iii) Some teachers make mistakes that cannot be corrected.
    iv) Some learners miss out due to competition between gardening and attending lessons in homes.
    v) Many community members demand for study materials instead of their children listening to radios and televisions.
    vi) Some teachers were reported to be too speedy when giving instructions/activities thus learners fail to write it all down.
    vii) Practical lessons seem to remain a challenge during lesson delivery.

These were challenges enumerated from that assessment.

    b) The committee was informed that the full school opening roadmap could only be finalised after a two-month assessment of the current partial opening for finalists has been undertaken. This would therefore imply that the radio-based learning should only be implemented after the assessment and the roadmap has been finalised.

    c) Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), which is supposed to partner with other radio stations and ensure that the radio-based learning is implemented, is not mandated to supervise other radio stations. 

In addition, UBC is likely to be overwhelmed with the national campaigns and the need to broadcast in 56 languages.

    d) UBC is financially handicapped with debts of over Shs 40 billion and no provision has been made by the Ministry of Education to pay for broadcasting airtime and this puts a constraint to the initiative of learning through the radios.

    e) The committee observes that there are some parts of the country that do not access any local radio signals like Karamoja, Kapchorwa, Sembabule, Lwengo and others.

    f) There is no provision in the ministry's budget on how the radios will be maintained by the poor beneficiaries in terms of repair and accessories. 

In addition, there is no information on the funding required to fully operationalise the radio-based learning. Information relating to the costs of delivery of radios, payment of teachers’ outstanding arrears and other related costs have not been provided to the committee.

    g) According to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) National Household Survey Report of 2016/2017, 4.3 million households had no access to radios. Further, given the growth of the economy and household incomes over the last four years arising out of Government strategic interventions, households with no access to radios could have reduced further to below two million to date.
    h) According to the Ministry of Education and Sports, the radios will be procured from different sources at varying prices ranging from Shs 33,000 to Shs 42,000 per unit. 

The committee is concerned that for the same type of radio, we are required to pay different prices constituting an obvious loss of public resources and against Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) regulations 

i) 	According to the radio delivery schedule provided to the committee by the Ministry of Education and Sports, two million radios are to be delivered in December 2020, two million radios are to be delivered in January 202l and five million radios to be locally manufactured will commence delivery at the end of February 2021. This could imply that the commencement of the radio-learning programme would fully commence in March 2021.

However, the committee has strong reservations in the ability of the selected companies to supply the radios as per the delivery schedule. The committee visited the identified local manufacturer (Orion Transformers & Electrics) and established the following:

    i.  The company’s core activity is production of electrical transformers, not radios.  
    ii. No production line was seen for the production or assembly of radios.
    iii. The company requires time to recruit and train its human resource for the production of radios.
    iv. Under the circumstances, the committee estimates a period of over six months to commence production, by which time, the current academic calendar would have come to an end; hence defeating the whole rationale for the immediate procurement of radios for learning.

j) 	At 49 per cent of debt to GDP ratio, the current debt situation in Uganda is almost hitting a debt ceiling, where more debt will not be sustainable. The provision of Shs 336.8 billion can only escalate the debt crisis and it would be unwise to recommend any expenditure of this nature.

k) The ministry has not indicated the source of funds to purchase the radios. 

Given the foregoing observations, the committee does not recommend the approval of Shs 336.867 billion to purchase nine million radios for the distance-learning programme.

Vote 020 - Ministry of ICT & National Guidance; Shs 3 billion for support to UBC.

The funds are meant to support UBC in the delivery of its mandate as a national broadcaster with the mandate to educate, inform, guide and entertain Ugandans. The committee noted that all the subvention funds from Government to the agency for financial year 2020/202l were cut to nil, making it difficult for the corporation to operate effectively.

The committee also observed that UBC, as a national public broadcaster, cannot ably compete with the private sector as it struggles to achieve full national coverage while broadcasting nationalistic content, which does not necessarily generate sufficient advertising revenue.

However, the committee defers approval of this request pending availability of the source of funding.

Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority Uganda;  Shs 44.67 billion

This request is to cater for external financing by the World Bank for implementation of the Regional Communication Infrastructure Programme (RCIP), particularly for the outstanding and projected obligations in the missing links and last mile connectivity as well as contract obligations under the project.

The overall objective of this project is to transform public service delivery in Uganda using ICT in order to improve the lives of Ugandans. The specific objectives set for RCIP are to:

(i) 	Lower prices for international capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband networks (the connectivity development objective), and;

(ii) 	Improve the Government’s efficiency and transparency through e-Government applications. 

The beneficiaries are listed there and I would like to move to the recommendations. 

First, I should mention that this activity is funded unlike the previous one that I have mentioned. The committee, therefore, recommends approval of Shs 44.67 billion to NITA-U for the implementation of the Regional Communication Infrastructure Programme.

Vote 014 -  Ministry of Health; Shs 4.0 billion

This supplementary request is to enable reallocation of Shs 4 billion from the recurrent budget to the development budget of the ministry's Vote, to enable Kayunga Hospital expansion of the bed capacity in order to operate as a referral hospital from a general hospital following the recent renovation of this facility. This request is budget neutral.

The committee recommends approval of Shs 4 billion to the Ministry of Health to enable the expansion of the bed capacity of Kayunga Hospital.

Vote 307 - Kabale University; Shs 960 million

This resource was excess Appropriation in Aid (from students’ fees and donors) remitted by the university to the Consolidated Fund, that was meant to be returned to the university for the completion of the medical school by December 2020, as the deadline for accreditation by the East African Medical Council. The committee recommends approval of this money – Shs 960 million – to Kabale University for the completion of the medical school.

Votes 500 – 797 - Local Governments; Shs 4.145 billion

This money is required for the Public Private Partnership secondary schools for Universal Secondary Education (USE) grant funds and Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) fees for schools partnering with Government. 

The committee was informed that this supplementary request is budget neutral, thus only requires adjustments within the Votes to rectify the errors so that the budget execution for the financial year 2020/2021 is not affected. The committee recommends approval of this amount to the local governments for the USE grant funds and UNEB fees. 

Vote 757 - Kabale Municipality; Shs 533 million

The committee was informed that this was additional local revenue collections earmarked by the municipality for priority capital development projects, which include the completion of the on-going construction of the council hall and the doctor’s house, which is part of the upgrading of Kamukira Health Centre IV to a hospital status. 

The additional local revenue collections are accruing from leasing of plots located in the former housing estate of Kabale Municipality. The above fund was remitted to the Consolidated Fund at the end of last financial year.

The committee recommends approval of Shs 533 million to Kabale Municipality for capital projects, including the completion of the on-going construction of the council hall and doctor's house. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I request the House to adopt the report of the Budget Committee and supply figures as recommended in the annex. A summary of those figures is presented in Table 3, wherein we are proposing the approval of the recurrent expenditure amounting to Shs 6.15 billion and development expenditure of Shs 50.16 billion. The overall request for approval from the committee is Shs 56.31 billion. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Budget Committee and the members. I am just curious about the supplementary request for the Convention Centre under Vote 012, which you have rejected. I am wondering about what happened to the grant by the Government of India for the Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre. The silence of the Government is very loud on this issue. Why are you looking for supplementary when there is a grant from the Indian Government? Why are you even fidgeting around Kampala, when this thing is supposed to be in Jinja? 

6.15
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself 100 per cent with the committee report and thank the chairperson of the committee for coming up with such a good report.

To buttress my feelings and views of the people I represent, I watched CNN today and they said the first test for Coronavirus vaccine begins tomorrow, on Friday. 

The idea of buying radios, which will be supplied up to next year - these radios may appear at the time, when Coronavirus is history. Therefore, I think it is not a wise idea. I fully agree with the committee that we first hold on to the idea of spending Shs 300 billion, to buy radios that will not be delivered like the facemasks. In any case, it is election time. This country is not running away after elections. We shall come back and revisit the decision in case what the committee advises is wrong. I really want to thank the committee and I beg to move that the question be put. (Laughter)

6.17
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to also thank the committee for being clear on a number of issues. 

Regarding the issue of radios, I would like to add that it has been delayed. Therefore, I agree with the committee that the procurement of radios should wait. Maybe we shall think about it at an appropriate time, if COVID-19 continues.

Secondly, we are talking about supplementary but there is a bridge that connects Ngora to Pallisa called Alele. That bridge was planned but it has stalled. We are wondering why it stalled. This is why I join others to say that we approve the proposal instead of wasting time. Otherwise, time is running out and as you are aware, there are some problems in town. Therefore, I propose that we just put the question so that we can approve the report.

6.18
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee. However, to I would like caution dealers in this town. 

I saw some “manufacturers” who were despising Parliament. After we found out that they do not manufacture anything and that the sample radios had come by DHL, they published a statement in the media that Members of Parliament who came on the fact-finding mission are liars yet they only deal in transformers. This was appearing in newspapers yesterday. This is very bad because it puts the institution of Parliament in bad light.

Madam Speaker, I would like this to go on record that this has to stop. If Parliament is doing its work, allow it to do its work. You cannot say that Members who went on the ground and found nothing, are liars. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just taking on from where hon. Tayebwa has stopped, I think if the Ministry of Education and Sports fails to justify the reason for buying radios, they should not go and get dealers. 

There is a gentleman from the New Vision, who wrote an article attacking the Committee on Budget for picking one company instead of checking all the 15.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports presented a report to the committee and said they had identified four companies that would supply radios. Out of the four, one is a local company and the rest are foreign companies. Therefore, how could they have expected a parliamentary committee to fly to see those four companies? They only went here because it was the only local company - Orion Transformers and Electrics. Therefore, we would like to caution ministry officials and the minister not to blackmail Parliament. The committee didn’t see anything; there was nothing. In fact, I would like to thank the owner of that company for being very honest. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports denied the report of some gentleman that I had submitted earlier. He said “If it means losing my job, I would rather lose it than taking you to a non-existent company.” The ministry disowned what that gentleman had told us in the committee. I appeared in that committee as an ex-officio member.

I would like to thank the committee but also warn those dealers outside there, as hon. Tayebwa has said, to stop blackmailing Parliament. If they do not have facts, they should stop it or seek for information. How many times shall we be deceived? You know what happened to the bicycles for the LC I chaipersons. Up to now, we are still demanding. What happened to the masks? We have failed to supply mere masks but now you are talking about radios, which need manufacturing, assembling, importing, shipping and Uganda National Bureau of Standards. How can they really be delivered next month? Unless they have already awarded the contract, given money and the things are here. Otherwise, from what we saw with the so-called local supplier, there is nothing. 

I would, therefore, like to propose that if this money is there, we move it to the Ministry of Health to deal with issues of COVID-19 and to help the schools reopen. The schools have failed to adhere to the Standard Operating Procedures because there is no money to buy sanitisers and soap.

Finally, can the minister tell us what is this convention centre they are building? Is it a substitute to the one at Jinja or is it a separate one? Who owns this? Can the ministry tell us whether it is the one sponsored by the Indian Government or it is different? 

Last time, when hon. Kamuntu was in the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, he said they were building it in Entebbe.  We need clarity from the Government. The ministers are here and so they should be able to tell us more about the convention centre they are building. 

In the report, they said that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) had a deficit. I have just been reading a document here, from the new Commissioner General of URA that they made surplus in July. Their target was Shs 68 billion but they collected Shs 102 billion. In August, the target was Shs 81 billion and they collected Shs 117 billion. In September, the target was Shs 83.53 billion and they collected Shs 121.2 billion. If it is true that URA collected surplus – could this be as a result of what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told us some time back that he was going to revise the Budget? Honourable minister, did you revise the Budget? Otherwise, you were supposed to have brought it back here but we have not seen it. We are still waiting for your revised budget to take care of the COVID-19 situation. We do not know when it is coming.  Otherwise, we would not be asking these questions. Madam Speaker, there was a surplus collection of 47 per cent by URA. Thank you. 

6.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with my colleagues in supporting the committee’s report. I also wish to support hon. Otto for passing the motion. 

I wish to begin with the issue of the convention centre. We have realised that the language that some of these ministries understand best is when you put a condition that they will not appear again and we shall not listen to what they present unless they give us a position here. 

Regarding the convention centre, we have dilly dallied a lot and eventually, we shall lose it. I am speaking from a selfish point of view of somebody who comes from Busoga. This was an offer that was given to Jinja for a specific reason. Now mafias are playing around and want to steal this thing. We cannot simply look on. 

Madam Speaker, I request that you give a condition to the ministry concerned that they come and give us a position. Unless they give us a position, we should not discuss whatever concerns that ministry. I humbly request.

On the issue of the Ministry of Education and Sports wanting Shs 336 billion to buy radios, if we allow this, we are setting a precedent to some of these ministries. Education purchasing household items like radios? Tomorrow, they will come asking to purchase saucepans for home economics students. (Laughter)

We must know what we are doing. As colleagues have said, they have failed to purchase simple things. We allocated money in April and up to now, nothing has been purchased. You want us to allocate money in November towards December – 

Madam Speaker, if we are looking for mafias, this is the route we should follow and trace these mafias. Somebody must be in this deal and we need to move and track them. I saw the gentleman fidgeting with a small loud speaker saying this and that. Eventually he conceded that he could not.

I think this is the time to begin tracking these mafias. Whoever brought this deal of radios must be part of the mafia gang in this Government. We need to begin here, trace these guys and bring – (Member timed out.)

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for a job well done. We have had several meetings with the Committee on Budget where we submitted all the details concerning this project. 

However, two points did not come out properly. One, over 8 million young people who are supposed to be in school are still at home redundant and nobody knows when this lockdown will come to an end. We need to come up with a programme to engage these people because some of these children have already been married off. Some have started taking drugs and others are idle and disorderly. That point needed to come out and what we are going to do about this. 

Perhaps the other point that came out in our meeting is that radio teaching has been adopted in some countries like Nigeria, Thailand and Niger. As a ministry, we are saying that whatever Parliament will decide is what we shall move with. However, the responsibility over what happens to the children when they are locked up at home should be one for all of us to carry. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, were you going to give lessons on these radios from morning until evening so that these children do not move anywhere? (Laughter) 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for being open and honest. He is always an honest man and the question I would like to ask is; I would like him to help me understand how a radio can help a child run away from drug addiction. I would like to be helped such that it becomes justification for us to buy radios.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the minister because he feels for the children that are at home and are not going to school. 

A few days ago, we were here and we requested Government to provide only Shs 7 billion for candidate classes as examination fees. Government has failed to pay Shs 7 billion but the minister is sympathetic towards those who are not candidates and need Shs 336 billion. I wonder how possible it is for the ministry to feel for those who need Shs 336 billion and yet not feel anything for those who are finishing and need only Shs 7 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also recall that last financial year, we asked Government to just add Shs 5 billion for higher education financing scheme to capture more students. Government had no money but now they have money for radios.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, as I said, we will go with what Parliament will decide. We had a plan and even a timetable to follow when executing these radio programmes. I think we have discussed much of this with the committee and that is why I am saying that we shall follow what Parliament decides. 

THE SPEAKER: Have you sent these children books on which they are going to write the things they are studying? 

Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 3 and Addendum 1 and 2 to Schedule 3 for financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a petition from citizens in Njeru Municipality, Namabere Village. There is a looming eviction from Namabere Village, Itongoro Parish in Nyenga Division. Somebody is forcing people out of the land, giving them Shs 100,000 and telling them to leave immediately.

As you recall, His Excellency the President put an embargo on evictions during the COVID-19 pandemic and we are still in the pandemic. I would like to invite the Minister for Lands to take interest in this matter and help the citizens of Namabere Village, Itongoro Parish, Nyenga Division, Njeru Municipality in Buikwe District. 

Whether the House is on or not, I would like to get an answer by close of business next week. Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is good the Minister of Education, hon. Muyingo is here. There was a complaint coming from LDC. You remember we raised the issue last time. Over 50 students have been denied to sit exams and they have been told that they must repeat the full year next year. 

I think you should pick interest and follow it up. There is a team that came here yesterday to see us over the matter. I tried calling you but I couldn’t get through to you. You must pick interest in it. Those who had been taken for training in Kyankwanzi petitioned and they have been allowed but these 50 have been denied. Where will they get that money from? I would like you to pick interest and help those students.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I thought we were moving to the committee of supply.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we are going to committee of supply.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the supplementary expenditure recommended for approval under Schedule 1, the total recurrent budget is Shs 6,015,000,000. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development expenditure is Shs 50,016,000,000 – I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

In total, a sum of Shs 56,031,000,000 – I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee -

THE SPEAKER: No, just report on what we have decided.

6.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.3 for the financial year 2020/2021 with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the schedule passed is contained in Annex No.1 from Code 003 to Code 796 - that is for the recurrent expenditure and for development expenditure it is from Votes 014, vote vote 126, vote 307, vote 757. This is for clarification and for record purposes.

Honourable members, thank you very much for the day’s work; we have been here since morning. We invited you for the special sitting to pay tribute and then this work. I am going to adjourn the House sine die. 

Members, I know that you are busy but I do hope that you have taken the opportunity to take the test before you go back to your constituencies because the facilities are here in the House. I encourage you to check as often as possible because we are constantly moving and working. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

