Thursday, 21 November 2013 

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I want to alter the Order Paper slightly to permit the Leader of the Opposition to make a small statement for five minutes and then just to inform the Members that the Government Chief Whip has allocated hon. Katwesigye, our new member from Buhweju, the following committees: She will serve on the sectoral Committee on Health and for the standing committee, she will serve on the Committee on Human Rights. So, I invite members to cooperate with her and give her the necessary support.

I also want to inform Members that the gym is available. We have acquired quite a bit of equipment and we want to encourage members to be fit. There are a number of treadmills; there are bicycles and quite a number of facilities. I want to encourage Members to do exercise constantly for your health. Thank you. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.07
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for secondary schools for the year ended 31 December 2011 together with the report and opinion thereof by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit on the implementation of the express penalty scheme by the Uganda Police Force.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on value-for-money audit report on the capacity building support to SACCOS by the Rural Financial Services Programme. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the implementation of the National Budget by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit on the management of the land tenure reforms project by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on Governments’ efforts to achieve gender equality. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on value-for-money audit on management of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit on the performance of the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP-1) and 2. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit on the management of the Lake Victoria Environmental Project Phase 2. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit on the environmental management activities of the National Environment Management Authority – NEMA. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chairperson. All those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts to be perused expeditiously within the constitutional guidelines and report back to this House. 

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

3.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Since Tuesday of this week, the Lord Mayor, Erias Lukwago and Dr Kiiza Besigye and many activists have been in illegal detention by the Uganda Government authorities. The circumstances that led to their detention are purely political. 

Madam Speaker, the mess in Kampala is strictly a war for control of the city and now President Museveni is bent on harassing his political opponents by using and abusing institutions such as the Police and the Directorate of Public Prosecution to hold down the Lord Mayor and his supporters. 

Regrettably, the Police have continued to willfully abide by the illegal wishes of the commanders and President Museveni in particular. 

The institutional abuse and misuse of power by President Museveni has found most fertile ground in the Police Force. The Police are now deeply drawn in squabbles and they are making mistakes. They move somebody supposedly a suspect from one detention facility to another in the middle of the night simply because they fear the reaction from the public. 

While the Police on one hand are trying to purport that they are protecting the public and their business from the actions of the Lord Mayor Lukwago and Dr Kiiza Besigye, the Police will not wish the same public to know where these gentlemen and activists are being held and why they are being moved around. 

Madam Speaker, this they do because they fear the public will rise to the rescue of these people known to them as their leaders. Our Inspector-General of Police, Kayihura and President Museveni and other decision implementers know that it is illegal to move people who are being held as suspects at night. 

We are aware that the President has already ordered the DPP to charge Dr Kiiza Besigye and the Lord Mayor with treason but the DPP has refused. However, in spite of the fact that the President in the past used the DPP to execute his political wars, we are informed that the current DPP is trying to resist that and is also trying to resist the President’s illegal orders. What is treason and what law are we then protecting?

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate to the President that the problems of KCCA will not be solved by teargas, bullets, arrests, threats, illegal detentions or intimidations. While we remain peaceful in our actions, the President should be reminded that he is the not the only one who can monopolise violence, brutal force and fire power. All this can be just a matter of decision and before Ugandans know it, we shall all be blown up in oblivion. This is not something we want to do. But it is something that President Museveni is increasingly pushing Ugandans towards. 

It is at this point that I call on everybody that we should resist illegal actions, and I tell all those who are carrying them out to stand warned. Today it could be me; tomorrow it could be somebody else. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition has made a statement and the allegations are many. I would suggest that you give him time to substantiate some of them. We do not have copies but at least I can remember a bit of what he has said where he is alleging that the President has put a lot of pressure on the DPP to go and make illegal sanctions against some of the members of the Opposition. I would request that he substantiates so that as Government and individuals who are implicated in that can also come up and explain; because it is not a simple matter that he is talking about. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on Tuesday we were in this House. We left slightly after 8.00 p.m. I was in my office when I was told that Dr Kiiza Besigye and the Lord Mayor Lukwago had been arrested; and that Dr Kiiza Besigye was at CPS with some activists. I went to CPS. Initially, I could not be allowed to see Dr Kiiza Besigye but after some intervention, of about one-and-half hours, I was able to see him. 

While I was there I was told that the Lord Mayor was in Mukono, Naggalama. I was also told that there were some youths who were at Kira Road Police Station. I left. I told Dr Besigye, “Let me go and look for the youths and see the Lord Mayor before I come back.” When I got to Kira Road Police Station, I did not get the activists - that they had been taken to Kira Divisional Police in Kira, Wakiso. Madam Speaker, I went there and met the youths and some activists - five of them. This was after midnight. 

I went to Naggalama but I could not see the Mayor. I came back and I went to CPS at 2.00 O’clock in the morning. As soon as I left CPS, I was told when I came back in the morning to check, Dr Kiiza Besigye had been moved immediately after 2.00 a.m. to Jinja Road Police Station. I learnt that later. 

So, what I am telling you is that Dr Kiiza Besigye was moved from CPS at night and that can be confirmed because he was there at CPS Kampala and in the morning he was at Jinja Road. You can confirm that. Likewise, the Lord Mayor was moved from Naggalama to a place I do not know. 

Now, by then on that day, they had not made a statement yet they had been arrested in the morning. By yesterday morning none of them had made a statement. It is illegal to put somebody in prison without making a statement. It was over 24 hours and nobody had made a statement. As we speak, if they were arrested at 9.00 a.m. on Tuesday, today by 9.00a.m. they would be making 48 hours. The law says nobody should stay in prison for more than 48 hours - 

Now, to show you that they must have been looking for a charge to fabricate - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are really speculating. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you wanted substantiation. So I can speak and you will confirm by induction or by osmosis and you would know what is taking place in your Government. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I request that you accord the Leader of Government Business time on the Order Paper on Tuesday to come and make a response.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister should come here and report to the country about the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition, yes, some, can be dealt with as you have wisely ruled but there is the question of liberty - people’s freedoms - people who are being held illegally over and above 48 hours that are required. 

I am only seeking your guidance whether it would not be proper that the Minister for Internal Affairs would be ordered as you – since under our Rules Of Procedure he is supposed to attend Parliament and respond to the issues raised; that at least would secure the freedom of these people as we wait to deal with circumstances under which they were held over and above the 48 hours. But if we do not take any action in that regard as Parliament, it will become very easy for anybody to conduct himself in that manner. I am seeking your guidance on that, Madam Speaker. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Things are not okay. Even our own hon. Nsereko is under house arrest. Yesterday I went to his home and I asked the policemen, “Why are you detaining this man at his home?” They said that they had it in their mind and in their bodies that Nsereko would move in Kampala and cause problems. His own constituency! Then I told them, “You people lead hon. Nsereko to Parliament, wait for him as he does business at Parliament then lead him back to his home because you do not want him to cause problems.” They refused. 

And this is another problem. That is already forced imprisonment and, Madam Speaker, it is still unfair; we also do not know where we are supposed to move or where we are supposed to stop. Because hon. Nsereko’s constituency is Kampala Central and Police are detaining him at his home. Where they are staying, there are no toilets. They are outside his home and we do not know what they are using in that area but they are there and they are still detaining other people at their homes. 

So, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance otherwise Government should tell us: if you want to give me security, tell me. If you want me to walk from Kalungu to here, provide that security other than locking me up at my home when I have no problems with you. What is happening in your Government? Tell us what is happening.   

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, we are aware that under the Constitution a person arrested should be produced before a court of law within 24 hours. We now require the Minister for Internal Affairs to cause the appearance of those who have been detained in the courts as per the constitutional requirement.  

3.22
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that I am also not a free person. Police came and surrounded my home since Sunday night; and these days there is the Police patrol van which follows me wherever I go. 
Madam Speaker, it is so painful that I have to stay with Police permanently - with teargas- my innocent children who have not committed any offence. I have tried to talk to the DPC Mukono. I have tried to talk to the OC Operations, a one Kansiime, about why Police have taken over my home and why they are following me but they have not made any response.

Madam Speaker, it is so painful when you are put in a prison and you become a prisoner. Wherever you go, Police are following you. The other time, they only left me to get out of my home after the Chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus pleaded with the IGP to leave me to welcome the Katikkiro of Buganda. But even then that day, I came to Kampala with a Police van following me. 

Today, they are outside there waiting for me. As soon as I get out of here, they will start following me. Life is so painful; it is so bad. Through you, Madam Speaker, I want to request - honourable colleagues, this is not a laughing matter. Today it is me and tomorrow it might be someone else. 

Madam Speaker, we seek for your intervention and what is happening to me is the same thing that is happening to hon. Moses Kasibante of Rubaga South. Equally his home has been taken over by Police. He is also not a free man.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Government Chief Whip, if it is true that Members are being prevented from carrying out their work as Members of Parliament, we need an explanation from the Minister for Internal Affairs today. Today, because they are supposed to be here legislating for the country, representing their constituents and helping the House to do business. We want the minister here this afternoon.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

3.25
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The motion reads: 

“Whereas Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and subclause 4 (b) of Article 94 and Rule 110, empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Members’ Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective XI (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, sets out the state duties to stimulate agricultural, industrial, technological and scientific development by adopting appropriate policies and the enactment of enabling legislation;

FURTHER AWARE that various laws and regulations allow Bank of Uganda to supervise and regulate financial institutions and introduction of the financial products in Uganda;

CONSIDERING THAT various financial institutions have set up shops in Uganda’s banking sector such as commercial banks, credit institutions, microfinance deposit taking institutions and forex bureaus;

CONSIDERING FURTHER THAT the financial product provided by the various financial institutions in Uganda’s banking sector are similar and there is need to diversify the financial products offered by Uganda’s banking sector;

NOTING THAT the introduction of Land and Agricultural Development Bank and the financial products offered there under will fulfil the need to diversify the banking sector by offering financial products that are tailored to land and agricultural development in Uganda;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the financial products offered by the Land and Agricultural Development Bank will be premised on the provision of a reliable source of credit to fund seasonal production and long term investment in land, buildings, equipment and breeding stocks, the repayment of which will depend primarily on the successful production and marketing of the item invested in or produced and only secondary on collateral taken;

TAKING COGNIZANCE of the fact that the financial products that will be offered by the Land and Agricultural Development Bank will be different from those offered by the conventional banking system, currently provided in Uganda;

COGNISANT THAT the financial product that will be offered by the Land and Agricultural Development Bank can be applied and adopted in Uganda’s banking sector alongside the conventional banking system already in existence without adversely affecting the Uganda’s banking sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled: “The Land and Agricultural Development Bank Act” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading. I beg to move.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR EKANYA: At the back of the list, Madam Speaker, we have several Members who have seconded but in principle, hon. Vincent Ssempijja, hon. Dr Eriaku Peter Emmanuel, hon. Makhoha Margaret, hon. Sarah Nakawunde, hon. Iddi Isabirye, hon. Sofia Jjuuko, hon. Henry Musasizi. Some other Members have gone for other assignments. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is just asking for leave to produce a Bill. The substantive debate will follow when the Bill comes for the first reading.  We have no objection to giving him permission. Okay, I now put the question that this House do approve the request by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Good Samaritan Primary School, represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Mukasa Bakaluba. There are also pupils and teachers of Light College Secondary School, also from Mukono, represented by hon. Betty Nambooze, hon. Bakaluba Mukasa and hon. Peace Kanyesigye all of Mukono. Please stand up. (Applause) You are welcome.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, maybe with your permission, for the record, there is no constituency that is represented by I and hon. Bakaluba Mukasa. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa is MP for Mukono South. I am the MP for Mukono Municipality and I represent that constituency together with hon. Peace Kanyesigye. Madam Speaker, that is for the record.

THE SPEAKER: Would you want to be associated with the children of Mukono? (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the pupils come from my constituency and that is why I want to own them as their MP. They don’t come from hon. Bakaluba Mukasa’s constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Then you should have provided the right information because I am using what I have. But also I wanted to be all inclusive so that all of you own them. Okay, next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION ON THE INCREASING CASES OF HEPATITIS B VIRUS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Timbigamba.

3.30
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a motion for a Resolution of Parliament on the increased cases of Hepatitis B in Uganda. I move under rules 47, 48, 50 and 51 of the Rules of Procedure. The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Hepatitis B is caused by Hepatitis B Virus; the virus affects the immune system and usually leads to the inflation and damage to the liver. Hepatitis B Virus also causes damage to the materials inside the liver cells and also causes liver cancer;

WHEREAS the Hepatitis B Virus is much similar to HIV/AIDS Virus and is now doubled as the HIV/AIDS Virus in its transmission. For example,  Hepatitis B is also transmitted through direct blood contact, sexual activities, sharing injections, drug equipment, to mention but a few. As compared to HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B is also transmitted by pregnant mothers who have the virus to their unborn babies during the pregnancy and at birth;

AND WHEREAS not every infected person with Hepatitis B Virus experiences of acute Hepatitis, between 30 and 40 percent of the people infected with the virus do not experience any noticeable symptoms and when they occur, they usually do so within four to six weeks after being infected but can last for several months before the patient finally succumbs to death;

AWARE THAT the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy have obliged the Government of Uganda to, among others, take cognisant of the significant role that a health society plays, take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the populace;

COGNISANT of the fact that since the early 1980s, there has been a mutation of different viruses dangerous to human life internationally and Government has recognized the importance of the health  sector in the prevention of transmission and delivery of health services to ordinary Ugandans;

FURTHER COGNIZANT of the fact that as a peoples representative, the Parliament of Uganda is obliged to assure its constituents of among others: a) the standards of health services accessible to the majority of the population; b) the required level of professionalism in matters of life and health and the accessibility and adequacy of health facilities in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that Government develops a comprehensive Hepatitis B policy and ensure its implementation; Government carries out a massive sensitization and vaccination drive for Hepatitis B Virus.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just second and she justifies. It has also been seconded by several Members from Mbarara, Arua, Moyo, Ndorwa, Buliisa, Nebbi, hon. Prof. Gilbert Bukenya and all the others.

MS TIMBIGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The justification for this motion is that Hepatitis B Virus is a very serious infection. Also we need to take cognisant of the fact that its infection rate is at 10 percent while the one for HIV/AIDS is only at seven percent.

Madam Speaker, the good thing about Hepatitis B Virus is that it can be guarded against through vaccination. The Government of Uganda can pass a resolution, as it has been prayed in this motion, to immunize or vaccinate all people in Uganda against this virus.

Countries like the USA have already done this with the whole population there being vaccinated against this Hepatitis B Virus. The number of lives lost to Hepatitis B is much higher than the number of people who have HIV/AIDS. 

The vaccine for people already positive with Hepatitis B cannot help them to cure. They only live for some time but eventually end up dying. Hepatitis B Virus - and this is important to note - does not spread through hugging and kissing unless there is blood contact in the mouth; or may be through viewing the body of a person who has died of Hepatitis B. When we see these bodies being covered like those for people who have died of Ebola, that is just discrimination.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, it is very serious that we give Hepatitis B attention. I beg to move.

3.38
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to further second this motion, moved ably and at the right time. In the district that I come from, in the great sub region of Bukedi, in the District of Tororo, it has been established that Hepatitis B falls under one of those Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) – sorry I had been carried away by paramedical who were misinforming me –(Interruption)

MS LEMATIA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me permission. I just want to say that it may be very confusing to the community to say that Hepatitis B is part of the non-communicable diseases while the presentation was very clear that it is highly infectious. Non-communicable means that if, for example, I sleep with this person, I cannot transmit this disease to him. So, these two don’t move together. I also suffice to correct the fact that Hepatitis causes cancer; it doesn’t itself cause cancer; it only predisposes it. Thank you very much.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much for that very useful information that dispelled those who were trying to misinform me and the House. Actually, the NTD I was talking about stands for Neglected Tropical Diseases. And as I was saying in Tororo, research has revealed that probably about 30 percent of the residents of Tororo are suffering from most of these diseases including Hepatitis B.

But I also have been informed that it is not only about B. We should be talking about a comprehensive policy to cover all Hepatitis diseases from A to E. In Uganda, we mostly have A, B and C. So, we should be able to get support from Government. In most of the areas this is the disease that is referred to as Kidada, for example, in the Adhola land. Kidada means the swelling of the stomach of a patient. The patients get very little help and end up dying but with very little medical attention. Usually they are either withdrawn – you find some medical practitioners saying, “take this patient away it seems was bewitched.” The patients end up dying with swollen stomachs. I have seen relatives and friends who have died this way.

We would love to get the commitment of Government in this regard. I beg to support this motion. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now honourable members, we have had the occasion to discuss Hepatitis B on at least three occasions. One was brought up by hon. Epetait and hon. Jacqueline Amongin. The second time it was brought up hon. Hamson Obua in relation to the recruitment of soldiers when you said 50 percent had Hepatitis B, and there was also another occasion.

So, the case for it has been made in this House. Let us concentrate on the prayers. The prayers are that Government develops a comprehensive Hepatitis B virus policy and ensures its implementation. The second one, Government carries out a massive sensitisation and vaccination drive campaign. Those are the two simple prayers.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I have very urgent information that I would want to give this House about the lab tests that are available for it.

I know about instances of five girls who had gone for employment abroad and you know some of these homesteads check them thoroughly. Five of them came back when they had Hepatitis B, but when they came back, they had given them a clean bill before they went. So, two of them have been back, they have gone to SAS Clinic; they have gone to Ebenezer because they are desperate but their results are negative here. So, what is the issue? Don’t we have enough facilities?

So, those are some of the challenges that our people are grappling with right now because abroad, they found them positive yet here in Uganda, the best of our labs are saying they are negative -

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, what has that got to do with the prayers? Why don’t we agree with the prayers, accept them and ask Government to take into account all that they are saying? 

Honourable members, I put the question – (Mr Otada rose_) Yes, amendment hon. Otada -

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you for reminding us that a case for this has been made. I seek the indulgence of colleagues to accept an amendment that Government should present to this Parliament a comprehensive budgetary proposal for parliamentary approval to tackle the Hepatitis syndrome in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Something like a supplementary?

MR OTADA: Yes. You know, the policy and the sensitisation drive is welcome but within that, there should be a clear proposal for funding this drive because these two will just  be hanging without a budgetary proposal. That is the amendment I seek to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bayigga, you are very angry today.

DR BAYIGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As part of the prayers, I want to, first of all, support the motion. But the most important thing now is for Government to make another status report. Before you go into budget, you must give another status report. 

Madam Speaker, you remember very well that whenever we discussed Hepatitis B virus infection, especially in Eastern Uganda, Government was coming up with certain work plans that have been developed and budget input. Now, we would like to know the new status out of that surveillance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House - 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two prayers but one talks about massive sensitisation and vaccination drive campaign for Hepatitis B. Right now, the vaccines we are giving to children have got Hepatitis B.

THE SPEAKER: Say that again –

DR BITEKYEREZO: The vaccines we are giving to children have an anti-Hepatitis B vaccine, but what is remaining is the people who are adults and they are negative – think about the nurses, think about the doctors, think about lab assistants and anybody who can easily get into contact with somebody who has Hepatitis B.

So, what I was suggesting is that let government secure Hepatitis B vaccine for people who are working in risky areas mainly health workers and lab technicians.  For the children right now, as we talk, the vaccines we are giving - you know it because the drugs are very expensive, Madam Speaker, and you must give them three doses, even in Arua, they gave only 200 but they were giving only one dose.

MS OLERU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that the vaccines should not be limited to health workers only, because right now, like in Moyo District, in every ten people screened, you find two have got Hepatitis B.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think he wanted to limit it. He wanted a special provision for the health workers because there are the ones who will administer – 

MS OLERU: Madam Speaker, that provision is already there. I was in West Nile with the Commissioner Clinical Services, Mr Amandua; he is very clear with that. Health workers are already covered. (Interjections) Yes, they are covered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is already there, we restate it. If it is not there, we put it. So, I want to put the question that this House do approve the motion and the prayers as amended, first by hon. Otada and then by hon. Bitekyerezo.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can we also amend the prayers to include the time frame that Government reports back to this House within three months?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we shall be going on recess. So, we should ask them to report when we resume in February. Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that the motion be approved as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE PROBING THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR, MAYORS OF THE DIVISION URBAN COUNCIL AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE (Mr Stephen Baka Mugabi): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the select committee. Before I proceed, allow me to lay on Table important documents that I have here. The first one is minutes of the select committee on KCCA petition. The second one is minutes of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government during the consideration of the KCCA petition.

Also contained here is the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on KCCA petition, and then submissions from witnesses and memoranda from all those people who appeared in the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. I beg to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, following presentation of the report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the Lord Mayor, Mayors of Division Urban Councils and Authority Councillors seeking the intervention of Parliament to probe into matters pertaining to the mismanagement of KCCA Members raised concerns about the authenticity of the same report.

The House resolved on 23 May 2013 to establish a select committee of the House to review the report. In accordance with Rule 179 of the Rules of Procedure, a seven-member select committee of the House was appointed and the instrument of appointment is attached as Annex 1 to review the report of the select Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the Lord Mayor, mayors of division urban councils and authority councillors on the mismanagement of KCCA.

The composition of the committee was as follows:
Hon. Grace Isingoma Byarugaba – chairperson.

THE SPEAKER: Those they can read.

MR BAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The next one is terms of reference. In her letter dated, 17 August 2013, reference AB199/199/01 (also annexed as Annex 2), the Rt. Hon. Speaker issued terms of reference to the select committee. Specifically, the select committee was tasked to:
    (i) Review the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the Lord Mayor, mayors of division urban councils and authority councillors seeking the intervention of Parliament to probe into matters pertaining to the mismanagement of KCCA.

    (ii) Examine the authenticity of the minutes of the meeting held on 15 May 2013 by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

    (iii) Draw conclusions and make recommendations on what the House should do. In so doing, the committee  is to examine the way the meeting was conducted, its venue, why the clerk was not allowed to attend, the effect of the clerk not attending, the framing of the report and make a report to the House.

Mandate of the Committee

In view of the above terms of reference, the committee sought the advice of the Legal Department of Parliament as to what constituted its mandate. (And that letter is attached as Annex 3.) Accordingly, the select committee was mandated to proceed as follows:

    1. Obtain all the necessary facts and evidence surrounding the production of the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government particularly with the view to ascertain its authenticity.

    2. Make clear recommendations to the House on how to proceed with the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the KCCA petition.

    3. If the select committee satisfied itself that the procedure followed by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government was correct, and in accordance with the rules of natural justice and that its recommendations are legally tenable it might uphold the report and recommend the House to go ahead and debate it.

    4. If on the other hand the select committee identified fundamental irregularities that affected the validity and authenticity of that report, it could recommend that the report be rejected on the given grounds and that the report-making be done de novo – afresh.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the following:
    (a) Hon. Raphael Magyezi – former deputy chairperson and also current member of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government.
    (b) Hon. Betty Nambooze – sponsor of the petition.
    (c) Some of the former members who are also current members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.
    (d) The Clerk to Parliament and Mr Paul Ouma, the committee clerk, who facilitated the Committee on Public Service and Local Government during consideration of the report.

The committee made several efforts, including written submissions, phone calls and text messages to hon. Florence Kintu to appear before it to no avail. 

The committee also analysed, among others, the following documents:
    (i) The report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the Lord Mayor, mayors of division urban councils and authority councillors on the mismanagement of KCCA that was presented in the House in May 2013.

    (ii) The draft report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government written by the committee clerk on the petition by the Lord Mayor.

    (iii) The minutes of the proceedings of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government during the consideration of the petition.

The other documents were minutes of the meeting held on 15th May by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government; the attendance register of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

Issues

While considering the terms of reference, the committee endeavoured to determine the authenticity of the report by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the KCCA petition. Thus, the committee addressed itself to the issues below:
    1. Whether the Rules of Procedure were adhered to during the consideration of the petition and writing of the report.
    2. Whether the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the KCCA was regular and could therefore be debated and adopted by the House.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

(i) Mode of proceedings during the consideration of the petition

Our findings were as follows:

When the KCCA petition was presented by hon. Betty Nambooze on 11 December 2012, the Rt. Hon. Speaker referred it to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for consideration. The committee received the petition and commenced consideration of the same during the month of January 2013. From the committee register and minutes availed to the select committee, it was established that during the consideration of the petition, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government held duly constituted meetings and at every meeting, quorum was realised. 

During the consideration of the petition, a number of witnesses were summoned, attended meetings with the committee and submitted memoranda. They included, among others, the Lord Mayor, division mayors, KCCA councillors, the Minister for Presidency who is also in charge of KCCA, the Executive Director and senior management of KCCA. 

All Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government who appeared before the select committee attested to the fact that the committee had proceeded well in its investigations until the meeting of 15 May 2013.

(ii) Records/Minutes of proceedings

Our findings were as follows:

During the consideration of the KCCA petition, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government did not make effort to have an audio recording of its proceeding; there was no transcription of the proceedings. During his appearance before the select committee, hon. Raphael Magyezi, former Deputy Chairperson of the committee disowned the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, saying the minutes had fundamental gaps and therefore could not be relied on as a true record of what transpired during the committee meetings.

Other Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government who appeared before the select committee neither confirmed nor disowned the minutes, when asked about the authenticity of the minutes save for the minutes of the meeting held on 15 May 2013.

The Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government did not meet to review precious minutes of their proceedings during the consideration of the petition.

On 16 May, 2013 when the committee chairperson presented the report in the House, she laid on Table three sets of minutes, including those for the meeting held on 15 May 2013, during which the committee sat to consider the draft report. 

A review of the committee minutes that the select committee retrieved from the library revealed that they were fundamentally lacking in content; save for the submissions of witnesses, the minutes did not capture committee findings.

Observations and key decisions made by Members in the course of these meetings

(a) Observations

The failure by the committee to review the committee minutes and harmonise positions on a number of positions on a number of issues during the consideration of the KCCA petition could have contributed to the questionable authenticity of the final report. 

With the former Deputy Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government disowning committee minutes, and Members of the same committee denying ever discussing some of the recommendations contained in the report in any of their previous meetings, it would be extremely difficult to rely on these committee minutes.

In the absence of a credible record of the proceedings of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the select committee was unable to ascertain what the actual findings and observations of the committee were in respect of each of the allegations contained in the KCCA petition.

To that end, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the parliamentary committee should always review minutes of committee meetings as one way of generating consensus on key issues and minimising cases of Members disowning certain committee actions and decisions. Audio recordings and subsequent transcription of committee proceedings should be done whenever parliamentary committees are carrying out assignments of investigative nature.

(b) The 15 May 2013 Meeting

Findings

Prior to this meeting, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government had hoped to consider the draft report on the petition during a retreat held in Jinja during the month of April 2013. 

However, this matter was not considered during the retreat. On instruction from the chairperson, the committee clerk called for a meeting to consider the draft report on 15 May 2013. According to the committee clerk, on 15 May 2013, some committee Members convened in Room 013, Ground Floor, North Wing Parliamentary Building to consider the draft report.

According to the committee clerk and committee Members who appeared before the select committee, on 15 May 2013, by 12.00 noon or thereabout, both the former chairperson and deputy had not showed up for the meeting in Room 013; as a result, the meeting was called off.

An inspection of the committee register showed that on 15 May 2013, hon. Florence Kintu and hon. Raphael Magyezi recorded their presence yet the committee clerk and Members informed the select committee that the duo never showed up for the meeting in Room 013. 

According to the committee clerk, he learnt of the meeting that was reportedly held in the chairperson’s office on 15th May after the committee meeting in Room 013 had been called off.

The reported meeting of 15 May 2013 during which the Committee on Public Service and Local Government endorsed the report on the KCCA petition was held in the office of the former chairperson of the committee in Room E405, Fourth Floor, East Wing Parliamentary Buildings. The clerk to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government did not attend the meeting. During the meeting, hon. Magyezi Raphael, the Deputy Chairperson of the Committee was nominated as the minute secretary. 

According to the minutes of this meeting, 10 out of the 17 Members of the committee attended. The committee leadership excluded the clerk from this meeting on the allegation that he had previously demonstrated technical and professional ineptitude while discharging his duties as evidenced by his failure to write a report on a petition from Kira Town Council; a petition by former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation; a motion for the creation of new districts; oversight visits, among others. Besides that he had exhibited unethical conduct by leaking confidential information to the public, despite being cautioned. 

During the meeting, Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, among others, considered and approved the report on the KCCA petition. However, in the same meeting when some Members challenged the inclusion, in the report, of the recommendation that His Excellency the President takes over the management of KCCA, the committee leadership told them that the onus would be on the House to either adopt or reject that recommendation. According to the minutes of this meeting, it was hon. Besisira Ignatius who moved the motion that the report on the KCCA petition be adopted. However, he denied this when testifying on oath while appearing before the select committee. (Laughter)

The minute secretary of the meeting of 15 May 2013, hon. Magyezi Raphael, could not avail proof of Members’ attendance of this meeting. 

Observations

Ordinarily, committee meetings are supposed to be held in committee rooms or any other designated meeting venues. Out of the ordinary, the reported meeting of 15 May 2013 was held in the chairperson’s office situated on Fourth Floor, East Wing Parliamentary Buildings.

It is the select committee’s considered opinion that it was not appropriate for the leadership of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to convene a meeting for the consideration of a committee report in such a venue - the chairperson’s office - since other non-members who share the same office with the chair were also in attendance. Besides, the size of that office could not have accommodated all Members of the committee. 

Despite the reservations that Members had about the technical and professional competence of the committee clerk, this matter was never reported to his supervisor; neither did they inform the Clerk to Parliament to designate an alternative clerk to facilitate the committee. 

It was irregular for the committee and its leadership to hold a meeting for the consideration of committee business without a clerk. By appointing hon. Magyezi as minute secretary for the meeting of 15 May 2013, and excluding the committee clerk from the same meeting, the committee usurped the functions and duties of the clerk contrary to Rule 196(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The exclusion of the committee clerk from the meeting on the grounds that the matters to be discussed were sensitive and, therefore, confidential was found untenable since clerks and other technical officers of Parliament are professionally bound by the rules of secrecy and have on many occasions handled equally confidential information.

Whereas the committee leadership claimed to have sought legal advice, which advice informed their decision to recommend the takeover of KCCA by His Excellency the President, there was no proof that the Legal Department of Parliament or the Attorney-General were consulted on the matter; neither was this matter ever discussed in any of the committee meetings.

The authenticity of the minutes of the reported meeting of 15 May 2013 is highly questionable since the Member who reportedly moved the motion to adopt the report denied ever doing so. Besides, the select committee could not obtain proof of attendance of that meeting.

The committee to that end recommends that the minutes of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the meeting that was reportedly held on 15 May 2013 be expunged from the records of Parliament. 

The House further interests itself in the motives and actions of hon. Kintu Florence and hon. Raphael Magyezi, former Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson, Committee on Public Service and Local Government respectively, in respect of the exclusion of the committee clerk from the committee meeting of 15 May 2013; and importation of issues that were never discussed into the committee report. 

The framing and writing of the committee report 

Our findings were as follows: 

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government had concluded its investigations by 24 April 2013 and the committee clerk was expected to produce a report within two weeks after closure of investigations. By 13 May 2013, the committee clerk had not written a draft report. 

During his appearance before the select committee, hon. Magyezi Raphael informed the committee that he and the chairperson took the responsibility of writing the report after the clerk had failed to produce a draft report despite several reminders. 

Hon. Raphael Magyezi informed the committee that in the course of writing the report, he did not use minutes of the committee because they were not there. The draft report which the committee clerk had written, a copy of which he availed to the select committee, was fundamentally lacking in content as it did not contain the findings of the committee and lacked observations as well. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay that draft report which the clerk had prepared on Table. 

Despite the fact that the committee clerk had failed to write the report, the committee leadership never brought the matter to the attention of the Clerk to Parliament for action. Out of the ordinary the committee leadership took up the responsibility of writing the report themselves.

Observations 
Whereas the clerk to the committee is duty-bound to write a committee report, there is no provision in the Rules of Procedure that renders a committee report a nullity if it is written by committee Members.

The exclusion of the clerk from the committee proceedings, particularly during the consideration of the draft report, was a procedural mistake which raises concerns over the intent of the committee leadership at the time. Whereas the Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government could have had reservations about the competency of the committee clerk, the matter was not brought to the attention of the Clerk to Parliament. It was not appropriate for hon. Raphael Magyezi to take over the responsibility of writing the report. 

The committee leadership should have asked the Clerk to Parliament to designate another clerk assistant to handle the assignment.

A committee report that is not anchored on the minutes or the Hansard which is a record of the proceedings highlighting the findings, observations and decisions made during an investigation, cannot pass the credibility test. Therefore, the testimony by hon. Raphael Magyezi during his appearance before the select committee that he wrote the report in issue without referring to committee minutes leaves the authenticity of the report in balance.

The committee recommends that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be rejected and Parliament considers the petition afresh. 

The committee contends that in the absence of a credible record of proceedings, coupled with fundamental irregularities surrounding the process of writing the report, ultimately affected the validity and authenticity of that report. 

The leadership of parliamentary committees should desist from writing committee reports. Where the competence of the clerk is questionable, the relevant authorities of the Parliamentary Service should be informed. 

Competence of the committee clerk

Findings

While meeting the Clerk to Parliament it was established that among the cardinal duties of a clerk is to provide procedural and legislative advice to the committee, write committee minutes and reports and keep custody of documents and records of the committee, among others. 

It was established that Mr Ouma Paul, the Clerk to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government during the consideration of the KCCA report, did not write the committee report on the KCCA petition. The draft report that Mr Ouma wrote was fundamentally lacking which made it inadequate for draft report consideration. The report did not capture the findings of the committee during the investigation; neither did it contain the observations and recommendations of the committee.

The committee clerk, Mr Ouma Paul, informed the select committee that he did not capture the findings, observations and recommendations in the draft report because Members had not made any throughout the consideration of the petition.

The committee minutes written by the same officer did not capture the critical issues raised or noted by Members during their meetings with witnesses; no findings, observations, reaction or key decisions reached. 

The committee clerk did not progressively write minutes of the committee findings, neither did he impress it upon the committee to review and confirm the minutes. 

The committee clerk did not secure an audio recording of the committee proceedings and the subsequent production of the transcripts of the proceedings, yet the matter under investigation was very sensitive. 

The committee clerk did not keep custody of key documents, memoranda, submissions of witnesses received by the committee during consideration of the petition. Even when the select committee requested him to avail the documents, he could not avail them. The committee clerk exhibited wanting conceptual, analytical and evaluative skills yet these are fundamentals in minute and report writing.

The committee clerk did not bring to the attention of the Clerk to Parliament the irregularities surrounding the irregular manner in which the committee wrote and endorsed the final report.

When the chair and deputy chair of the committee allegedly failed to show up in the meeting of 15 May 2013, the meeting he had purportedly called on 15 May 2013 to consider the draft report, the committee clerk did not advise the Members present to choose from among themselves a Member to chair the day’s meeting as provided in the Rules of Procedure.

It was found that the Clerk to Parliament got to know of the circumstance surrounding the writing of the report when the matter was raised on the Floor of Parliament, and she was tasked to investigate the authenticity of the committee report.

Observations

The select committee faulted Mr Paul Ouma for the act of dishonesty by concealing from the Clerk to Parliament the circumstances surrounding the irregular manner in which the committee wrote the report. Had he informed the Clerk to Parliament, she would have intervened in time.

Mr Paul Ouma failed to act professionally well knowing the irregular manner in which the committee report was written and endorsed, went ahead to take the responsibility of ensuring the production of copies of the final report for consideration for the House. Without reasonable cause, Mr Ouma, as a clerk to the committee failed to perform one of his cardinal duties of writing the committee report within the expected time.

A period of five months, January to May 2013, within which the committee considered the petition was sufficient for him to draft a report. The purported draft report, which we had called Members to consider on 15th May could not pass for a draft report because of the fundamental flaws in the document. 

He did not capture the findings, observations and recommendations. For the committee clerk to say that he did not capture the findings, observations and recommendations in the draft report because Members had not made any during the consideration of the petition was an acknowledgement of his failure to execute his duties as a committee clerk.

Mr Paul Ouma, Senior Clerk Assistant, failed to keep custody of documents and other critical information submissions and memoranda by witnesses and made no effort to have an audio recording of the committee proceedings, yet this was a very sensitive probe. By doing so, he failed to execute his core duties as a custodian of all committee information. This was contrary to Rule 214 and 218 of the Rules of Procedure.

Given the reported failure by the committee clerk to write committee reports, the chairperson and her deputy should have formally brought the matter to the attention of the Clerk to Parliament. Even when the committee clerk, Mr Ouma, allegedly continued to dismally perform his duties as committee clerk, there was no evidence that his supervisors had ever made any effort to provide necessary technical and professional guidance. Minimal or lack of supervision translated into poor output or no output at all by the officer.

The fundamentally-lacking report that was written by the clerk to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government could be a signal that the quality of some committee reports is deteriorating, which calls for corrective action by the Parliamentary Commission.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Parliamentary Commission designs and ensures the implementation of the capacity building and skills development programme for staff, especially in the area of report writing, capacity building and skills enhancement, which is an integral part of organisational growth and development. Successful organisations have done it and continue to do it for sustainable development.

Conclusion
The findings of the select committee leave no doubt that the process of considering the KCCA petition and the writing of the report by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government was marred by fundamental irregularities, which ultimately affected the validity and authenticity of that report.

The committee is, therefore, constrained that the report be rejected on such grounds and House considers the petition afresh. 

The report is duly signed by five out of seven Members and it passes the test. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair and the committee, I would like to thank you very much for the work done. I am flabbergasted that the work of this House can be conducted as if it is a rumour mill, casually - maybe I should not say anything more. 

The clerk is a custodian of documents. Parliament is a place of record. How can we hear that there were no minutes of meetings, no recommendations! How casual can we be -

THE SPEAKER: Two minutes, please.

4.18
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We are all in shock that something like this is happening in our committees, where exhaustive research work records are supposed to inform plenary so that we all contribute to the findings and reports of our committees.

This is just a tip of the iceberg. Time and time again, some of our committee clerks are rejected by chairpersons and Members and they are shifted around so that the work or non-work they do in a particular committee is exported to the next committee. This calls for a structure review of the capability and capacity of our clerks –(Interjections)– yes, it is important that we should not isolate this case to just this probe.

I did not see the recommendation the committee put on Mr Ouma. He undermined the relevance of the committee. As Members of Parliament, we appeared before the committee, before the final report and yet I do not see that captured anywhere. We made recommendations and we gave advice. So, for him to purport that we just went and there were no recommendations, he undermined his status and his presence during the proceedings.

So, he needs to be investigated too –(Interjections)– why? I should be protected, I do not know why hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi thinks that the clerk did all this and it is okay for him to say he did not keep records –(Member timed out­_)
       
4.20
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see the whole House in a state of shock but for me, as a shadow minister for special regions where Kampala falls, I am not shocked.

I saw this long time, right from the Committee on Presidential Affairs when the issues of Kampala Capital City Authority came; you really find that there is a lot of politics in it. And I want to put it correct that we should not victimise the clerk assistant, the powers are coming from somewhere; we are just trying to hide –(Interjections)– today, my colleagues from the other side are saying “no way”, but that time, the same colleagues from the other side were all up in arms against hon. Nambooze.

I interested myself in the meeting, which took place in Room 013 and I was shocked to see what hon. Magyezi did and I remember I raised the issue and asked him, “Raphael, is that you?” I could not believe when he walked from outside the room and came and moved a motion to close the meeting, which had not taken place and we tried to raise the issue. Nobody was listening to us and that is how bad it was. 

Madam Speaker, that is why you see even up to today the Lord Mayor is suffering out there; that is the same issue, the issue of Kampala Capital City Authority is more than what you are seeing here.
	
It is not about the clerk. Let us not victimise these clerks; they are very innocent. The people who are doing this are above; they are beyond the clerk. These clerks are just going to be victims. 

So, we must first of all look into the issue of KCCA in detail otherwise our country is just going to the dogs. It is so unfortunate that this is happening and I have not seen the recommendation that the select committee has put on the chairperson and vice chairperson because they should also be penalised.

4.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and thank you so much, select committee for this report. I want to support what hon. Nabilah Sempala has said. There is a problem in this institution and it is the responsibility of all of us to go and sit down and find the way forward to make sure things go well. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, as the Chairperson of the Commission, if you took off time to sit with every committee, there are stories that are running in the most of the committees. We are talking about reports and keeping of records. There is also the issue of finances in these committees. I want to suggest that the Commission takes off time to find out exactly what happens in committees. 

As a Member of Parliament from Bugiri, when I was voted in and came here, I had never chaired any committee. This may apply to others who are in Parliament for the first time. I have never been trained on how to chair these committees as a chairperson. I would also suggest that the Parliamentary Commission trains the chairpersons and vice chairpersons –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I thank the NRM Chief Whip for giving way. The information I want to give her and this entire House is that, this is not the first matter we have handled as the Local Government and Public Service Committee and this was not the first report we were bringing here. It shall be remembered that we are the people who brought here a report about the bicycle scandal in the Ministry of Local Government. We handled so many matters and Paul has always been our clerk.

The second piece of information I want to give is that before joining Parliament, our chairperson hon. Florence Kintu, was a chairperson of a full district. Hon. Raphael Magyezi was the Secretary General of Uganda Local Authorities Association. These are people with experience who cannot in any way claim to lack competence to handle meetings.

Madam Speaker, these actions were deliberate. The Clerk’s Office has no opportunity to be here to defend itself and the request I am making is that, we do not use our privileged position here in Parliament to victimise the Clerk’s Office. Thank you.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you for the information. I am a very observant person. Reports are rarely read here and my colleague makes comments thanking the committees for good reports but today she has done it. I am sure it was because she appreciated the findings of this committee.

My colleague is saying that these people are experienced. However, this is their first time in Parliament. I am raising the issue of where we have problems in the operations of Parliament and it is our responsibility. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, if you recall, there was a report that was thrown out. Both sides accepted and we threw out a report which was presented on the issue of value for money. Just yesterday, a report could not be adopted and we took it as an information paper –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. I am just raising a point of procedure. I am wondering whether it is right for us to discuss clerks on the Floor of the House. The clerks have their office –(Interjection)– Can you allow me to bring out my point? You will have your time. 

Madam Speaker, the subject matter of this report is about the misbehaviour of the Members of this House who had authority over the clerk. It would not be proper for us to divert this House and discuss something that is not the main subject matter. I would want us to be bold enough and discuss the misconduct of our colleagues. I want to add that integrity is not taught; integrity is a character and you choose. 

I do not know whether it is procedurally correct for us to continue discussing clerks, which in my opinion is not the main subject matter of this report.

THE SPEAKER: The clerk was mentioned in the report but please conclude, there is something I want to say.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am not discussing anything outside the report. The report is talking about Members of the committee and it has even separated Members of the committee, leadership of the committee and the clerk to the committee. If the Member did not listen when the chairperson was presenting, please read it we have copies.

I want to re-echo the issue that we need training for chairpersons of committees to be told where they are supposed to begin and stop, and where the clerk begins and stops because – (Interruption)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek clarification from my sister the honourable Chief Whip. When you read Rule 175 of our Rules, it is very clear that the whips are the ones who designate Members to committees. 

I remember very well that designation of Members to committees includes designating chairpersons and vice chairpersons of committees, which she does. Therefore, she is bringing a suggestion, which is good but I want to seek clarification from her. Is it an idea that you want to adopt as a whip on the other side as opposed to referring that matter to the Office of the Speaker, which is the Parliamentary Commission?

THE SPEAKER: Please close, hon. Chief Whip.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I have not understood the question he was putting to me. However, I know it is the responsibility of the party whips to designate Members and leaders to these committees as the rules stipulate. The issue I am raising is when the party whips designate these Members, it is the responsibility of the Parliamentary Commission to train so there is a gap, which I also acknowledge and I am saying we should do our work and the Parliamentary Commission should train –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am the chairperson of a committee and I have benefitted from so many trainings organised by the Parliamentary Commission. Actually, I am even fed up of trainings of chairpersons and vice chairpersons in terms of parliamentary business. 

Is the hon. Minister in order to impute bad motive on the Parliamentary Commission chaired by the Speaker that they are not organising trainings for chairpersons, yet we have had more than enough and we are even tired of these kinds of trainings? Is she in order to be irrelevant yet she is the Government Chief Whip?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Commission has organised several trainings for the chairpersons and vice chairpersons. Having said that, hon. Members, there is something we need to look at. When we were still in the Movement system, the Speaker had a very key role in determining who becomes a chairperson. In other parliaments, it is an issue of seniority in the House. But now we have democratised it and  all the parties just do whatever they want and the Speaker just receives – I just receive the people I am given. We have to look at the way we appoint chairpersons. 

So, honourable members, the report says we need immediate surgery. So, I want to say that we adopt the report and we go and do the medicine which hon. Baka is asking for. I put the question that this report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: In view of the debate, I need to sit and think about which appropriate committee should deal with this petition.  I need to think about it. So on Tuesday, I will advise you which committee will deal with this petition. 

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE  AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE LIBERALISATION OF THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, we are ready with the report and I am ready to present. However, I do not know whether we have copies, because I consulted and it seems the copies are not ready for honourable members to follow. And secondly, colleagues who have the minority report seem not to be around. So I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Are there Members who can assist and present the minority report?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was trying to get across to my chairman and saying to him that if he has a copy of the minority report, we can read it to the House. So, if he has a copy, I can present it on behalf of whoever authored it so that we can move this business out of the way. 

THE SPEAKER: You do not have the minority report and the copies are not available – but I had asked the clerk to attach it to the main report. You know, they came separately; I received the minority report in my Office on Monday and the main report on Wednesday – so you do not have copies. 

Okay, honourable members, we will receive the report next week. So we direct the Clerk to produce both the main report and the minority report – they should be stapled together; that is what our rules say, so that Members can have access to them. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE ALLEGED ARRESTS AND RESTRAINT OF FREEDOMS OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND OTHER POLITICIANS IN UGANDA

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker. Before I came to the House, I was informed by the Government Chief Whip that the hon. Leader of the Opposition made a statement here in the House in respect to the detention of the Lord Mayor Erias Lukwago and Dr Col. Kiiza Besigye and others and that they were being held beyond the 48 hour rule, and they are asking why this is the case. 

Madam Speaker, it is true the two leaders were detained and as to why they were not produced within the 48 hour rule, there are normally circumstances which can make someone not appear before court or be charged before the 48 hour rule. 

One is when they refuse to make statements to the police and two, when they refuse to be released on bond. In this case, I was yet to confirm what really happened. But the truth of the matter is that as of this afternoon, the Lord Mayor and Dr Besigye are being charged in Buganda Road Chief Magistrate’s Court and that is where they are. That is what is happening right now. 

As to the allegation or charge that the H.E President had directed the DPP to charge them of treason, I do not believe it and I am not aware that the President can issue such a directive in this era of our democracy. 

Finally, as to the detention or preventive detention of the honourable members of Parliament, I do not think this is proper. I am yet to find out why they are being detained. Unless they are a threat to law and order, otherwise, I am going to investigate right away and have them released. That is the clarification I wish to make. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have done whatever was on the Order Paper for today. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 November 2013 at 2.00 O’clock)
