Tuesday, 19 November 2013

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. First, to announce with regret that our Chief Accountant, otherwise known as “Uncle Money” lost his mother yesterday. She will be buried tomorrow in Luweero. So, I wanted Members to be aware that Mr Kunobwa has lost his mother.

Secondly, in the public gallery, we have today received the Katikkiro of Buganda together with members of his cabinet; he has been visiting Parliament in support of the rehabilitation of the Kasubi Tombs. He is there in the gallery and we shall later have a Motion to briefly debate the importance of the tombs and our cultural heritage.

We also have, in the gallery, members of the business community from Soroti Municipality, Eastern division. They are here on a three-day study visit. They include: Mushid Etabat, the Speaker of the municipality, Mr Geoffrey Ewatu, Mr Robert Engulu, Mr Athanus Katongole, Ms Hellen Agojo, Mr Richard Eyoru and Ms Jane Aguti the Assistant CDO of Soroti. They are represented by hon. Mukula and hon. Osegge.

We also have a delegation from Ntungamo: LCV councillors, LCIII chairpersons, local council chairpersons and sub county councillors represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Kabasharira.

We have some school children but I do not yet know who they are. I will let you know when I get more information.

Hon. Members, you will recall that on the 5th November, I communicated to you about the continued absence from Parliament of hon. Tony Kipoi Nsubuga, MP for Bubulo West. In that same communication, I informed the House that I had written to him, requiring him to attend the next sitting of Parliament. To-date, he has neither complied with the requirement to attend the sittings of the House nor has he made any communication to me in that regard. 

In the circumstances and in accordance to Rule 101(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I refer this matter to the rules committee to investigate the Member’s conduct and report to this House before the 20th day of December 2013. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

    I) BY THE FORMER EMPLOYEES OF POSTA UGANDA OVER THE MISMANAGEMENT OF THE AFFAIRS OF POSTA UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Please, read the subject and the prayers.

3.17
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present a petition by the former employees of Posta Uganda over the mismanagement of the affairs of Posta Uganda. I am moving it under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure:

The humble petition of the former employees of Posta Uganda against their irregular dismissal and termination from their jobs, nepotism, tribalism and flaunting of procurement laws and the procedures of the management of Posta Uganda.

They pray that Parliament intervenes by causing an investigation into the administration and management of the affairs of Posta Uganda Limited with a view to address the issues of nepotism, abuse of office, flaunting the existing procurement laws. It is duly signed by the petitioners. 

I beg to lay on the Table. Thank you.

    II) PETITON BY THE PEOPLE OF MAIRINYA “A” VILLAGE, BUKABOOLI SUB COUNTY, MAYUGE DISTRICT REGARDING BOUNDARY DISPUTES

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Majegere is not here. Okay, hon. Members, the first petition is sent to COSASE for perusal and reporting. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE KINGDOM OF  BUGANDA, THE KABAKA OF BUGANDA, THE KATIKIRO AND ALL UGANDANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT  BEING UNDERTAKEN BY THE KINGDOM, IN PARTICULAR THE RESTORATION OF THE KASUBI TOMBS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated, we have the Katikkiro of Buganda, Owekitiibwa Charles Peter Mayiga. He came with members of his cabinet namely: Ow’ekitiibwa Emmanuel Sendaula, the First Deputy Katikkiro; Ow’ekitiibwa Mohammed Ssemambo Ssekimpi, Second Deputy Katikkiro; Ow’ekitiibwa Eva Nagawa Mukasa, the Minister of Finance – a very important person. Ow’ekitiibwa Apollo Makubuya, Minister for Constitutional Affairs; Ow’ekitiibwa Ahmad Lwasa, the Deputy Speaker; Ow’ekitiibwa Mumbejja Sylvia Namazzi, State Minister for research; and Ow’ekitiibwa Ben Kiwanuka Mukwaya, Minister for Health. They are here to observe the proceedings. And again, let me thank the members for the tremendous contributions made towards restoration of one of Uganda’s cultural heritage. 

I also have, in the public gallery, pupils and teachers of City Primary School Kampala, represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. I think they are the ones on this side. You are welcome, children.

3.20
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Chairman of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. The Motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Kingdom of Buganda, the Kabaka of Buganda, His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the Katikkiro of Buganda, the people of Buganda and all Ugandans for the development being undertaken by Buganda kingdom and particularly for the restoration of the Kasubi Tombs as a cultural heritage site.

(Motion expunged from the records.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know we had agreed to have this motion moved but the text of the motion I have is different from what you have presented. The contents of your motion are different from the one you gave me and I approved. (Laughter)

Now, hon. Kiwanda, bring the other one I approved; let us defer debate on this one as you bring the one I approved. Meanwhile, let us do something else as you bring the other one.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to suggest that let what he has read be expunged from the Hansard so that they bring the motion that you approved, which should be presented here for debate.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE BUSINESS TRANSACTED BY THE COMMITTEES SINCE THE INCEPTION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AND BUSINESS PENDING 

    1. COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Education and Sports is one and a half years old. At the inception of the Ninth Parliament, it was still the Committee on Social Services, so, I am giving an account of the business that transpired since 2012/13 and in the first half of 2013/2014.

Madam Speaker, the committee looked at and analysed the policy statements for both the financial year 2012/2013 and also the budget framework papers for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 2013/2014.

The committee has considered a number of petitions. We considered a petition by the staff of Kyambogo University on the mismanagement of the university by Prof. Ndiege Omolo. We also considered a petition by the students of Kyambogo University and we brought reports on these petitions. They were presented to Parliament. 

We considered two petitions by the students of Makerere University: One was on the increment or the payment of 60 per cent of fees, and the other petition was on the mismanagement and poor sanitation in the halls of residence of Makerere University and both reports were presented before Parliament. 

We also considered two petitions on the quality of USE by the Private Schools Association, which are implementing USE in Uganda and both reports were presented to this House. 

We still have petitions whose reports we have not presented. One was a petition by Mulago Paramedical School. The report is ready but it is not yet presented to the House. 

We have two petitions, which we have not considered. One was moved by hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke on matters of the transfers of staff of Bishop SSS, Mukono. We have also not considered a petition, which was tabled to Parliament by hon. Patrick Nsanja on the management of football in Uganda. We are yet to consider that.

Madam Speaker, the committee has considered two Bills. One is the UNESCO Bill, a Bill establishing the UNESCO Commission. The report of the committee is ready. We have also considered another Bill on the financing of our education. The report is ready; we have been delayed by the minister because there are some grey areas where we needed to be consulted but today, I received a copy of the letter from the minister giving us a go-ahead to go along with our proposed amendment. So, we are ready to report on both Bills next week.

The committee undertook a number of internal trips to Western and Eastern Uganda to look at education institutions especially technical colleges; and also undertook a trip to Kyambogo University at a time when the first strike was taking place and also to Busitema University. 

The committee also undertook a number of travels abroad to Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Botswana to benchmark on the students’ loan schemes and financing for higher education in those countries and these benchmarking visits have helped us where we are in considering the Higher Education Financing Bill. 

We also undertook a trip to Morocco to support the Uganda Cranes during the match against Senegal. Madam Speaker, recently, a team of some members of the committee attended the UNESCO conference in Paris that ended last week. 

The pending business for the committee is the presentation of the reports on both the UNESCO Bill and the Higher Education Financing Bill, and also the two petitions of hon. Nambooze and hon. Nsanja, which we are yet to consider. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Of course, you know that one of those Bills is very important for the young people of this country – the one on financing of higher education; I think we should try and prioritise it. Thank you very much. 

Now, the chairperson of the Buganda caucus has returned with the proper motion, we now expunge the original submission and let him make his presentation.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE KINGDOM OF  BUGANDA, THE KABAKA OF BUGANDA, THE KATIKIRO AND ALL UGANDANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT  BEING UNDERTAKEN BY THE KINGDOM, IN PARTICULAR THE RESTORATION OF THE KASUBI TOMBS

3.43
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I need to make this clarification that when we drafted this motion, we took it to the Clerk and the order is that the legal department at times does some amendments here and there but the day has been so busy. We have been with our guests and from there, we just moved here with the motion that I had given to the Clerk. 

But most obliged, Madam Speaker. We are going to present the one that has been well-done by the Clerk. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As he presents, I had originally introduced the voters from Kajara but they were still in the corridors. They are up here, represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Kabasharira. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MR KIWANDA: Motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Kingdom of Buganda for the development of Buganda Kingdom and partially for the restoration of the Kasubi Tombs as a cultural heritage site, moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure.

WHEREAS Article 246 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda establishes institutions with traditional and cultural leaders in accordance with the culture, customs and tradition, all wishes and aspirations of people to whom it applies;

AND WHEREAS the Government of Uganda under the leadership of H. E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, restored the Kingdom of Buganda and other cultural traditional institutions; 

NOTING THAT the people of Buganda enthroned His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II as the Kabaka of Buganda at Naggalabi-Buddo on the 31st day of July 1993 for the wellbeing and restoration of the Kingdom of Buganda;

FURTHER NOTING THAT His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the various Katikkiros, Her Royal Highness the Nabagereka, princes and princesses and all chiefs of Buganda embarked on the social, economic, cultural and rebuilding and transformation of the Kingdom of Buganda through various education, health, environmental, social, cultural and economic programmes initiated in the last 20 years;

ACKNOWLEDGING the role played by various Katikkiros of Buganda in the maintenance of social cohesion and economic transformation of the Kingdom of Buganda such as: Katikkiro Joash Mayanja Nkangi, who played a major role in the period after the restoration of the cultural institutions in Uganda; Katikkiro Mulwanyammuli Ssemwogerere who built a firm foundation upon which the kingdom stands to date; Katikkiro Daniel Muliika whose effort culminated into the establishment of Muteesa 1 Royal University; Katikkiro Eng. J.B Walusimbi under whose tenure of office the unity of Buganda was emphasised; and the current Katikkiro, Charles Peter Mayiga, who has committed himself to the restoration of the Kasubi Royal Tombs and the mobilisation of the youths of Buganda for economic development;

RECOGNISING the sacrifice and support offered to the Kingdom of Buganda and His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda, Ronald Muwenda II, the Katikkiros of Buganda and the Her Royal Highness, the Nabagereka of Buganda, by the people of Buganda and Uganda at large for the development of the kingdom;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
    1. That Parliament appreciates the achievements of the Kingdom of Buganda, His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda, Ronald MuwendaMutebi II and Her Royal Highness, the Nabagereka of Buganda for their exemplary leadership, development and economic and social transformation of the Kingdom of Buganda;

    2. That it recognises the various Katikkiros of Buganda, the royals of Buganda, the chiefs and the people of Buganda and Ugandans for their untiring support to the Kingdom of Buganda; and
    3. That it acknowledges the contributions by Ow’ekitiibwa Charles Peter Mayiga for initiating the historic relationship with the Parliament of Uganda, for his effort to mobilise the youths, for the development and restoration of Kasubi Tombs as a UNESCO World Heritage.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Geoffrey Kiwanda. Yes, hon. Betty Nambooze. The motion has already been seconded.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I stand to justify my motion. The motion has almost spoken it all. However, I cannot forget to emphasise the issue of unity that this kingdom has brought about. The coming to this Parliament of Uganda of the Katikkiro of Buganda is an indication that we are in one Uganda. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the kingdom through the various programmes embarked on the mobilisation of the people of Buganda towards hard work. And it is only through hard work that the people and Uganda in general can develop.

Madam Speaker, everyone in this House will also recall that the health programmes that the kingdom has been participating in especially the immunisation, the health camps that have been put up by the Ministry of Health of the Buganda Government have helped a lot our people towards improved health standards.

The environmental programmes under the Kingdom of Buganda – recently, the Kabaka of Buganda initiated a programme in one of the counties called Kyaggwe to plant 25 million trees. This is all to improve the environment in this country.

But also the social mobilisation that is being done by the Central Broadcasting Service (CBS) also known as radio “yaffe.” Madam Speaker, we have to say something about this. 

The Kabaka Education Fund – I want to inform this House that the Kabaka has an education fund for every district in this country to at least admit two students to Muteesa I Royal University. Some of the districts that have not had students in their areas getting admitted, I am here. Please, if there is any district that has not benefited – for example, those in the Karamoja Sub Region and all the others in the 120 districts – there is the Kabaka Education Fund for two students per district, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

There is also the Nabagereka Foundation especially through the Kisakaate about the proper upbringing of children – Madam Speaker, on several occasions, we have seen you with the Nabagereka trying to promote ethical standards amongst the children in this country. This has contributed a lot to the moral upbringing of our children.

The community work through the Bulungibwansi. The Kingdom of Buganda has done a lot through the Bulungibwansi community to mobilise our people to go and work out for themselves especially on feeder roads in addition to working around their homes to improve health and social standards in those homes.

I know that many Members of Parliament would also like to speak to this motion. So, I do not want to take a lot of their time. But before I end, I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing us table this motion in this Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kiwanda. Okay, before hon. Betty Nambooze comes, I want you to join me in welcoming local leaders from Buyanga Sub County in Bugweri, Busoga represented by hon. Katuntu and hon. Kabaale Kwagala. (Applause)

3.43
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is in my upbringing that while talking about issues of the Kabaka, I have to speak with a lot of caution and dignity. I, therefore, seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to allow me constantly refer to my notes as I speak to this motion.

Madam Speaker, I wish to support this motion by congratulating His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda on this historic occasion when the whole of Uganda is set to recognise the work being done by his government through the representatives of the people.

The story of any Government is the story of the character of its leader. Therefore, it follows that when we talk about the Buganda Government in the last 20 years, we talk about the reign of His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II.

The Kabaka returned from exile in 1988 and accepted a lesser title of the Ssabattaka. The circumstances under which our king went into exile are so conflict ridden and they bring back a lot of pain to us the Baganda.
 
Following a number of struggles by Ugandans, the Kabakaship was restored. The fact of the matter is that Kabaka Ronald Muwenda Mutebi has been on his throne since 1969, which is the year in which I was born, but he was publicly announced as the King of Buganda in 1993.

The 18 Buganda counties over which Kabaka Mutebi reigns have had prosperity along the times of turmoil and challenges. Despite these challenges, Buganda in the last 20 years has emerged as a more modern and assertive kingdom with a central role in Uganda. We have developed our own distinct sense of identity. We value things that make us unique; that make us Baganda. We are a nation of different peoples. In fact, Buganda is the United Nations of Uganda sharing a common belief in peace and progress.

The dignity, wisdom and assurance that the Kabaka and the kingdom bring relating to his role as the king, supersedes maps and distances. Throughout the changes we have witnessed in the past year, his status as our king has given many of us a sense of stability and confidence – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have only 20 minutes for this matter. So, I want to get someone – people who are not from Buganda. Yes, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, but only two minutes.

3.51
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to congratulate the Kingdom of Buganda, the people of Buganda and the leadership of Buganda for putting Uganda on the world map. I say this because in Africa, we destroy but the Baganda have maintained their culture and the Kasubi Tombs are known all over the world because the Baganda have maintained Kasubi Tombs.  (Applause) 

When you Google and look for the heritage sites around the world, you will find three or four heritages in countries. I last served in China, Madam Speaker, and in each of the China’s 15 provinces, you would find three or four heritages in one province. But in Africa, when you go round, how many heritages do you find? You find Kasubi Tombs, which the United Nations identified as a heritage site. Therefore, this is a pride for us that Kasubi Tombs is there and Uganda is known.

When I was serving outside, Madam Speaker, whenever tourists were coming to Uganda, Kasubi Tombs was one of those places I used to tell them about. I would tell them, “Please, go and see where the Baganda used to bury their kings.” This is a pride to all of us. 

I want to thank you; I want to thank the Katikkiro for coming today. And I want to thank all my colleagues, Members of Parliament - (Member timed out_) 

3.53
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Katikkiro of Buganda, the whole entourage and the Buganda caucus, my in-laws for exhibiting unity in diversity. This country needs unity in diversity at this point in time when we need national integration. 

I thank the Katikkiro for the effort, not only to bring back the Kasubi Tombs, but also to take them to a level now that they are a world heritage centre of a five star facility and not only Kasubi Tombs but all other cultural institutions. As a person from the mother kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara –(Laughter)- I would really want to- (Interjections) – yes, because we stretch to DRC, Tanzania and some of these areas. So, it is important that we have unity in diversity.

As Parliament, we have not used the cultural institutions we restored in the Constitution to do what they are best for: environment conservation, tree planting, food security and fighting poverty. If we gave the Katikkiros of these kingdoms the latitude and leverage through a constitutional amendment, and we put more money in the budget of the Ministry of Gender so that we stop depending on the magnanimity of the President of this country, we would see a lot of development by partnering with cultural institutions.

My appeal is that we make it a budget item so that the Minister for Gender who is in charge of Culture has that financing to make sure that all regions where these kingdoms exist mobilise people without spending money. It is very expensive to mobilise people for development through ministries. So, bulung ibwansi, ggwanga mujje – now, everything is for tenders. A lot can be done by cultural institutions and we need to provide a constitutional amendment, which will enable cultural institutions to take their role in developing this country in environmental protection, food security and fighting poverty. That is what will help Uganda. 

And we do not need hegemony as if Central Government is competing with cultural institutions. Cultural institutions are more permanent; we just need to help them do what they are supposed to do and that will give this country a milestone in terms of development. 

The challenges, however, that the cultural institutions and religious institutions have to fight with are challenges of corruption, homosexuality- (Member timed out_)

3.57
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Busoga region but my mother comes from the Kyaggwe region. So, I am really happy to be speaking on this motion.  I thank the Katikkiro and the Kabaka for the work they have been doing. I will begin with a challenge to the Buganda Kingdom by saying that you have done everything in education: you have promoted the girl child but in banking – take the example of the United Kingdom, you must establish a bank where we will know that Buganda Kingdom has such and such money. (Applause) 

That said, I appreciate the fact that after over 37 years of Buganda Kingdom not trusting the Parliament of Uganda, today the Katikkiro’s coming is a sign of confidence in the Government of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we really appreciate, as the Parliament of Uganda, the women programmes, which the Nabagereka is promoting. But we would like to also hear that maybe every year, the Nabagereka sponsors about 50 to 100 students to join the university. 


We thank Buganda Kingdom for the unity and peace. 

Lastly, I would like to say we thank Buganda Kingdom for the accommodative nature it has shown to all people- (Applause)- because I believe when we are here in Parliament, most of us stay within Buganda apart from a few. I would like to congratulate the Katikkiro and I would like to say this should not be the last time. Even towards 2016, you come and show us support. The government will benefit and the Members of Parliament will benefit. Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

3.59
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the Kingdom of Buganda upon the achievements. I would like to acknowledge the fact that Buganda as a kingdom has done quite a lot for this country and being a member from Sebei region, that is, Kongasis County in Bukwo District, I have also benefitted from the education programmes offered by the Kabaka. (Applause) As I talk, I have two students from Bukwo District who are pursuing courses at the Kabaka Mutesa 1 Royal University. (Applause) 

I appeal to you that in case we have cultural functions for Buganda, we are part and parcel of your programmes; we shall be able to mobilise all those who have benefitted from those education programmes, together with us leaders, we join and team up with you as Baganda; not to rule out the fact that most of the Members of Parliament live in Buganda. So, Buganda is now my second home. So, I am a Muganda as well. (Laughter)

We are proud of that and I would urge all other cultural institutions to maintain the spirit of organising themselves because it helps to create a sense of unity and morality, and it also helps us to link up synergy so that we both move forward and know that we are all Ugandans with the same heritage. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.01
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I join the rest of my colleagues to support this motion. I am very excited about some of the programmes especially under education, environment and also peace promotion. However, I feel whatever the leadership is doing is demanding a lot from us as Ugandans especially on keeping peace, diplomacy on how to present ourselves. 

I see a lot of respect and discipline hailing from the leadership of Buganda Kingdom but the challenge is, how much do we emulate what the leadership is selling to us, on our moral character, on how to present ourselves to the community in this country?

Madam Speaker, I thank the kingdom for especially the issue of providing sponsorship to needy children. Adjumani District did benefit and I feel that as community members in our rural areas, we need to learn and also initiate some programmes as elected leaders just as the cultural leaders also do – we have ideas to be picked and to be emulated so that at the end, we join our hands together to help the needy children of this country. 

I thank you very much. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Rosemary Najjemba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much that I caught your eye as it was not easy because you had said that Members out of Buganda and I am from Buganda. 

First, I would like to thank the NRM Government for restoring the cultural institutions. We would not have been here today if the NRM Government had not restored these institutions – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS NAJJEMBA: Madam Speaker, I think that I am entitled as a Member of this House to say what I want to say and to appreciate those who have contributed. 

I thank our Government for restoring these institutions. We all know the history of Buganda and Uganda and we know that these institutions were abolished, and we all know what happened and we thank our Government for restoring them. And that is a fact, whether you like it or not!

I would like to appreciate our Government for the Memorandum of Understanding between our Government and the government of Ssabasajja Kabaka. We want to thank them for sitting together and having that memorandum done. I would also like to ask both sides to ensure that the issues that were agreed upon are implemented and it is our prayer that everything is implemented to the letter.

We pray that the relationship between our kingdom and Government is maintained. We want a cordial relationship and want all of us to work together for the benefit of our people. Some of us belong to both and I always tell people that my mother is Buganda and my father is NRM. If you asked me whom I loved best, I would say that I love them both. So, I would like my parents, my mother and father, to always work together and to love each other.

I wish to applaud the socio-economic efforts under the different programmes that the Kingdom of Buganda is implementing. The Kingdom of Buganda is known for implementing a number of socio-economic projects – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi - UWOPA.
 
4.05
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate and thank the Kingdom of Buganda for the work that they are doing.

As a woman, I have been interested in the underlying cultural aspect related to women’s empowerment and in Buganda, I have been interrogating how the culture has promoted women’s empowerment. For example, while in other cultures a woman is married and you take the clan of your husband and you grapple with the idea whether you belong to where you are born or where you are married, in Buganda I am told your clan is where you are born and that is fundamental and it has made the women in Buganda to be protected. 

If you look at the business community – you go downtown and you see the number of women who are doing business. If you climb a plane, for example, going to Dubai and you see the number of women on the plane, majority of them are Baganda women. It means, therefore, that in Buganda, when people are born in a family, they are looked at as equal children and that is the beginning point on how we raise our children. Do we raise our children equally? I want to congratulate Buganda for showing us that both girls and boys are important and vital in society. 

I would like to ask the other communities to emulate especially what the Nabagereka is doing. The Kabaka and the institution have enabled the Nabagereka to initiate programmes for Girl-Child Education and programmes to do with women empowerment. She is always at the forefront of family planning – something that actually in other cultures people do not talk about - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: This debate would be incomplete if hon. Nzoghu did not stand up to speak. (Laughter)

4.08
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Kiwanda, the mover of the motion. I want to just say three things:

First, I appreciate the efforts that the Buganda Kingdom has put in place in especially working in good relationships with the rest of Uganda unlike other people who really disunite Uganda. (Laughter)

Secondly, there is the issue of the Kasubi Tombs. When the Kasubi Tombs were burnt, the President of the Republic of Uganda assured the people of Buganda Kingdom that the report would be out but up to now, the report has never been out. It is actually painful at this moment that we are even having the reconstruction of the Kasubi Tombs before the report is out. 

So, people are asking: where is the report of the Kasubi Tombs? And who burnt these tombs? Because you cannot just say that the NRM Government has actually reinstated the kingdoms but who burnt the tombs? We must ask ourselves. (Applause)

Finally, I also want to say that Government still has a long way to go on two premises. The first is that well, as the Kingdom of Buganda is concentrating on uniting the people of Buganda and other people who stay in Buganda, there are also efforts by Government to trim the powers of Buganda Kingdom by splitting Buganda Kingdom and giving it chiefdoms that are not necessary – and this is a warning to the Government of Uganda that actually, the Ssebanyala and other kingdoms, which are really emanating out of Buganda must stop and stop forthwith. We shall not accept this and – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Nakadama, the minister in charge of the kingdoms and then the minister in charge of trade and that of tourism.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as the restoration of Kasubi Royal Tombs World Heritage Site is concerned, I also want to support the motion and say that the Government of Uganda attaches great importance to the Kasubi Royal Tombs World Heritage Site because it is a living site where important components of the Buganda culture can still be observed. It represents strong elements of intangible cultural heritage and it is a master piece of human creativity. The site is the only Ugandan cultural property inscribed on the world heritage list in line with Uganda being a state party to the 1972 UNESCO Convention on the World Heritage, Cultural and National Heritage. 

The Kasubi Royal Tombs was established by Muteesa I as his palace. He built the famous dome-shaped structure, Muzibu Azaalampanga in 1882. Ssekabaka Muteesa I became the first king of Buganda to be buried in this palace in 1884. 

In 1910, the remains of his successor, Ssekabaka Mwanga II who died in exile in Seychelles, were returned and buried in Muzibu Azaalampanga. This broke the tradition of burying each king in his own palace. It also established Kasubi as a burial ground for Ssekabaka Daudi Chwa and Ssekabaka Muteesa II were also buried in Kasubi in 1939 and 1971 respectively.

Following the promulgation of a Republican Constitution in Uganda in 1967, kingdoms were abolished. They were, however, reinstated in 1993 under the Constitutional amendment Statute 1993. The properties of the former kingdoms were handed back to the owners under the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Act, 1993. It is under this law that Government, in 1997, handed back the Kasubi site to the Buganda Kingdom. The site was gazetted as a protected site by statutory instrument No. 163 of 1972 under the Historical Monument Act, 1967. The land is registered in the names of the Kabaka of Buganda.

After the unfortunate incident of the fire that gutted down Muzibu Azaalampanga, the largest hut on the site, on 16 March 2010, Cabinet directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to investigate the fire and address the emerging issues regarding the site.

In this regard, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development constituted a commission of inquiry to investigate the incident. The commission, which was chaired by Justice Stephen George Engwau completed its work and submitted the report to the minister. Cabinet considered the report and constituted a technical team chaired by the Head of Public Service to study the commission’s report and develop a Government White Paper on the recommendations of the commission of inquiry. Cabinet has studied and considered the contents of the White Paper, which will soon be released to the public. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, whose mandate is to advise Government on intangible cultural heritage, is represented on the technical committee, which is chaired by the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of trade - and I think I might get into trouble with King Oyo if Toro does not speak. So, Minister of Trade there, then Toro.

4.16
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I stand to support this motion and I thank hon. Kiwanda and hon. Nambooze for presenting this motion. As we all know, this has been a long journey. It has been a long journey, very emotional, and all the issues that are raised here definitely have taken place. So, now that we have a cordial and harmonious relationship, I think we should be more positive. Let us look at the more positive side for the good of our country.

I want to thank the Kingdom of Buganda for its interventions in health, education and other sectors. As the Minister for Trade, I am excited about some of the interventions they have made, for example, MuganziLwaza Mall in Katwe. Katwe is now shining. We know that there is employment and revenue generation and we all benefit.

I would like to thank Ow’ekitiibwa Katikkiro for being the icon of hard work, unity, mobilisation and commitment. But in all this, I would like to thank our dear Speaker, because without her able leadership, we would not have experienced this. We have gone down in history because of our Speaker. I thank you very much. I wish to submit.     

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I married from Buganda and when we were down in the Conference Hall, the hon. Minister for Gender did intimate to the Members that she was going to elaborately pronounce herself on this report on the fires. Around lunch time, I talked to my wife and said the report was going to come out. (Laughter)

So, from the submission of the minister, when this incident happened, the President addressed the nation and came out categorically clear about this and we gave the benefit of the doubt but then to date - there was some suspicion that maybe in a way, who is this person who was involved? Then he said that there was going to be an investigation. 

The guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is that, when the minister says the report got out, then it was taken to Cabinet, Cabinet is dealing with it, then the White Paper will come out, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that maybe the minister makes it public so that members of the public and other people who wish Buganda well can really rest assured?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is the White Paper for? Isn’t it for the future?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Members that when a commission of inquiry has been put in place, those are the procedures. So, I was informing the Katikkiro that I am going to inform you of how we have moved as far as that report is concerned. 

Now, I have just mentioned here that according to what we have, according to the investigations, the report came out; we have already got the White Paper in Cabinet, which is going to be released to the public soon.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I think we have moved well since morning and we have moved in unity. We have anxiously waited for more than two years for this report. This Parliament appropriated money, among others, to facilitate the investigation into the cause - and to guide the nation. The Prime Minister stood here in April last year and did not simply promise but undertook to present this report to the House and indeed, to the nation. The minister made a promise this mid-afternoon that she was going to give us the progress and give us the report. 

Now, she stands up to tell us she is bringing a White Paper, which is an edited version of the report - highly diluted indeed. Madam Speaker, some of us have had the pain of waiting to see what happened to the sweat of our fore fathers centuries ago. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to come here and tell us that they are studying – she is not even producing a White Paper, but that they are studying the edited version of the report; edit and dilute it again and then give us the results? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report is important but it was not part of the prayers. I would like to appeal that we complete this motion of thanking the kingdom of Buganda and then, we can demand from the minister separately. I know it is important but let us not mix them. 

4.22
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to pay tribute to Ssabasajja Kabaka of Buganda, Her Royal Highness the NNabagereka and the people of Buganda for the purposeful development, which has taken place within the kingdom and the nation at large. 

I also want to thank the the Katikiro of Buganda, Ow’ekitiibwa Peter Mayiga for his visit to Parliament. This is a historic moment and an occasion to be registered. 

Kasubi Tombs were gutted on 16 March, 2010 and were completely destroyed together with many ceremonial objects. The Kasubi Tombs were destroyed but luckily, the tombs themselves were not affected. The loss of Muzibu Azalampanga was a tragic event for Buganda, but not only for Buganda but also for Uganda and the world at large because the Kasubi Tombs were and are still a World Heritage Site. 

When this occurred, various stakeholders came together; these included Government, the Kingdom of Buganda, UNESCO and other development partners to find a way of reconstituting Kasubi Tombs. And to that effect, on 17 March, Government put up a committee to investigate. That has been talked about by the Minister of Gender. 

In June 2010, Government put up another committee for the reconstruction of Kasubi Tombs. In this arrangement, Government called on stakeholders. This committee is chaired by my ministry and it has got members from Buganda Government, UNESCO and all other Government departments that are concerned, including Ministry of Gender, Ministry of Lands and others. 

Since that time, a lot of work has been done. The first thing that was done was to estimate the cost of reconstruction of the Royal Kasubi Tombs. It was found that we required Shs 5 billion to put Kasubi back in its original form. Of course, we had to put into consideration the intrinsic challenge of putting the structure in place. We had to get consultants from abroad to tell us how to go about it but at the same time, consult with the elders, particularly Mengo elders to tell us what was needed to put things back in place. 

As we speak now, Government committed herself to contribute Shs 2 billion towards the construction of Kasubi Tombs and I want to say that Government has fulfilled its pledge because on 1st August, 2012, H.E the President gave a cheque of Shs 2 billion to the then Katikkiro of Buganda, Ow’ekitiibwa Walusimbi and we have a certificate, which is here – I will lay it on Table to prove that Government has fulfilled its part of the pledge. 

On top of that, UNESCO pledged to put in $650,000 which amount to Shs 1.6 billion and Buganda Government offered to fundraise Shs 800 million. That is the exercise that the present Ow’ekitiibwa Katikkiro is carrying out now. I request Members and the public to contribute generously so that we can have this real asset for Uganda back. 

As the Minister for Tourism, I feel honoured that our ministry has been charged to make sure that the Kasubi Tombs are back in shape. As we speak now, a lot of progress has been achieved. So far, the foundation has been completed; the walls around the building have been completed; the columns have been put up and the ring beam will be put up very soon. 

The steel works and putting up the timber roof will follow; traditional artisans will be responsible for thatching and an emergency fire protection has been donated by UNESCO and is already in place. 

The Japanese Government has contributed to the comprehensive disaster risk management of the site and experts are working with Buganda Kingdom, UNESCO and the department of the museum to make sure that we minimise if not stop any chances of having fire at the new Kasubi Tombs. Construction of the perimeter wall has also commenced. 

As the Katikkiro of Buganda has announced recently, the reconstruction work is expected to be completed next year and I wish to urge my colleagues to make sure that we support the process that has been started. 

As a ministry, we have offered to intimately work with Buganda Kingdom and here, I would like to appreciate the support that I have been receiving, and in particular, I thank the Deputy Katikkiro, who is also the Minister for Tourism and the Minister of State for Tourism in Buganda who have been very supportive in our effort to reconstruct Kasubi Tombs. 

I also want to congratulate Buganda because in the recently concluded Miss Tourism, the winner is a Muganda and I believe the kingdom is going to support this girl because she is now an official ambassador to the international community for tourism and definitely, Kasubi Tombs is number one. 

So, to that regard, I commit Government that we are going to work with Buganda Kingdom with the leadership of Ow’ekitiibwa Katikkiro to make sure that Kasubi Tombs will always shine and will always be there for the future generations. Thank you. 

4.29
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Little did I know that there will be an opportunity for “The man” to articulate a point. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend the spirit, which you have championed, to let every region be heard publically so that even those who are not heard today can be heard tomorrow. 

I say so because this is the second time, Madam Speaker, that you are according the Buganda Caucus to move a motion of this magnitude. On the 7th August this year, I moved a motion congratulating His Majesty the Kabaka for successfully steering the Kingdom of Buganda for the last 20 years. You have accorded us another opportunity, you are a great Speaker and you will remain in the books of history for the nation of Uganda. 

This meeting is a demonstration that solutions in making Uganda get united are getting closer because little did we imagine that there would be an opportunity for Buganda to come here and associate with you, honourable members, and you even give us support so that we collectively rebuild our tombs! This is a very big pillar in this history of Uganda and we would like to collectively thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Why is Uganda still lagging behind when it comes to building a united Uganda? There is one great point, which the Katikkiro made before you spoke, Madam Speaker. He talked about the peculiarity of things. For example, in Buganda, our culture is seemingly peculiar and spectacular and a situation of that kind calls for a peculiar solution. You cannot generalise an answer with uniformity. You must study the problem circumstantially and this is exactly what Buganda is demanding.

I would like to thank all the Members of Parliament who have contributed, in good faith, towards our cause. I wish I would speak beyond this but let me speak only one stanza out of my poem, which is a replica of what we are talking about: 

In Uganda there are many kings: Emorimor, Adhola, Kyabazinga, Abakama, Obusinga. In Buganda the Kabaka reigns, he does not rule but he still commands.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.33
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course, to take on the microphone after hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, “The Man” has just spoken is a challenge in itself.

I have been in this Parliament for twelve and a half years but this is the first time I am seeing a Katikkiro of Buganda in this Parliament. On that note, we would like to congratulate both you the Speaker and indeed, the Katikkiro, on this very important occasion. I want to congratulate Ow’ekitiibwa Charles Mayiga for having been appointed the Katikkiro. I have not had that opportunity before.

If you read the history of this country, there are two institutions that have been at the forefront of developing the education and the health sectors, and these are religious institutions and the kingdoms. Look at Buganda. If you look at the big secondary schools in Buganda, say Mengo, Kings’ College Budo, Gayaza, Kibuli and Nabisunsa, they are all associated either with the church, the mosque or the kingdom. The same applies to the health sector. That underscores one thing; the importance of these institutions in society.

Madam Speaker, sometimes, it is saddening that a few elements within the Central Government go out of their way to undermine these very institutions. Of course, I will always remember that day when two colleagues in this House: hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Betty Nambooze plus Ow’ekitiibwa Charles Mayiga, the Katikkiro, were arrested. Maybe, the word is “kidnapped” and they went all night in the rain, taken to bushes and so on. And some say that this Government actually loves kingdoms. Those are the challenges.

I am talking to you from a perspective that I come from a kingdom, which is still grappling with challenges of leadership. The point I want to make is that this country might be small geographically but it is big enough for all of us to live in, in harmony and with equal opportunities. We do not have to agree all the time, there are republicans and federalists, yet, we have only one country to live in. We will not agree all the time because if two people agree all the time, one of them is useless. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the last chance on this very important debate. That was my wish, so, do not envy me. I was just wishing to be the last to speak.

From Toro kingdom, I bring greetings to our Katikkiro who is here and I also congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for making history because as a historian, this is the first meeting of its kind where we have the kingdom in a Parliament where it was abolished. So, this is very historical. It rubs away all these historical wounds that were there before and it shows that the country – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to call the Member holding the Floor to order for diverting the debate and eluding that this same institution abolished kingdoms. I think we are all read and educated and we are very concerned about our history by reading the Hansard. Can he specifically quote the date, month and year when the kingdoms, whether the kingdom of Buganda or the kingdoms in Uganda were abolished and by which government? 

Can the Member holding the Floor be very specific? Otherwise, can he withdraw that statement? Is he, therefore, in order to make a statement, which is not even conversant with the history? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it is not in dispute that there was a new Constitution in 1966 and then another one in 1967, which made this country a republic. That is the one, which abolished kingdoms. Please, conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and for saving me as well. I want to bring a point that we need to give attention as a country - because the kingdoms were restored but at the same time, these kingdoms are growing at a fast pace. What this means is that managing the growth of these kingdoms is something, which we have to think about very carefully. 

We cannot begin looking at these kingdoms like they were when they were just starting. These kingdoms are becoming more assertive and this means that we must be in position, as a country, to manage this growth carefully. So, I hope that in the future and as we are thinking of stabilising this country, we come up with permanent laws that are going to guarantee the stability and unity of Uganda. I think this is extremely important, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to end by concluding that of recent, the queens have brought African queens here in Uganda - the Nabagereka and the Queen mother of Tooro - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank all of you for your contributions. I would like to inform the Katikkiro that although there is still work in progress, we are now at Shs 153,670,000. 

So, hon. Members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON A PETITION FROM UGANDA RAILWAYS TENANTS ASSOCIATIONS ON THE TRANSFER OF 57.93 ACRES OF LAND AT NSAMBYA FROM UGANDA RAILWAYS CORPORATION TO UGANDA LAND COMMISSION

4.43
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPISES (Ms Angelline Osegge): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises -

THE SPEAKER: Could you just give a synopsis; you do not have to read the whole report.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I just want to make one point that this report has been ready since September 2012 and I want to pray that next time, we will have an opportunity to present the reports when they are ready.

On 29 August 2011, the Speaker received a petition from the Uganda Railways Tenants Association (URATA). The petitioners prayed that:
    1. Parliament carries out an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the transfer of approximately 57.93 acres of Uganda Railways Corporation Land at Nsambya to Uganda Land Commission (ULC).
    2. The tenants should be given priority to purchase the land.
    3. Parliament halts all the pending sale of URC properties and carries out investigations on how other URC properties were sold since 2005/06 when URC was concessioned.

The Speaker subsequently referred the petition to the committee and the terms of reference are as stipulated.

Circumstances surrounding the transfer of that Land in Nsambya from URC to the Uganda Land Commission

Madam Speaker, allow me to give a background before I go to the observations and recommendations of the committee. 

In his letters dated April 30 2010, 10 August 2010 and 29 September 2010, which are in annex 1, addressed to the then Minister for Local Government and Lands, H. E the President directed that approximately 57.93 acres of URC land at Nsambya be immediately transferred to ULC. According to the President, this was supposed to avail land that would be given to local investors who had previously been given land in the Nakawa-Naguru Estate. The Nakawa-Naguru Estate land would then be given to Opec Prime Properties Limited, a UK firm, to develop a satellite town. 

The developers who possessed titles of the Nakawa-Naguru Estate went to court seeking protection of their properties, which hampered Opec Prime Properties Company Limited from taking possession of the estate. However, following a consent judgement between the petitioners and the Attorney-General, it was agreed that the developers be allocated land elsewhere in compensation for their titles that would be cancelled at the Nakawa-Naguru Estate. The new land to be parcelled to compensate the developers later turned out to be the URC land in Nsambya. 

Subsequently, Cabinet, in a meeting held at Kampala on 13 October 2010, decided under minute 337(CT2010), annex 2, to allocate the URC land at Nsambya to ULC for reallocation to the private developer. The Uganda Railways Corporation Board agreed on this undertaking and informed the minister of the board’s resolution on this matter in a letter dated 6 April 2011. That is annex 3. 

Government undertook to pay URC for this land at a rate of Shs 1.2 billion per acre as per the evaluation report of the Chief Government Valuer. The proceeds from the above mentioned transaction were expected to alleviate Uganda Railways Corporation’s financial problems and enable the settlement of its long standing liability. The proceeds were also expected to provide a source of funding to sustain operations of URC while in transition. However, despite the transfer and subsequent allocation of the land to private investors, money has never been deposited on the divestiture account for URC to access.

The transfer of the land from URC to ULC was done in April 2011. The land was then reallocated to private local investors, some of whom had been allocated land at Naguru/Nakawa Estate and issued with land titles as explained above. 

As a result of these developments, the Uganda Land Commission requested Uganda Railways Corporation to provide vacant possession of the said land to the private developer. Subsequently, URC wrote to the tenants giving them notice to vacate and give vacant possession of the properties to the new owners. This ignited a standoff with the sitting tenants who, under their umbrella association, URATA, petitioned the Inspector-General of Government and Parliament to investigate the matter with the view of having Government give them first priority to purchase the non-core assets of URC being divested. 

The Committee Findings and Observations and Recommendations

Although in the President’s communication he noted that the land at the Nakawa-Naguru Estate, which had been allocated to local private investors was done in error, the committee established that the land had been lawfully leased to local private investors who were already in possession of these titles before a UK property developer called M/s Opec Prime Properties Limited was allocated the same land. M/S Opec Prime Properties Limited intended to establish a modern satellite town. 

Therefore, it turned out that the President was persuaded by the promise of Opec Prime Properties Limited to establish a satellite town.

Observation
The committee noted that while the land in Nakawa-Naguru was evacuated to pave way for the development of a satellite town, by the time the committee considered this report, such development had not yet commenced. The land had been hoarded but no construction activity was on-going at all. 

Recommendation
The committee recommends that the appropriate sessional committee of Parliament takes interest in the affairs of – (Interruption)

MR EKUMA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I have looked at this document that is being presented to us as a report and I see signatures appended here but I do not see the list of Members, who appended their signatures, attached. So, the authenticity of the signatures here seems to be questionable. Would it be procedurally right for us to proceed when this list is not attached for Members to look at the membership? 

THE SPEAKER: Has anyone said they did not participate in making this report? 

MR EKUMA: Madam Speaker, the authenticity of the signatures is my concern. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with it when we come to it. Please, present.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not know how signatures can appear without the names of the Members. On the copy that I have, the list is there. It could have been an omission during photocopying.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just to say that this report has been here for almost one year. Let us not dillydally over it. Please, present and we debate.

MS OSEGGE: Reasons why petitioners were not given first priority as sitting tenants to purchase the land.

The petitioners’ claim

The petitioners claimed that the transaction was maliciously done and that it was not in line with the procedure of the Uganda Railways Corporation divesture action plan, which entitles sitting tenants occupying such property first priority to buy the property when it was up for sale. 

They further argued that the transaction was not in line with the provisions of the Second Schedule to the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act Cap 98, which provides for a Government of broadening the basis of ownership among all Ugandans. They expected the minister to explore practical ways by which the Government could assist Ugandans to participate meaningfully in acquisition of interests in enterprises being divested or privatised or both.

The petitioners further accuse Government of not informing them that the land was up sale but only received information through grapevine in December 2010 that the land was due for redevelopment. The committee’s investigation on this matter revealed as follows:

The relationship that existed between the tenants and URC was purely landlord-tenant relationship. By the time of investigation, most of the former staff of URC had been paid their benefits and left the estate. Instead, a large number of non-staff tenants had taken up the houses and were paying rent directly to URC.

Pursuant to Section 3(2) (g) of the Second Schedule to PERD Act, the Minister of Finance recommended that the land be transferred directly to ULC, the divesture and reform implementation committee eventually recommended to URC under section of the act that the said land be transferred to Government. Subsequently, and pursuant to section 44(j) of the Second Schedule to the Act the ministry negotiated and agreed with the URC for the said land to be transferred to ULC for reallocation to developers. In turn, URC would be compensated by Government.

Observation

The committee observed that while the petitioners may have had to be considered for a first offer by URC as guided by the PERD Act, by the time they sought to enforce this claim, the legal facts on the ground had changed. The land in question did not belong to URC anymore but had been transferred to ULC for possible reallocation to developers. The divesture and reform implementation committee had waived the application of the URC to the sale of URC land at Nsambya. The petitioners, therefore, had no legal claim over the property.

Our recommendation is that in view of the fact that the petitioners did not have a legal basis for the petition, the committee recommends that the claim should not be upheld by this august House.

Some of the new investors had on humanitarian grounds offered to compensate the tenants for the cost of relocation. These included IUIU, among others. 

The committee advised the tenants to negotiate with the new title holders for the possibility of having their relocation costs paid to them.

Plans for redevelopment of the estate

Our findings

The petitioners expressed interest to buy and redevelop the land at Nsambya. Their development plan included the following; to develop the land into a modern satellite town. To put up 100 flats each with 16 units leading to a total of 1600 units. 700 of the units would be occupied by members of URATA and 900 units would be rented out. This would provide accommodation for 1600 families and create employment for their children.

The remaining quarter would be shopping malls and recreational facilities.

The funds would be raised from URATA members’ contribution and partnership with private developers.

Committee observations

During the hearings, the petitioners did not provide any evidence that they had the finances required to develop the estate to the state or standard envisaged by Government. Instead, they only presented artistic impression without any plans and financial proposals attached to them. Such a scenario would lead to development failures, creation of unplanned settlements in urban areas and growth of urban slums.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the current investor should be allowed to redevelop the land in accordance with authorised plans of the city.

Allocation of land at Nsambya to various beneficiaries; Madam Speaker, as indicated above, on 30th April 2010, the President of Uganda wrote to the Minister of Local Government requesting Government to transfer URC land at Nsambya to ULC. The transfer was expected to pave way for commencement of allocations of land to all the private local investors whose titles were allegedly issued in error in Naguru-Nakawa.

It was also expected to enable the developers Opec Prime Properties Ltd allocated land at Naguru-Nakawa to take over the entire project site in accordance with the Public-Private Partnership agreement signed between the developer and Government on 15 October 2007.

Subsequently, Cabinet approved allocation of specific acreage of land to the developers as follows - the table is there on page 11.

Findings and Observations

An examination of the beneficiaries indicated that some institutions such as National Library, Nakawa Disabled Vocational Training Institute, William Nkemba and Church of Uganda, which had initially been allocated land at Naguru-Nakawa estate preferred to remain as part of the redevelopment at Naguru-Nakawa and were integrated in the project shown in annex 5.

The committee observed and noted with concern that even if ULC was following approvals by Cabinet, it went ahead to make double allocations to institutions that originally agreed to remain at Nakawa-Naguru. This caused suspicion of foul play in the allocation.

The alleged allocations such as Nakawa Vocational Training Institute, Church of Uganda and the National Library of Uganda were not even aware that they had been allocated land at Nsambya.

The Secretary ULC informed the committee that ULC had corrected the anomaly but no evidence was provided to prove this assertion.

The committee recommends that the allocation of land to these three institutions be investigated by the Inspectorate of Government with a view to establishing the actual facts on the ground and undertaking corrective measures.

Our second finding was inappropriate allocation. During the hearing, the committee established that there were inappropriate land allocations. These were with respect to non-intended beneficiaries. While the transfer of the land from URC to ULC was intended to benefit local developers whose titles at Naguru-Nakawa were cancelled, the committee observed that companies other than those got allocations. These were Kampala International University and Fair Play Catering Services.

The committee observed that allocation of land to persons or institutions that were not intended beneficiaries of the land as per the Cabinet resolution was irregular on the part of ULC. We, therefore, recommend that the IGG should investigate these inappropriate allocations and take the necessary action against those found to be culpable.

Specific allocation of land to various local investors; allocation of land to CTM and Almanac. The committee learnt that CTM and Almanac was allocated six acres of land at Nsambya but they had not surrendered the title deed for the land at Naguru. Leasehold register volume 3781 Folio 17, plot No 28 to 30 measuring approximately 1.04 hectares and plot 24 to 26 on Nakawa Road measuring approximately 0.428 hectares, which was being compensated.

The said titles had already been mortgaged to Orient Bank.

Observation

Although the Nsambya land had been valued higher than that in Nakawa-Naguru, CTM and Almanac got 8.5 acres as opposed to six they had in Nakawa. 

Besides, the two entities had already mortgaged the title they were to forsake in Nakawa-Naguru. As such, the titles were not surrendered to Uganda Land Commission as a precondition for fresh allocation in Nsambya. The committee, therefore, suspects foul play in this allocation.

The committee recommends that CTM & Aluminous should not take possession of the allocation at Nsambya until they surrender a clean title for the Nakawa-Naguru land, which they had mortgaged to Orient Bank. Government should work out a mechanism with CTM & Aluminous and Orient Bank with a view of having a smooth transfer of titles back to Government and transferring the current mortgage to the new titles of CTM & Aluminous at Nsambya.

Allocation of land to Kampala International University (KIU)

According to KIU management, the university is constantly developing new programmes and expanding its infrastructure, a demand that necessitates it to constantly require land to accommodate its development needs. It was in the spirit of this need that KIU wrote to the Minister of Lands on 4 April 2006 applying for possible availability of land at Nsambya Police Quarters for its expansion. According to a letter by the Minister of Lands dated 8 May 2006, the President had written to the Minister of Internal Affairs requesting an allocation of 30 acres of land at Nsambya Police Barracks to KIU on condition that KIU constructs an alternative facility for Police elsewhere. This condition was agreed to by KIU in a letter dated 30 April 2007. 

The same was reiterated in their letter to the Secretary to the Uganda Land Commission on 28 August 2007. However, it later emerged that this particular piece of land had already been allocated to another developer. It was on this basis that KIU petitioned the President on 7 June 2010 for allocation of 20 acres of Nsambya Railway Corporation land instead of the former. 

Our Findings

On 29 September 2010, His Excellency, the President wrote to the Minister of Lands directing him to allocate 20 acres of URC land at Nsambya to KIU. This directive was effected on 10 May 2011 when the secretary to ULC allocated 10 acres of the same to KIU. 

Our Observation

Plots 16A-28A Nsambya Road comprised in FRV 440 Folio 17 measuring 11.41 acres, which was transferred to Uganda Land Commission in April 2011 at a cost of 33.808 billion (not paid) and subsequently allocated to KIU is claimed by a one Nantale Faridah and is therefore a subject of dispute in High Court Civil Suit No. 97 of 2011, Faridah Nantale v. Attorney-General and others. 

The committee could not delve into details of this particular allocation for fear of breach of the subjudice rule after FaridahbNantale’s lawyers brought this to the attention of the committee. See annex 6.

We also found that there was unauthorised allocation of land. The ULC allocated land that had not yet been transferred by URC to it and thus lacked the authority to do so. The plots were 1,3,5,7 and 9 on Kibuli Road and plots 1-3 Press Road at Nsambya, which still belong to URC. These plots were allocated to Kampala International University. The office of land registration proceeded to prepare lease agreements purportedly on the mistaken premises that the land belonged to ULC. When the land registration office later ascertained that the land did not belong to ULC, declined to issue titles to those plots as requested. 

Our Observation

In addition, the committee learnt that plots 1,3,5,7 and 9 on Kibuli Road and plots 1-3 Press Road at Nsambya belonging to URC are encumbered by a mortgage in favour of the defunct Uganda Commercial Bank. As a result, the Commissioner Land Registration turned down a request to transfer this land to KIU.

Our Recommendation

ULC should always do due diligence to avoid disputes arising from conflicting interests. In addition, ULC should be allowed to act independently other than through instructions. 

Allocation of Land to Fair Play Catering Services
In 1986, Fair Play Catering Services applied to Kampala City Council for land to construct a hotel and it was offered 1.6 hectares on plot Nos.64-68 Kitante Road at a premium of Shs 250 million and ground rent of Shs 25 million for a period of five years, extendable to 49 years. Part of this land is where the Golf Course Hotel was later built. After Fair Play had paid all the necessary charges and was waiting for the land office to issue a certificate of title, the town clerk ordered that no development should be carried out on that land, citing technical problems. 

On 18 October 1995, KCC offered the same land, less in quantity, measuring 1.365 hectares to Fair Play Catering Services for hotel development. 

On 19 December 1995, Fair Play Catering Services was informed in a letter written by the then Town Clerk, Mr Gordon Mwesigye that the then Minister of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning, hon. Tom Butime, in his letter referenced, had frozen the hotel development site for any further development under section 42 of the Public Land Act and under Articles 237 and 239 of the new Constitution. 

Fair Play later learnt that the same land was offered to Betuco Ltd who upon acquisition, sold it to the current owners who constructed Golf Course Hotel. It then filed a suit in court which KCC decided to settle by offering alternative land at Naguru Estate comprising plots 72-76 Naguru Road. They again met all the required conditions but they were later told that KCC could not fulfil this offer because the Central Government had taken over the land to develop a satellite city.

Fair Play was finally allocated land on plots 14-18 Barracks Drive, measuring approximately 1.49 hectares in Nsambya.

Our Observations

During considerations, Fair Play brought to the attention of the committee many years’ long battles with Government over allocation of land after it paid premiums. The allocation in Nakawa-Naguru was meant to take care of this long-standing issue but once again, it was cancelled. Fair Play expressed fears that it may not get the alleged land because at that time, it had not yet received any documentation. 

The committee suspects fraud on the part of former Town Clerk, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, who wrongfully denied Fair Play the right to land even after paying premiums. 

Our Recommendation 

After several years of frustration by Government officials, Fair Play Catering Services should have been a priority for land allocation at Nsambya to avoid unnecessary litigation that could cost taxpayers’ money.

Madam Speaker, Uganda Land Commission needs to facilitate the company with land titles to enable this local company commence its intended development. If this is not done, Government might be forced by court to pay the developer substantial costs. 

Further investigations should be carried out by the IGG to establish circumstances under which Betuco acquired the land; and Gordon Mwesigye for possible abuse of office; and the then minister for possible influence peddling. 

Allocation of land to House of Dawda
House of Dawda had been allocated land at Naguru comprised in LRV 3841 Folio 7 plot No.10-22 Nakawa Road measuring 4.06 hectares. On surrendering this lease title, they were then allocated land comprising of that FRV 440 Folio 17 and FRV 440 Folio 18 at Nsambya on the basis of an agreed ratio of 0.75 acres to one acre of land held at Nakawa. Uganda Land Commission then processed a lease title in their favour for 3.064 hectares for five years renewable 49 years at no additional cost. 

Our observations 

The committee established that House of Dawda was ready to compensate the tenants to pave way for commencement of development. The committee commenced this initiative by the private developer of plot 24(a) measuring approximately 3.064 hectares. 

The committee recommends that tenants take up the offer by House of Dauda to settle this matter amicably so that the tenants vacate the land with no animosity. 

Allocation of land to Access Uganda Ltd

Madam Speaker, Access Uganda Ltd was allocated plot 16(a) to 22(a) on Nsambya Road measuring approximately 5.376 hectares on 1 December, 2008. Our findings show that this land is a subject of judicial proceedings and the committee could not delve much into it. 

There were also issues of allocation of land to Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU). This university was allocated ten hectares of land at Nakawa on 4 October, 2006 and the land title for the land was issued on 10 April, 2007. However, on 20 October, 2009, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development informed IUIU that the allocation was in error and the IUIU should return the land title for cancelation. 

In 2009, the university took legal action to retain ownership of the land. The Attorney-General opted to settle the matter out of court and consequently Government gave IUIU a proposal to get another piece of land in Nsambya. 

In consideration, therefore, Government of Uganda undertook to process a lease title in favour of IUIU for land measuring approximately 2.977 hectares comprising plot 10 to 20 on Kibuli Road. 

The committee takes note of the laxity by Uganda Land Commission to stick to established procedures for land allocation. It is also deplorable that the commission seems to lack independence but acts most times on presidential directives. 

The committee is concerned that this trend paves way for abuse of established regulations and discretionary powers by responsible parties. 

Recommendations

    1. Parliament should investigate the competence of the ULC on managing land on behalf of Government of Uganda. 
    2. Ugandans and other investors who identify suitable land for development should use the established channels of land acquisition other than applying directly to the President for the same. 
    3. A new legal framework should be put in place with a view of making ULC more independent, and able to exercise its mandate without undue influence from any other authority. 

Allocation of land to Charles Kimera

Charles Kimera was allocated 0.458 hectares of land at Nsambya on plot 33 Katalima Road, FRV440/17FRV Folio 18. Then, land was also allocated to National Library of Uganda. It should be recalled that the National Library of Uganda was one of the local beneficiaries of land at Naguru/Nakawa who were to be incorporated in M/s Opec Prime Properties Project. 

A memorandum of understanding was signed between the Government of Uganda and National Library of Uganda in which it is specified that the developer undertook to provide space for National Library Uganda’s building within and in accordance with its master plan. 

Madam Speaker, we go to the status of the non-core assets of Uganda Railway Corporation in Kenya. This is because after getting this, we undertook to visit other countries to see the status of the assets of Uganda Railways. 

The committee undertook an oversight visit to Nairobi, Kisumu, Mombasa, Kenya to assess the current condition of non-core assets of URC. Under the privatisation policy of government, section 3 of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Act, established the Divesture and Reform Implementation Committee as a responsible body for the implementation of Government Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Program.

The DRIP authorised the divesture of Uganda Railways Corporation in April, 2006 by way of a 25 year concession to Rift Valley Railways (RVR) Uganda Ltd. Under the divesture agreement with RVR, only core assets listed in the concession agreement would be managed by RVR. Consequently, Government under the URC divesture action plan earmarked non-core assets or properties as the source of funds to sustain the operations of URC in transition and were to be disposed of in phases. However, this was not done. 

Status of the properties of URC in Nairobi

At the time of the committee’s visit, the property comprised block 1.3 parcel no. 405 South Sea in Mugoya Estate in Nairobi measuring approximately 0.0329 hectares of land. It was registered in Uganda Railways Corporation of P.O. Box 7150 Kampala under leasehold tenure from the Government of the Republic of Kenya for a term of 99 years starting February 1, 1986. 

According to a copy of the land title availed to the committee, there was not any registered encumbrance. The committee established that from about November 15 and December 15 2010, the property was valued by SM Kasa and Property Consults and CB Richards Elise at the request of the privatisation Unit. This was aimed at establishing the market value of the asset. The valuation report could, however, not be retrieved and availed to the committee immediately. 

Tenancy and terms of tenancy

On 1 August 2009, URC rented out the property to Ms Rebecca Owul of P.O. Box 62502 Nairobi, Kenya at a consideration of Kenya Shs 30,000 per month. The tenant first paid rent to the URC account. Later, the tenant was requested to pay rent to RVR. In September 2010, the tenant was again requested to pay the rent on the URC account on the basis that the property had reverted to URC. 

We observed that while a one-year tenancy agreement was signed between URC and Ms Rebecca Owul, on 2 November, 2009, the tenant continued to occupy the building upon the expiration of the tenancy agreement. This makes the tenant-landlord relations weak and governed not by formal agreement but informal arrangement that could be a basis of fraud and under-declaration or over declaration of rent. 

The committee recommends that URC should as a matter of urgency formalise its relationship with Ms Rebecca Owul to avoid unnecessary speculation over the property. 

The Status of URC Property in Kenya

When the committee visited the property, it was found to be under management of URC. The property is situated on plot 12/252 Tom Mboya Drive Miriam Mani Estate Kisumu City, Kenya. The property is a residential four bedroom house, which seemed unmaintained at all. The property is currently being rented out to Caroline Akinyi Okach an employee of RVR Kenya. 

The status of ownership

The property was part of the core assets of URC that were transferred to RVR as part of the concessional agreement in 2006. However, in July/August, 2009 the property was reverted back to URC due to its poor state. The tenancy agreements seen by the committee was between URC and the tenant, Caroline Akinyi Okach. However, there was no title provided to prove actual ownership of the property. 

Revenue accrual

The said property generates monthly rent to URC of Kshs 15,000 which is approximately – just translate that to Uganda shillings. It is banked on the URC account as shown in the tenancy agreement and transaction receipts. 

The committee observed that while the property was found to be under the management of the URC, it was not possible to verify that the title deed had been reverted back to URC from RVR Ltd. 

The committee recommends that URC should take full control of the property in question and ensure security of tenure and of title.

Status of URC property in Nyali, Mombasa, Kenya

According to the URC schedule of non-core assets phase two submitted to the committee, URC has one residential house in Nyali farm garden in Mombasa on an area of 0.440 hectares of land. The property was held under leasehold from 1st August 1987 for a period of 99 years. 

The land at Nyali has one residential house, a swimming pool, a car port, a borehole and a house water pump, which pumps water directly to the swimming pool and the house. The compound is fairly big and well maintained by the tenants. The house is in a fairly good state; repairs were made on the house, swimming pool and on the water pump. The plumbing system was reinstated and renovations were made on the floor and ceiling, which was leaking and the walls were repainted.

Ownership and tenancy

The property is occupied by a tenant, Mr Brown Ondego who is the Group Chief Executive of Rift Valley Railways. The house was released to Mr Brown Ondego upon signing of the lease agreement in 2000. Mr Ondego’s representative informed the committee that the lease is renewable every after one year and the rent of KShs 30,000 is remitted monthly to the URC account directly until such a time as URC will decide otherwise.

The committee observed that while the house was fairly maintained and was found in a good state with utility bills paid promptly, it could not be ascertained that the rent was paid directly to URC as documentation was lacking.

Our recommendation, as a committee, is that URC should consider retaining some of the non-core assets and should examine whether some core assets would be required in future in case there is need to revitalise the railways transport system in the country, as already being planned by Kenya Railways Corporation.

All tenancy agreements and transactions between the parties should be formalised to avoid speculation by either party. If it is decided that the URC property abroad should be divested, this should be done in accordance with the laid down disposal procedures and in any case, revaluation of the property should be done at the time of divestiture.

Whereas Section 1(1) of the Second Schedule to the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act envisages that in the implementation of the Divestiture Policy due regard should be given to the government policy of broadening the base of ownership among all Ugandans, and whereas the same provisions urge the Ministry of Finance to consult with the Divestiture Implementation Committee with a view to explore practical ways in which the government can assist Ugandans participate meaningfully in such acquisitions, Section 25 of the PERD Act is to the effect that the Minister of Finance exercises the discretion to sell or not to sell assets of a corporation undergoing divestiture to its employees. Besides, by the time of this transaction, the claimants were no longer employees of Uganda Railways Corporation.

In a similar claim by tenants who petitioned the Inspector General of Government for not having been given first priority to purchase URC property, the claim was rejected by the Inspectorate of Government on grounds that the tenants had ceased being employees of URC.

The land transferred to URC and given to the developers, as indicated in President’s letters, was done so when the ministry and the committee exercised their discretionary powers under Section 25 of the PERD Act to the contrary and acted under the provisions of Section 5(1) of the Act. Section 3(2) (g) of the Second Schedule of the Act and Section 4(4) (j) of the Second Schedule to the Act, in the opinion of the committee, this petition was not meritorious. The tenants who were paying rent to URC had neither legal rights to compensation nor that to first opportunity to purchase.

I beg to move that this report is adopted by this august House. As I resume my seat, I beg to lay on Table the minutes that culminated into the report that has been presented before the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Vice Chairperson of COSASE and the members of the committee. Hon. Members, the report says there was no merit in the petition but there are issues that come to light and one of them is the recurring issue of the Uganda Land Commission.

As you recall, when the Appointments Committee reported last in this House, we had just approved the members of the Land Commission. We really appealed to Government to make an enabling law to govern the Uganda Land Commission and we were advised that it was in very advanced stages. I have not seen it to date. I think it is clear that many things are still going wrong because of the absence of that law but also, there are those other issues that have come to light and Members are free to debate. 

5.27
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One thing is apparent about land scandals in this country and I am yet to be advised about who has the competence to determine who an investor is in this country. Is it the President? Is it Uganda Investment Authority? Because scandal after scandal, you trace the President’s letter and when it comes to these land bonanzas, which have taken place in this country, you see the President usurp the powers of Uganda Land Commission.

My understanding would be that it is up to Uganda Land Commission to determine who qualifies to get land and who does not qualify because when you look at the annex on this report, you see Cabinet delving into which individuals should get land. The question is; how did these individuals get to know that there is this land? Cabinet is acting as if it were Uganda Land Commission. 

It is on this basis that the President is directing them that give so and so 10 acres or 20 acres of land.

Madam Speaker, we have spoken about this subject and if the Executive was interested in what we have been talking about, they would be borrowing a leaf from what we are saying. Let me summarise it again for them.

What we have said on the Floor of this Parliament is, let the institutions of Government do their work. Let Uganda Investment Authority determine who an investor is and let Uganda Land Commission determine who qualifies to get a piece of land.

For instance, you are telling us that the tenants who are licensees in those houses do not have capacity to develop them, but no proof has been furnished that these brokers of land that you are allocating land do have that capacity.

Madam Speaker, as you may all be aware, I am the Vice Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee. When we met Uganda Land Commission regarding the Nakawa-Naguru estate land, we discovered that these people were also brokers. We were informed they had even submitted an application to subdivide this same piece of land. People were relocated from that place and they are telling us that these are investors. What is the size of their capital and where is their money?

We have heard statements that those people have got money. Where is it? If they are investors from UK, do we have a guarantee from the Government of the UK that these are investors? How financially sound are these people? What yard stick do you use to tell that a Ugandan has no capacity to develop a piece of land, but that a foreigner has that capacity?

I will end with one last example of Shimoni. The facts are clear. Kingdom Hotel developers had applied for the land but later, another company applied for the same. The lease was transferred from the original person to whom it was given, who did not fulfil the lease terms, to another person.

What is obtaining when you pass there is that it was supposed to be a five-star hotel but they have put up only some parts and the lower part is on sale. In another part, they have put up a washing bay, yet these were supposed to be investors. 

Why is that happening? It is the same Uganda Land Commission, which gave them the place; such investors emanate from the same place.

In summary, I am saying we want to see Uganda Investment Authority determine who an investor is. We want to see Uganda Land Commission deciding who should take the land. Short of that, we shall sit in this House and my good friend hon. Migereko will come and defend the investors they sent to him - (Member timed out_)

5.31
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the thorough work done. I stand to support the recommendation that some non-core assets should not be sold. As Infrastructure Committee, that was one of our recommendations in our report; that URC should not sell off these assets since we are revamping that department. 

I would request the government to give us assurance now that they will comply because sometimes we deliberate on important issues here but department officials continue doing Ugandans a disservice. They were about to sell all estates along the old railway line but non-core and core assets should all be retained. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are three. First, we now need assurance from the government about the money that was supposed to be deposited from the sales of the URC land. 

Last week, we listened to a petition and the findings of the committee on the pensions of former URC workers. It turned out that the government had not honoured the obligations to pay for this land. We now want it clearly stated on the Floor; is the money going to be available; is it available; where is it so that URC can receive the money due to it and they sort out their obligation?

Two, while I thank the committee, I would have loved them to look at the fact that though the petitioners had no legal basis, but still the way they treat people who are being evicted these days is horrible. I thought the committee would have paid attention to this and advised the people who manage evictions even if there is no legal basis. 

Madam Speaker, you should have passed Naguru area when the people were being evicted. You would not believe that this is how we treat our people, Ugandans. What you see in Kasokoso and the deployment of those huge vehicles is what was going on in Naguru. It turns out a year after that actually, even there is no work going on in that particular place. I think it is important that we recommend to the government and the agencies that handle this type of work to be decent in trying to handle Ugandans even when they have no legal claim. Try to handle them as humanly as is practical.

Thirdly, I just have a lingering question; we followed through the concession of RVR in this House and it turns out we do not see anything much that that concession has delivered. All I hear now is that the government is proposing disposal of everything; let the government tell us; what is the future of railway transport in this country? You want to sell the land where you could expand and everything about railways is being sold; what is the plan? How about this vision 2040, which you brought here and said you were going to do railway transport; are your trains going to fly in the air? What is happening? 

I think Uganda Land Commission needs to help us; we need to think about some land for strategic interests of this country. Everything is being sold to people who are called investors, some of whom unfortunately are the ones we see implicated in each and every report – (Member timed out_)

5.36
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe county South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought hon. Migereko was a minister and should not really clamour for time because he has time allotted to him to respond.

On page 12 of this document, I see a recommendation that the committee made that the allocation of land to the three institutions be investigated by the Inspectorate of Government. But I think in this report alone, there is good ground for suspicion in the allocation of land. I think the police should take charge of this investigation to find the criminality and prosecute accordingly. I beg to recommend.

It looks like the President is running most of these institutions, and I have heard you making passionate appeals to strengthen the Uganda Land commission. I do not know whether we shall need to kneel down or to pray to God in order to make this government respond to that to ensure that these matters are taken seriously. If it is a style of leadership, then the President should tell us that he is going to rule by decree and we will not even need to strengthen laws in which such deals are being made. 

I wonder whether we have departments for urban planning because I doubt that the President as a person even if he is the President of Uganda has the audacity to plan for the city or for anywhere some of these developments are going. For instance, if you say that Kampala International University be allocated land at Nsambya as long as it can develop another facility elsewhere; where exactly? In Gulu, in Juba, in Nakasongola; where exactly would the President be happy that such a facility be established? What is very vexatious is that these commissions which are established do comply – where does the President get the information? What informs his decisions for these allocations and what can Parliament do apart from pleading with the government? 

Yet we know, the culpable person who is causing all these troubles is in the Office of the President and he is occupying the number one position? Can Parliament exercise more power than just pleading? Should we just pray? I think that this Parliament – (Member timed out_)

5.40
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairperson for the good, brief and direct report. There is only one gap, which I see in this report; it is not pin-pointing whom we shall hold accountable. You need to be firm and tell us that these people are responsible. But if you just present such a report, we are going to debate and we shall not have a lesson. So, whom should we hold responsible for each particular mess?

For instance, how does the President come to know that there is land in Nsambya – you tell us? They talk of a ministerial committee – who are the people on this committee? Tell us so that we have where to start from.  

Like hon. Alaso has said, Parliament needs to protect the tenants. If investors are willing to pay something to these tenants, we should not just say that they go like that. You have even written here in your report on page 9 under recommendations, “The committee recommends that the claim should not be upheld by this august House”. We are not assisting the tenants. We are wasting Government resources because in some recommendations you have identified where the problem is. 

For instance, page 13, you have observed that allocation of land to persons, institutions that were not the intended beneficiaries as per the Cabinet resolution was irregular on the part of the ULC. Then you are again sending this to the IGG; you have clear evidence. Why should we send this again to the IGG? Money has been spent, Parliament has done its work, again you send to IGG? How many years is this going to take? This report has taken about four years already. When shall we get a solution for this?

5.42
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest in thanking the committee and its leadership for the good report.

On page 19 of the report - in one of the recommendations the committee says Parliament should investigate the competence of ULC in managing land on behalf of Government of Uganda. Uganda Land Commission has been mentioned a number of times in this report, and it is also not surprising it is like that because there have been so many cases in which ULC is mentioned in seemingly fraudulent transactions related to land and yet this is the body that is supposed to be the custodian of land on behalf of Government.

I would be interested in hearing from the minister responsible, what does he know about the competence and performance of ULC and what does he intend to do? This is becoming an embarrassment. You talk of Kyambogo University scandals; it was ULC, which parcelled off land without the knowledge of the governing council. What is the institution really benefiting us as Uganda? I hope the minister will ably inform me on that. 

The other bit is what hon. Mwiru has stated. I think the most lucrative venture in this country is to position oneself as an investor. Who is an investor anyway? I would think that an investor should be able to add pronounced value to the lives of Ugandans. But if you are coming here as an agent, then what kind of investment is that? Would it qualify you to deserve land, which the Ugandans have paid for?

On the issue of UIA determining who is an investor and qualifying land allocation or any other benefit to them, I think there should be another body besides UIA, which should set the criteria, the process and the guarantee required of an investor. You cannot be an investor when you are just coming here to get free land and then sell it out. You should be able to prove to Ugandans that you have the money to invest and be able to add something on our economy.

5.45
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done but I have some issues. We have always talked of developing a satellite city and we have talked about a satellite city in Naguru well knowing that Naguru is within the metropolitan city of Kampala. There is nowhere in the world where you can have a satellite city within a metropolitan city. Already the reception is not good. 

The principle is that we are getting land to develop a satellite city but we cannot develop a satellite city within a metropolitan city. So, there is someone who is not telling the truth and it is that person that we need to know, because we may as well take this for foolery. We want the general public to believe that actually, we are going to have a good city, yet you cannot have a city within a city.

The other issue is the competence of ULC. I sit on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and a number of times we have interacted with ULC. Actually, ULC does not know how much land it manages and that is why they allocate land and later, they ask themselves whether they are the ones that allocated it. Unless we come up with a clear mechanism on how land can be allocated, we shall continue to have such issues.

The other issue is URC. We met URC as the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we advised them to stop selling off land because they had what they call core assets and non-core assets. We discovered that what they call non-core is what is near the city because it is more valuable than what is outside the city. They have emphasised selling off what is within and around the city because that one fetches a bigger value in terms of money so they consider it to be non-core and sell it off. Even last week, I saw URC still advertising land in the papers - (Member timed out_)

5.49
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing this issue about the land of Naguru-Nakawa and the railway land in Nsambya to this House. It is true that we need to develop this area of Nakawa and Naguru because our city is growing. We cannot continue to have these ramshackle houses around, which are dangerous for people to live in.  

However, there is a problem with the process. This Naguru-Nakawa land - the tenants were evicted long time ago. Up to now, there is nothing on the ground. There is a problem between the Central Government and KCCA regarding the land of Nakawa-Naguru. The investor was ready to put up new buildings but KCCA came in and stopped the project.

The tenants who have been evicted are all waiting to come back when the houses are developed, but up to now, nothing is happening. The problem is the Land Commission - for example, what plans did they have for the land in Nsambya?

I expected the Uganda Land Commission to have a big plan for this land. We would have housing estates, shopping malls, a school and other infrastructure. But here we are; everybody who wants to invest comes in, whether a university like KIU or other investors. We do not even know what they are going to put up there. Actually, we are heading for another confused city which you are talking about because we do not know who is to take what, at what time. 

Then this land commission, they have become bosses of Government. They sell the land the way they want, to whom they want, without any plan, without any permission from the right people as to who has to buy the land. Now, you have seen here some people buy land twice from - (Member timed out_)

5.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for a good report. I am deeply concerned about the Ugandan properties that cost colossal sums of taxpayers’ money to acquire but are just rotting away. As the chairperson was reading the report, the same scenario of former Coffee Marketing Board properties in Mombasa was playing in my mind - huge properties acquired in prime areas really rotting away.

The other day my committee had a chance to visit the European Parliament and we visited our embassy in Brussels. Even I, an individual, Jovah Kamateeka, would not work in an office like what I saw in the embassy building in Brussels- a building that is rotting away! Some rooms even closed because of the moist that is eating away the walls.
And so, really, my question is: when we give out land to the investors and they pay, why don’t we use this money to renovate and to maintain our buildings abroad that are the image of Uganda abroad? Even here in Uganda - government buildings, why have we failed to maintain our properties and yet, we talk of development? The money that came out of the privatised properties - why is it that we have failed to maintain those that we retained?

So, Madam Speaker, I recommend to the minister really that we have an inventory of all our properties both abroad and here - as government properties - and we have a phased out plan of vetting these buildings and then we can earn a lot more money from these properties. But it is painful to see these buildings rotting away and yet, a lot of our money is in them.

Let me just give you one example. In Brussels, we failed to maintain a building because we said we did not have money, yet, we paid twice as much to demolish that building. The plot now is in the middle of a residential area. It is just bush, harbouring thieves and criminals and that is Uganda for you abroad? Can we improve our image? Thank you.

5.55
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee has tried as much as possible to do a good job but what I am wondering is, who is responsible for all the mess that is mentioned here? We are talking about a commission but there must be individuals who should be pointed out to be able to answer for all the faults that are in here. 

On page 6, we are talking about monies that were brought in and the proceeds were expected as a source of financing. Where was the money deposited? I think we should have gone ahead to find out: where is this money? Who was responsible for it? And who is supposed to answer for this?

When we talk about Parliament investigating the competence of ULC, who are the people in ULC? I expect that when a commission is set up, there are technical people who are supposed to advise even the President because even if the President writes to you, you have the mandate to advise that, “This is the procedure we are supposed to take,” but if you simply go ahead and act according to the letter that is given to you, then you have no technical competence to be in that office. So, I believe that we should be able to pin point at individuals in this commission who are responsible for all this mess.

And when we are talking about Ugandans and investors who identify suitable land, really, it goes back to the individual. There must be people who are identifying this land and there must be people who have the mandate to act and are not working. So can we put it to the individuals who are at fault in the Uganda Land Commission? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think what you should be asking is, how do foreign investors identify land in Uganda and apply for it?   

5.58
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report presented. I have three issues to speak about arising from this report.

But first of all, Madam Speaker, I have always thought that probably the public will lose the confidence to submit petitions to this House. Many times I think that when they bring these petitions, it is urgent to them and it is like the last recourse for them. When they do not see answers forthcoming sometimes, I think it disappoints the public. I have seen we have petitions in our committees but they are not moving as fast.

I have always had a question which has disturbed me but I am happy that the issue of PERD has come again. If records on this PERD are available in this House, Madam Speaker, you will advise me but I have always asked a question: how much money was realised from the sale of Government properties and how was it applied? I would be very interested in knowing that. If it is within possession of Parliament, I would be advised on that.  

Madam Speaker, when you look at this, you find that the board of railways accepted to enter into this arrangement with Government because they had issues to sort out. They had debts to sort out to any effect the railways to continue running. But you find that out of all this - about Shs 70 billion- the report says nothing was deposited on the account. So can’t Government accept that they are responsible for the collapse of the railways in this country? Who is to blame if it is not Government, which even failed to honour its part such that the railways cannot continue running?

Madam Speaker, when you look at the rent paid from the properties in Mombasa, I get concerned, because the house is on one acre and there is a swimming pool and a luxurious environment. It is only going at Shs 900,000 per month. Somebody wonders whether this is the fair value for which this property would be going. I think something is seriously wrong with how we handle these public properties but - (Interruption)

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is concerned about the rent of the properties in Mombasa, but the committee has shown you in the report that what is recognised by URC is only one house and the committee has brought out many aspects surrounding that house. That means that in the calculation for the rent, URC did not consider the swimming pool, the car, the house and other amenities surrounding the house. Actually, the committee is bringing to our attention the fact that many things were not costed at the time of determining the rent.

I am a member of the committee and we made this report deliberately to show the House that URC missed out things either deliberately or by omission. So, Parliament is supposed to review those things and make due recommendations according to that one. But the committee has brought the -

THE SPEAKER: But you are now submitting.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you for that information but I do not think that it is quite departing from what I was speaking.

I want to end my submission by requesting you to demand from Government – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude your statement, hon. Lubogo. I think there is something you wanted to finish. What do you want us to demand?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, my concern is the value of the public assets that were disposed of and the amount of money that arose from it, and how it was applied because it has come up in this report on the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture. I thank you.

6.02
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the time has come for this Government to provide us with a proper annual record of the status of land it has, at least in urban areas across the country. I think that would help curb scenarios similar to Kasokoso and the rest.

I note with a lot of concern on Page 16 where it is noted that in 1986, a piece of land measuring 1.6 hectares. The same piece of land measured differently in 1995, where it was measuring 1.36 hectares. Madam Speaker, has land begun to be a moveable property in Uganda?

Two, who is the custodian of public land in Uganda? Somewhere, the President is allocating land and then KCC had already allocated the same. Somewhere, Cabinet directs for allocation of URC land to the Uganda Land Commission. The directive is made in 2010. Uganda Railways Corporation sits in 2011 to have a resolution for the same. In Kyambogo University today, part of the university land belongs to a private investor on the orders of the minister.

In KCCA, as we speak, a lot of land around the city is being given out and then they tell us that as leaders of Kampala that that is a mandate of KCCA. Now, somewhere, it is the mandate of the Head of State of this country. Who is responsible for Government land in Uganda such that we have that person responsible accountable for the mess over land in the country? I thank you very much.

6.05
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to highlight that the bulk of the suffering of this whole liberalisation policy is being borne by our city, Kampala. That is why it is a shame to look at because it cannot be planned. The land is haphazardly allocated and there is a mafia clique – (Interjections) – for those who want to know them, there are some agents around Kampala who look at an empty plot in a prime area like Nakasero or Kololo. They do their research between the land office, Entebbe and the LCs. When they realise which department or under which ministry the plot falls, they go to see the minister most times and it is the minister in charge of that docket who normally approves its takeover and they enter a deal – (Interjections) - I have information. 

I would like to talk of a recent case in Kololo; Plot 44 Winsor Crescent, which was the former headquarters of Special Branch of Police bought by our Government in 1963. The Chinese have taken it over – just last week. Who okayed Police property to be taken over by Chinese? I now know that a certain minister is the one who took them to survey it. 

So, I would want this Parliament to interest itself in our prime areas and all ministries to lay on Table their property because if you tell ULC, they will say that they do not know. What happens is that there are surveyors and in case there is school land in Kampala - and we know that school land has been parcelled - what happens is that, the ULC tells the agents to go and tell the institution to write a letter to say that they no longer have interest and that is how the scenario moves. If it is URC, it will write that they no longer have interest. The person who writes that letter normally gets a kick back because he or she has okayed for ULC to start the process. 

This is the same scenario in every plot in Kampala at least. You will be shocked to hear that even headmasters and headmistress of our schools in Kampala wrote that they no longer have interest in some land belonging to their schools.  So, I think we need to – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Nabila had some important information; half a minute to give us that important information.     

MS NAGGAYI: So, I think that we should ask the Leader of Government Business to reiterate Government position on the privatisation policy. Has it worked? Is it working? Do we have the money? Do we have the property or should we revoke it? I think that the Leader of Government Business should come to this House and tell us if they are ready to review it or whether they are happy with the privatisation policy. We cannot see the money made out of it and probably we need our property back. At least, that is safer for us to be looking at our property until Government finds a plan for that property. But privatising this country and the city – I think the whole of the city has been privatised. 

I think we need a resolution from this House to save our property. We will lament and actually get heart attacks over these properties of Uganda unless we find a resolution as Parliament and move a motion for the Leader of Government Business to come and inform us on the progress of the privatisation, and liberalisation of our properties. I thank you. 

6.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the committee for the good work done. Now, you have seen how public land is being given away. Now we must thank those past governments, which built public institutions and really find out why the current one, which should be a good one, is not doing the right thing, but is instead giving away Police land, schools and the rest.

I would like us to first interest ourselves in knowing the owners of these companies because if you see CTM Uganda Ltd, you may discover that the shareholders are some of these ministers in front of us and if we do not do that, we are in problems. Let me give an example of CTM Uganda Ltd – (Interjections) - she was a Principal Private Secretary to the President and William Nkemba is her son and they are even the owners of Aluminious Properties. So, you can see that only one family is taking over 10 acres of land using their own methods of operation.

Secondly, I agree with the committee that those who were there had no legal basis but even those who went there had no legal basis. I think if they were considering everybody, they should have started with those who were there. But you will find that those who were considered are those who were heavily connected. 

Why should the people of Uganda look for Shs 72 billion to pay for this land for people to take it for free? I think we are being unfair. In fact, we are committing genocide because this Shs 72 billion should have been used to do something else but instead, we are getting it to pay for Kampala International University, which is run by one of the proprietors; our friend called Basajjabalaba who is good at issues to do with land in Uganda. Remember Uganda Broadcasting Council, Shs 169 billion and others. 

Anyway, the Bible says; “To him that has, more will be added unto them”. But this is terrible and I think it is getting out of hand. His appetite is too much and one wonders how he reaches in State House. There must be a conduit in State House. They should know somebody in State House who takes his petitions there. I think they take it with a letter to the President to sign, stating that we direct you to give these people land.

Let me give an example; I have property in Mbale. These people did not survey it. So, somebody came after being allocated the land and started fixing mark stones and even fixed some in my house. I thought they should first survey before they come and give you a title and part of the land was for the sewerage company. I asked the person, “How did you get the land, this property has been there for many years?” He told me, “In Uganda Land Commission, you do not need to go with a survey report. You just need to go with something drawn and you will get land”.

So, I want to put it to the Minister of Lands that Uganda Land Commission must be a dangerous place and if you do not interest yourself in it, you will have a big problem.

We are talking about over 59 acres but I can see 56.5 acres. That means 3.93 acres must be somewhere. Again, the minister must explain to us who has kept the balance before we can look for the culprits because maybe he is now the beneficiary of the same. But if he is not, he should tell us who has the balance.

My recommendation is that all those who got land must pay for it. We should not pay for it. That is the first step. They must pay this money and this is the money we should use to pay Uganda Railways Corporation, which should in turn use it to pay the pensioners.

There is an attachment of a letter here, which I want to interest Members in. It is written by my brother Michael Werikhe Kafabusa. If you read the letter, which is annex 2- there was the first one he wrote. In that one, he adds Kampala International University and says the Cabinet cleared it in the minutes. When you look at the Cabinet minutes, you do not see Kampala International University being given ten acres. But they are saying it was a Cabinet decision.

At the back of it, he made his own addendum and says: “Colour Press Services and Fair Play Catering Services” despite the fact that Fair Play Catering had problems - I do not see the clearance from Cabinet to add it on the list.

You know me, I do not give a damn. One of the culprits is my brother-in-law and he should answer for this crime of allocating land, which he was not directed to allocate. At an appropriate time, this is one of the culprits we should recommend because my brother Fox was taken in. He should also be able to answer. 

Madam Speaker, how did he bring these people in when Cabinet never cleared them? Maybe, there is another Cabinet minute and I would be glad to see it. If there is nothing, hon. Michael Werikhe Kafabusa must answer for these three crimes. He must explain. At least, for KIU I see the President directed but for these other two, I do not see the directive of the President. So, he must answer and tell us where he put the money he got from that directive.

I have always asked a question; how do people know about land? This is despite the fact that at that time, we even had a minister from Mbale. We never knew about the land. How did these ones know about it? I think this is the reason we must get up and ask the Minister of Lands to tell us how they knew about the land.

Uganda Investment Authority is responsible for investment, as my brother hon. Mwiru has said and Uganda Land Commission is responsible for land. How does the President assess these investors? I have looked for Opec on the stock exchange but it is not there. We do not even have the accounts of that company. So, how did the President know that Opec can do it? Who lied to the President? That is the question I always ask. 

Do our people leave this country or they stop in Entebbe? If they go out of the country and come back with investors who do not have even a balance sheet, how do we do this?

Madam Speaker, I would be happy if the Minister of Lands gave us the balance sheet of Opec capacity that this company can develop and evidence that it has undertaken similar projects in this world. I have searched for it on the stock exchange and it is not there. 

I have searched in individual companies and what I notice is that, it is something registered in these tax havens in - I saw something in Bermuda and Bermuda is a place where money is stolen and taken and then eventually, it comes back to Uganda in another form as if they are loans. So, what is this Opec which is making us pay another Shs 72 billion?

Who should answer for this? The first culprit to answer is the Minister in charge of Lands because he gave away land, which was not his. If it was his, where is the evidence that it was his? Of course, you are answering on behalf of Uganda Land Commission.

Two, I think the President should also explain to us who told him that there was free land to give away. You may recall the Binaisa Government when the current President told Binaisa that he was a bad man -

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am about to finish. He said he was a bad man but now, he is also doing worse things than Binaisa. So, who do we treat better, Binaisa or our President who told him that there was free land?

Three, we heard that this land was under the PU. Who removed the land from PU; because, despite the fact that PU has also stolen, for this case they were the ones responsible. Who removed it from PU? We needed money to pay your account and why hasn’t it been done?

Four, why haven’t we collected money from Ministry of Finance to give to URC? Because it committed itself that it is going to pay and of course, Ministry of Finance will get it from tax payers. Which tax payers are going to pay the Shs 72 billion? We need to know. Is it State House, is it the President or the Ministry of Finance?

Five, we need the minister to tell us the owners of these companies. If you do not disclose the owners, we are in problems and if you do not know the owners - because we have said that before you allocate land, you need to see the shareholders. Starting from 2009, when you are going to transfer or buy land, you must attach a picture. Now, you must attach the pictures of the directors and shareholders of these companies. We need to know these shareholders.

Six, having known the shareholders, we want to know the reason why they should not pay the Shs 1.2 billion per acre and we, who never participated in the loot, the tax payers of Uganda, should pay? Why should we pay for them when hospitals are collapsing?

Seven, what was the value of the land in Nakawa vis-à-vis the land in Uganda Railways? This is because Nakawa is a bit far away and I am sure the value is lower compared with URC land, which is in the centre of town. Now, you have got there two acres, why should you get equivalent of two acres of high value compared to your land there? What was the value in Nakawa, which you were going to exchange with our value here? This is very dangerous. If we do not get that, our people are finished.

Madam Speaker, I want Parliament to recommend to the President to desist from this business of writing letters anyhow, directing people because these letters are going to be used against him, even if he is dead. They are very dangerous, because - I am pleading that let us tell him that –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Leader of the Opposition, the resolution of this House has already been taken on that issue, in previous reports. For instance, in the Basajjabalaba issue, that was a recommendation of this House, that it should stop. We have already taken it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we need to – maybe, the minister was not here, because all the issues of looking for public land or public assets were passed in the Seventh Parliament, where hon. Migereko was a Member by then and a minister, it was passed in the Eighth Parliament where hon. Migereko was a Member and a minister. Even now, in the Ninth Parliament, it is going to be passed.

When you see them leaving assets go to waste, they are planning to steal them, when you see a new car being parked for about six months, they are planning to take it. When you see land or a building going down, they are about to take it and that is why we want something to be done.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, if you could respond in five minutes.

6.23
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee for a good report presented to this House.

The issue was land of former Uganda Railways Corporation at Nsambya and how it was given out. And in my view, this committee has done a very good job in handling the issues that were presented to it. But there were issues that arose in the course of investigation to which the committee came up with pertinent recommendations, and I want to say that we have looked at these recommendations and observations and I want to say that we think they are very fair and we are going to take up these recommendations so that we can be in a position to address problems in our sector and in the management of public assets.

Madam speaker, I would like to say that I will deal with the issues to do with land, but there are those issues which are to do with privatisation, which I may not be in a position to completely handle at this stage. For instance, the collections that have been made ever since the process of privatisation started. I do not have the statistics, I do not have the figures but I will be in position to take up this with the Minister of Finance so that as and when you allocate time, the Minister of Finance will be in position to come and deal with some of these issues.

There are issues of liberalisation policy, as to whether we should go ahead with it or not, I will also be able to pass on this to the Leader of Government Business and I am sure we shall be in a position to get very well informed as the House regarding the successes of this policy; but also areas, which may need polishing up if the benefits that we had hoped to gain as a result of privatisation and liberalisation are concerned.

Madam Speaker, Naguru-Nakawa, the company Opec Prime which was identified and procured for the development of Nakawa-Naguru estate was procured through a competitive process. There was a competitive arrangement through which Opec Prime - I can be able to provide information on this - was sourced and procured.

As to whether the land has or has not been developed, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Members that on 14th October this year, there was a function presided over by His Excellency, the President to start construction work at Naguru/Nakawa and as I speak right now, there is ongoing work on the ground. So, the issue as to whether land is being put to the intended use or not, I want to respond that yes, construction work is ongoing and if anybody had time to spare and visited the Naguru area, you would find construction work taking place there. (Interjections) No, I was there when the commissioning was taking place. So, I am talking about something I know.

Madam Speaker, in the report, there is the issue of inappropriate allocation of land. This problem was sorted out. Those who had adopted to remain in Nakawa- Naguru were incorporated in the project and names of those individuals and firms are available, and I am sure the committee did confirm this.

And those that were allocated land in Nsambya were allocated that land as a result of a Cabinet decision, and I have read the report this is referred to. The cases involving double allocation were also dealt with.

The titles, which had encumbrances for Naguru-Nakawa were also sorted out because the instruction was that the matter of encumbrances must be sorted out, and we can be in a position to provide documentation on this.

Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of the law governing the activities of Uganda Land Commission. You have been very strong on this and I would like to report that Cabinet approved the principle for Uganda Land Commission on the 21st August this year, and we have given instructions to the First Parliamentary Counsel to come up with the Bill, which will be considered by both Cabinet and Parliament as soon as it is ready.

We do agree with you that this is a very urgent matter, and we have been putting a lot of pressure on both the First Parliamentary Counsel and the Attorney-General to assist us in ensuring that this Bill comes out so that we can have a law for Uganda Land Commission that will help us address the many shortfalls that we have identified in the running of Uganda Land Commission.

Indeed, I do agree with the observations of the committee and the observation that have come up on the Floor that there are a number of things that must be urgently dealt with at the Uganda Land Commission.

I would also like to report that a new commission was nominated by the President, approved by Parliament and this commission is headed by hon. Baguma Isoke. It will soon start serving in office and we are set to draw to its attention to the many issues that have been coming up on this Floor of Parliament, and those we have observed as a ministry, regarding the running of Uganda Land Commission.

The issue of inventory of Government land under the Uganda Land Commission is something we have been working on. We however, ran into a few problems regarding resources and manpower. But we have tried to source for funds so that we can be in a position to complete this exercise that had been started some time back.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that some of these issues in this report merit further investigations by the Inspectorate General of Government (IGG). We do agree with you on this one, and we shall give all the support that the IGG may require in order to be in a position to carry out thorough investigations regarding some of these operations that were carried out at that time.

The issue of how we identify land for investors is a difficult question. It is true that there are some areas that have been put aside for development by investors, both local and foreign. And normally Uganda Land Commission works with the Uganda Investment Authority in allocating some of this land. In some cases Cabinet directs that such and such investment be catered for with the right amount of land for development, so that we can be able to put up this enterprise to create the badly needed jobs in the country.

However, there is still need to streamline the criteria for allocation and I am sure in due course we shall be sharing this information with Parliament and other stakeholders in the country so anybody who wants land particularly for investment can be in a position to get this information; they can be in a position to apply for it, following the laid down procedures provided they can meet the laid down criteria. I don’t think that way we shall run into any problem.

However, the Leader of the Opposition, who is one of the biggest land owners in the country, raised a question on how people identify land. Now on this, we may need to hold a debate outside this House so that we can be in a position to know – (Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, first of all, yes, I own land in this country because I was born here. But is the Minister of Lands in order to come here and say that as I own land in this world, that I also got it from Government in which he works as a minister; where they allocate free land?

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because I want the Minister of Lands to say, we have public land in such and such a place. I also want him to say that of that public land, Nandala-Mafabi has a share. That is to begin with. Failure to do so, he has to withdraw that statement because owning land in Uganda in the rightful way is not criminal, so long as it is not public land. So, is he in order to bring in my name when we are discussing issues of public land in regard to private land that I own? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you substantiate what land hon. Nandala-Mafabi has in plenty?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is true I really do not know how hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been acquiring land in many areas in the country. I have only heard that he is a highly landed fellow and I am sorry if that really offended him.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he said that you own a lot of land.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true I own land. But for your information, before I was born I got land through my grandparents. But I want you to tell the House whether the land I own in Uganda was got through the land bonanza or not. I need you to help me understand whether you meant that the land I own is public or private land.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I stated that I am sorry. I don’t know how exactly hon. Nandala-Mafabi acquired all this land. But I thought for – (Interjections) – I am sorry. I was only mentioning that those who may want to know how to acquire land, could ensure that they get close to you. I hope that the hon. Leader of the Opposition accepts my apologies.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you are still implying that he acquired land illegally – the one we are complaining about here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are talking about two types of land: public and private land. I want the Minister of Lands to categorically say that I, Nandala-Mafabi acquired public land and in such and such a place. That is all I want him to make clear because if it were private land – or else he withdraws. Otherwise, everybody is free to acquire private land but not public land.

THE SPEAKER: Is his land public or private land? I think that is the question.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to state that I don’t know whether he owns only public or customary land. I therefore withdraw my statement that you own land. Hon. Paul Mwiru had a clarification.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Minister. The clarification I am seeking – yes, we are not objecting to investors getting land. Our problem is about how one qualifies to be an investor. That is all we are saying because many of the people you have given public land have failed to develop it. So, what criteria do you use?

THE SPEAKER: Also, hon. Minister, you know I have a sentimental attachment to Shimon Land because that was my school; I mean Shimon Demonstration. Is it true that the so-called investor is selling part of the land, which he got freely? Is it true; because it was said on the Floor of this House?

MR OKUPA: Further clarification. When the minister talked about the Naguru-Nakawa land, he insinuated that it was properly given to Opec Prime Contractors. But I recall that on 14 January 2009, the IGG then, Ms Faith Mwondha issued a report, which was part of their investigations about the sale of that land, faulting the Minister of Local Government. But here you are telling us that Prime Contractors acquired that land through the legal means yet the IGG’s report that was published on 14 January 2009 faulted the minister for fraudulently giving land to Opec Prime Properties. So, who is telling the truth? Is it that report or you? 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, regarding the land at Shimoni, as to whether it is up for sale, this is something I need to investigate. What I know is that construction work has been going on for a five-star hotel. As to whether part of the land has been sold or is up for sale is something I will have to investigate and I will be in a position to give a statement on this at an appropriate stage.

Madam Speaker, regarding the IGG report on Naguru-Nakawaland, I am not yet privy to that report. What I am reporting on is what I am aware of. Are the physical plans being followed or not? We are trying as much as possible to follow the physical plan for the various urban areas in the country whenever we are carrying out any of these transactions. But it is also true that we are dealing with a lot of pressures and we are dealing with a very dynamic situation.

So, you may find that  - yes, it is true, there is a plan which was passed some ten years back and because of the new emerging pressures, we have to re-visit some of these plans and change the land use for which the given area was intended.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Uganda Railways, the Minister for Privatisation will be able to talk about. But what I can talk about briefly is that, it is a fact that we, as Government, are working with RVR reviving and revitalising of the railway network in the country. Not long ago, the line from Tororo to Gulu to Pakwach was being rehabilitated. I remember in the media, the President flagging off a train from Gulu to Tororo because the line can now work. 

It is also true that because of the current growth of the economy, the need to revive and take advantage of the railway has become very critical; because a lot of resources have been allocated to the roads but given the tonnage of goods that are using our roads, there is no way one can be in a position to ensure that they can last the intended life time if the railway system is not developed.

With the minerals all over the country that have been discovered and are now being exploited, with the timber, with the cement  moving up and down, with oil - the equipment that must be transported from the coast to the oil exploration areas, it has become extremely urgent that the railway must be developed and put to good use. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether the minister is in order to treat us to this amount of rhetoric about the railways when in actual fact, for instance, we know that in 2004, the hon. John Nasasira went up to Soroti to re-launch the train and that was the last time we saw that thing called a train on that route; when we know for a fact that almost all the railway sleepers in the stores here have been shifted by RVR to Kenya; when we know for a fact that they have ruffled out all the land for possible expansion of the railway industry; when we also know for a fact that “Good Shed” was actually sold to a private person.

Is the hon. Minister in order to mislead this House when these facts are so glaring and when the future of the railway industry is so gloomy? 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Minister, I wanted to invite you to drive towards Nsambya and see the amount of Mabati on both sides of the railway. It is just a railway, all the land has been cordoned off; it is under mabati, I think pending construction. Just here in Nsambya! So, the reality does not bail out what you are saying.

Let hon. Ssimbwa tell us. He passes there every day.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start from what hon. Alaso has talked about. Just some two weeks ago, the Committee on Trade was in Mombasa and what is true is that, all the URC wagons are no longer working in Uganda; they are in Kenya, transporting Kenyan goods from Mombasa, Nairobi up to Kisumu and whatever comes out of that, URC and the Government of Uganda do not benefit. Even when we wanted to interact with the RVR, they closed office for the whole day, intentionally, not to meet the Committee on Trade from Uganda because they had been informed.

Secondly, when we talk about URC land - let me talk about the Kampala area alone. And let me start from Busega up to Namanve. It is true what is remaining for URC now is just a plot of five metres from the middle of the railway line to this side, and that side but the rest of it all has been sold off. 

Take an example of the Queen’s Way here in the city, even when the train is passing, part of the train is passing on private land. So, the railway line is only the railway property but where it is passing is private land. As committee on COSASE, when we went to look at this property in Nsambya, we discovered that some of the land is already allocated to invisible or unknown people.

There are several plots which are on the lower side of the FC Villa Play Grounds – those ones were allocated and when you pass there today, there are mabati; when you are at the Queen’s Way where the vehicles going to Nsambya park, it was also allocated so there are other pieces of land that were allocated.

That is why, as a committee, we requested Parliament to recommend that the IGG goes further and investigates these allocations.

So, what is true is that even recently, URC went ahead and advertised property for sale and that was against the recommendations of the committees, one of Physical Infrastructure and COSASE to halt the disposal of these properties.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the issue of Uganda Railways and its revitalisation is so critical and I would like to propose that you give my colleague, the Minister of Works and Transport time to come and appraise the House on the steps that have been taken to revitalise the Uganda railway network. I know we have discussed it at Cabinet level and I know some good amount of work has been done, but clearly an authoritative statement from the Minister of Works would help us so that if need be, input can also be received from Members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t you join him in speaking for the land? You own the land, he owns the railway.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I thought that all along I had been dealing with land issues. I would be delighted to come back with him and we talk about the land that is under the Uganda Railways Corporation as an institution because since the land has been granted to an institution, it is clearly under that institution. But I am ready and will be prepared to join him so that we can be able to avail as much information as possible on these matters that are of concern to members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also invite you to drive from Queens Way to Nsambya so that you can see physically what we are talking about? You can even drive with me. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, now that you have raised it, I am going to take a lot of interest in that matter. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report. 

(Question put and greed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MRS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to state that my colleague, hon. Nandala, said “PPS” but we have had nine PPSs in State House. I wish he could substantiate because if it goes on the Hansard that – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I do not want the Minister of Trade to think I meant her. I said Magezi was a former PPS and William Nkemba is the son; Aluminous Properties is their company. So, I was saying that you can imagine such companies – 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Okay, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have disposed of that business. Minister of Finance, there is a query on what we actually got from the divestiture process. You remember when we made that law, there was supposed to be an account where the funds are placed so that Ugandans could borrow for investment. We want a report. How much have you collected? How many Ugandans have borrowed? Is it available? We shall want a report on the divestiture process. 

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, most obliged. The report will be presented in due course. 

THE SPEAKER: It should come before we go for recess. 

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I wanted to request because this is a critical matter of URC. If we wait and wait we are likely to wait forever. Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving a timeframe now so that he comes up with that report. We need to know where the money is, what it has done and find out whether Ugandans can benefit as other nationals of other countries are benefitting from Uganda’s assets to do business. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, just one or two things. Lt Gen. Charles Angina is inviting you for a thanksgiving in Bukedea on 23 November 2013 - that is Saturday. There will be transport for those who do not want to drive. So, please go and support hon. Angina for that function.

Before we go to the other one, I wanted to talk about item No. 10 on the Order Paper relating to the Uganda Revenue Authority, the report by the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. It has been brought to my attention that the audit queries which are the subject of that report were considered by this House in 2008, and following the consideration under the Finance Act of 2009, this House waived the taxes, duties interest and penalties on the arrears outstanding on or before 30 June 2002 and which were still outstanding by 30 June 2008. 

So, we saw that they were substantial debts, I think we need to agree whether we can ask the committees to take the Finance Act and look again, and see how they fit in because we actually considered those recommendations and we took a position as the House. The queries which have been presented in the report were handled in 2008 by this House and resolved.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I happened to be a Member of COSASE then and hon. Reagan Okumu was the chairperson. I remember at that time hon. Reagan Okumu laid the report on Table and those recommendations, which we had made in that report, were taken care of. It was as a result of that Bill that came out. The Members who were in that committee then like hon. Kakooza here will bear me witness that those matters were addressed at that time.

THE SPEAKER: So, in order not to take away the work of the committee, I want to propose that you take a look at the Financial Act of 2009 in relation to the contents of your report and then you come back to us, if it is necessary. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, when that matter came up on Thursday, I took interest to even ask the clerk what we had dealt with because I am also a Member of the COSASE. I think what is in the Auditor-General’s report which Members need to deal with is from 2009 up to 2012; but from 2008, that report as stated is true information. It is the one from which this Finance Bill arose and the clerk told me that our report should be from 2009 to 2012, where we need to interview URA but from 1997 up to 2008 that report was dealt with. 

THE SPEAKER: In other words, the report should be severed to remove the part before 2008 so that we deal only with the balance of 2009. So, please look at it and then you can sever what was completed and we only deal with 2009 onwards. In your presentation, you can make a synopsis just of that part which has not been considered. Of course, they were dealing with a long period of the PAC report. So, please do that and in your presentation, you should concentrate on the part which was not handled. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Now, we have two other businesses but I think let us deal with them both tomorrow. I have asked the hon. Chairperson of the Energy ad hoc committee to give a summary because it is a long time since this report was presented. So, tomorrow we shall receive the synopsis of your report so that Members can be refreshed and also, we shall handle the other report by the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. So, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 20 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
