Thursday, 13 November 2014

Parliament met at 3.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Today, the children of Uganda are here in big numbers. I want you to join me in welcoming first the teachers and pupils of St Neira Primary School in Kigulu Island, which is represented by hon. Peter Okeyoh and hon. Margaret Makhoha. You are welcome.

We also have pupils of Kyampisi Primary School in Kayunga, represented by hon. Idah Nantaba and hon. Patrick Nsanja. You are welcome.

We also have pupils and teachers of one of the famous girls’ schools in Busoga, Buckley High School in Iganga, represented by hon. Florence Kwagala and hon. Milton Muwuma. Hon. Mutyabule is a former head teacher of that school. You are welcome.

We also have pupils of Kyambogo Parents School in Nakasongola, represented by hon. Peter Nyombi and hon. Margret Komuhangi. They are welcome.

Honourable members, I want to remind the members of the Appointments Committee that we shall have a meeting tomorrow in the afternoon at 2.30 p.m. to consider the nomination of the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda and one board member of the National Planning Authority. So, please be there at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

I believe hon. Mbabazi has a burning issue. You have two minutes. Not Amama -(Laughter)- Betty Mbabazi.

3.14
MRS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to raise a matter of national importance. 

Last week on Saturday in Rubirizi, the sub-counties of Kirugu, Katerera Town Council, Katerera and Katanda were hit by a heavy hailstorm. About ten homesteads were destroyed, 2000 hectares of cotton, and 200 hectares of watermelon, tomatoes and onions were destroyed. I contacted my colleague and we decided to inform the honourable Minister of State for DisasterPreparedness, hon. Ecweru, but up to now we have not had any response.

I requestthat if possible, the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness should help us bygoing there to assess the situation and deliver any relief within their means. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, would you like to respond to the problems in Rubirizi?

3.15
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am sorry to hear about this disaster. I would like to inform the House that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is in West Nile at the moment and his deputy is also taken up. However, we shall inform them and necessary action shall be taken to verify this matter.

Meanwhile, the District Disaster Committee chaired by the CAO must be taking necessary action. They will go to the ground and write a comprehensive report, including how much is required. That will also be awaited but I will inform the ministry responsible.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.

MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a procedural matter. I have listened to my friend, hon. Mbabazi, and she has raised very pertinent issues about what was destroyed, and I have also raised the same matters previously.

Madam Speaker, we raise these problems here concerning the destruction we have suffered and we ask for iron sheets, houses but the ministry gives 20 bags of posho and beans. What is the problem? We are talking about crops, which have been destroyed, and the ministry gives posho and beans. Can we be helped on this matter? 

Sometimes we look funny in front of the electorate. Someone has lost a blanket, has no mattress, the house has lost a roof and we are expecting iron sheets, but the ministry brings ten bags of posho and people get two kilos each and half a kilogramme of beans. This is very painful. How can we proceed on such a matter when it comes to the people represented by hon. Mbabazi and me?

THE SPEAKER: I think let me ask the Government Chief Whip to respond.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssewungu is raising a very pertinent point. 

Our arrangement is such that we try to act from an informed point of view.That is why the Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament has been emphasising that in the meantime, let us make sure the District Disaster Committee files a report. This is because the District Disaster Committee is supposed to go to the area where the disaster has taken place, carry out an evaluation of the impact of the disaster and file a report on what is required as emergency supplies.The headquarters then provides the items, which are required. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker,I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. Honourable minister, what I am talking about is out of experience. We have done all these things and we have gone to the extent of even delivering these reports –Members of Parliament. Your people do not appear in our districts and in the end, after showing the extent of damage, you give us something different, mainly posho and beans. Sometimes the beans are not good. What are you trying to say in this House today?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think first of all no one plans for a disaster and no one knows what one million people will need after a disaster. That is why you have been asked to present your needs. Your districts should do an evaluation and inform the Government.

In addition, honourable members, those gardens belong to people. Those people sometimes have their granaries destroyed, their huts are destroyed and food is destroyed. These things happened to us in Kamuli this year. Yes, we first got the food but afterwards we got other materials; we got the iron sheets and we are rebuilding our schools. I also know that other areas have got the same, but please, pass on the information. I will now keep an eye on the Prime Minister to see that he does the needful. 



3.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise.

One, this country, Uganda, has now spent over two years without a Chief Justice and a Deputy Chief Justice.A few months ago when the Uganda Law Society had threatened to riot and they had given an ultimatum to the President to appoint the Chief Justice, he met and he did tell them that he was waiting for the court ruling.It is over two months since a judgment was passed. I am well informed that the President called the Judicial Service Commission and they met and he told them, “I am now going to solve this problem.” It is over two months now and we do not have a Chief Justice, we do not have a Deputy Chief Justice. 

Madam Speaker, these are very key and important positions in this country concerning the third arm of the Government.We had also heard that the Attorney-General was contemplating appealing.So, can the Government tell us what is happening? Is the President going to appoint the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice?Names were resubmitted after that meeting with the President; so the country needs to know, the legal fraternity needs to know and the people who are affected need to know how they are going to proceed with this.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, after the threat of Ebola, the Government of Uganda took a very sensitive decision to ensure that our borders were secured and whoever enters in is checked. They deployed health workers at these border posts to monitor. The medical staff that were deployed were promised risk allowance. This morning I received a representative of the medical workers who were deployed at these border posts; four months down the road, they have not received even a single penny. So, when is the Government going to pay these staff their allowances? 

Madam Speaker, those are the two very important issues I wanted to raise for the Government to respond. Thank you.

3.23
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, on the appointment of the Chief Justice, due consideration is being taken and the country will be informed very soon - [Hon. Member: “How soon?”]- As soon as possible. (Laughter)

I think Madam can come and clarify why they have delayed the payment of those workers who are protecting our borders. 

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I want to inform the House that we have had a challenge in the health sector; emergencies remain as unfunded priorities and we even went back to our submissions to this House the last time.We normally have these outbreaks but because of limited funding, emergencies like Ebola and others remain as unfunded priorities and when they occur, we are forced to find money from somewhere or to reallocate funds from other votes to actually fund this activity.

For the last quarter, we also had challenges. Releases were not even made to the ministry because of some other challenges that we had in the past -(Interjection) - No, it has nothing to do with sole candidature.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Global Fund has resumed funding to support the Government of Uganda in a number of areas, specifically TB, malaria and HIV/AIDS. There were some outstanding monies that accrued from the previous years that had not been paid back. So, before they could actually send the money to us, they requested that this money should be paid back and this of course affected our first quarter release.However, we are working hand in hand with the Ministry of Finance to ensure that funds for this second quarter are released.Using that, we shall see to it that we resolve that matter. Thank you

3.27
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You realise that the Buganda Caucus is made up of 99 members, which is almost one-third of this Parliament. As a whip, I got information yesterday that invitations were sent to all Buganda Caucus members, in a letter signed by hon. Kiwanda, to go to Kapeeka to meet Gen. Salim Saleh on the issue of farming.

Madam Speaker, I am standing here because yesterday we painfully went through a discussion so that we, as Members of Parliament,could audit ourselves on how we should support this institution.This institution is ours and we can only support it by being present. Now, if you deny this House of 99 members, then you would have crippled the House. 

I am standing here to raise this matter and I am begging Parliament and other caucuses that for us to perform and to prove that we are actually working for this country, any invitation that targets a big number, whether a committee or a caucus, must be channelled through the Speaker so that the Speaker is aware.In fact Madam Speaker, in your communication from the Chair, you might say, “I have received apologies from this group” so that we know because now, we have to be taught how to behave.

Madam Speaker, I am raising a matter of serious concern because I have that letter addressed to Buganda Caucus members and I have been observing. I am not a Muganda but I know them and I know that the Baganda are not here. There are very few them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, I received that letter and I declined to authorise 90 people to leave this House. I wrote to the chairperson of the caucus and said I will not allow them to go on a working day. If they have gone, they will have to answer to this House. 

Today is a day for House sittings, so those members of that caucus who are not here will have to explain to this House why they have defied my instructions and gone for a private activity during the time of Parliamentary sittings. Even a General must respect Parliament; those are private activities.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow ID 55,460,000, equivalent to US$ 87,750,000, from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the construction of the 132 KV Mirama–Kabale electricity transmission line and distribution project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is seconded.It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

3.31
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much,Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following:

i) 	Uganda Wildlife Education Centre
ii) 	Ministry of Internal Affairs
iii) 	Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives – Second Trade Capacity Enhancement Project 
iv) 	Hoima Regional Referral Hospital
v) 	Mubende Regional Referral Hospital
vi) 	Kabale Regional Referral Hospital
vii) 	Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital
viii) Soroti Regional Referral Hospital
ix) 	Moroto Regional Referral Hospital
x) 	Mulago National Referral Hospital
xi) 	Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital
xii) 	Arua Regional Referral Hospital
xiii) 	Jinja Referral Hospital
xiv) 	Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – Strengthening the Management of Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda Programme

xv) 	Transforming Settlement of the Urban Poor in Uganda Project – Project Id: P122475 and P121015

xvi)  European Investment Bank/Republic Of Uganda Apex Private Enterprise Loan Scheme

xvii) The East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (Ministry Of Works and Transport Component) IDA Credit No. 4147 Uganda

xviii) Ministry of Education and Sports – Support to the Post-Primary Education Training Expansion and Improvement (Education IV) Project (ADB Loan No. 2100150018143)

xix) Ministry of Water and Environment – Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project – Project ID No. P-Ug-Acc-001; ADF loan No. 2100150008296; ADF grant No. 2100155003172 and NDF Credit No. 441

xx) Ministry of Education and Sports – Universal Post Primary Education and Training Project – IDA Credit No. 4570-Ug

xxi) Ministry of Water and Environment – Programme Management Support under the Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support

xxii) Office of the Prime Minister – Strengthening Evidence Based Decision Making II 
xxiii) Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project Operations Account
xxiv) Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project – Divestiture and Redundancy Accounts
xxv) Uganda Registration Services Bureau
xxvi) Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited

xxvii) Special investigation into the management of the bank’s loan portfolio of Uganda Development Bank Limited

xxviii) Energy for Rural Transformation Project II – Uganda Communications Commission – IDA Credit Agreement No. 44540-Ug

xxix) Swedish International Development Agency Project – under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Support to Competitiveness and Investment Climate Secretariat
xxx) Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council
xxxi) National Environment Management Authority
xxxii) Uganda Human Rights Commission
xxxiii) Ministry of Water and Environment Climate Change Initiatives Project
xxxiv) Health Service Commission
xxxv) Judicial Service Commission
xxxvi) Kilembe Mines Limited
xxxvii) Uganda Embassy, Cairo
xxxviii) New Delhi Mission

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Seninde. All are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF WATER AND SANITATION IN UGANDA TOWARDS WORLD TOILET DAY – 19 NOVEMBER 2014

3.38
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I stand before you to present a statement under rule 45 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, in relation to the state of water and sanitation in Uganda as we celebrate this year’s World Toilet Day. 

Honourable members, ending the global sanitation crisis is one of the most urgent developmental challenges of the 21stcentury. By the end of 2011, there were 2.5 billion people, that is, over a third of the world’s population, living without safe and adequate sanitation and hygiene. The lack of access to these essential services holds back social and economic development through its negative impact on health, education and livelihoods. Healthwise, inadequate sanitation is the principal cause of diarrhoea, the secondkiller disease of children worldwide. 

As the target year 2015 approaches, it becomes increasingly clear that the international community is not doing enough to end the sanitation crisis. This is evidenced by the fact that the world has remained off track in regard to the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target to halve the proportion of people living without sanitation by 2015.Current trends indicate that 10 million Ugandans will still lack access to improved sanitation facilities by 2015, and the target will be missed by half a billion people in the world. 

There are immense consequences of inadequate access to water and sanitation. A study from the World Bank under the Water and Sanitation Programme revealed thatUganda loses Shs 389 billion, equivalent to US$ 177 million, annually due to poor sanitation. 
    • 13.8 million Ugandans use unsanitary or shared latrines.
    • 3.2 million have no latrine at all and defecate in the open. 
    • US$ 8.1 million is lost each year in access time due to unsanitary related diseases.

Each person practicing open defecation spends almost 2.5 days a year finding a private location to defecate, leading to large economic losses. This cost falls heavily on women as caregivers who may spend additional time accompanying young children, the sick and elderly relatives. This cost is likely to be an underestimation as those without toilets, particularly women, will be obliged to find a private location for urination as well. 

Death due to Diarrhoea 
Approximately 23,000 Ugandans, including children less thanfive years old, die each year from diarrhoea. Nearly 90 per cent is directly attributed to poor sanitation and hygiene, especially in our schools and health centres.In addition, poor sanitation is a contributing factor to other leading causes of child mortality, including malaria and measles. 

US$ 1.1 million is lost each year due to productivity losses whilst sick or accessing healthcare. This includes absenteeism from work or school due to diarrhoeal diseases, seeking treatment from a health clinic or hospital, and time spent caring for under-fives suffering from diarrhoea or other diseases caused by poor sanitation and hygiene.

US$ 21 million is spent each year on healthcare.Diarrhoea diseases directly and indirectly via malnutrition and its consequences like other diseases, such as respiratory infections and malaria, are all leading causes of morbidity. Costs associated with health-seeking behaviour include consultation, medication, transport, and in some cases hospitalisation. All this places a heavy burden on household and Government spending. 

The economic burden of poor sanitation falls most heavily on the poorest. The costs of poor sanitation are inequitably distributed with the highest economic burden falling on the poorest. The average cost associated with poor sanitation constitutes a much greater proportion of a poor person’s income than that of a wealthier person. So, you may not have reason to clap.

Epidemic Outbreak Costs
Faecal contamination of the environment is the root cause of an annual average of 3000 cases of cholera affecting Uganda. The cost of the necessary water and sanitation and health response is estimated to be US$ 1.9 million each year.

However, the economic implications of a cholera outbreak go beyond the immediate health system response. There are also costs related to productivity loss and premature death, diverting expenditures from other essential items and losses in trade and tourism revenue, including the costs related to funerals.

Water Pollution 
The adverse impact of unsafe excreta disposal on water resources is not included in the cost estimation as figures are not available for Africa. Where this affects drinking water supply, water supply and treatment costs for drinking and other domestic uses will add to the cost associated with poor sanitation.

The model does not attempt to capture the long-term economic causes related to the adverse effects of poor sanitation. Early childhood diarrhoea contributes to under nutrition, stunting and wasting, which are associated with malnutrition and in turn with reduced long-term cognitive development infections. Soil transmitted helminths are also an important cause of impairment in intellectual and cognitive development.

Tourism
Tourism can be a significant source of income, employment and foreign currency. There are multiple factors that contribute to travel and tourism competiveness. A travel and tourism competiveness report ranks countries according to 75 indicators, one of which is sanitation status. Based on the current contribution of travel and tourism to GDP, addressing sanitation in Uganda could lead to an increase in travel and tourism of an estimated US$ 3.9 million annually.

Madam Speaker, I will go to the way forward in my statement:
Addressing sanitation and hygiene requires action from Government at all levels - business, civil society as well as households. 

It also requires a significant increase and better targeting of financial resources and allocation.The recognition of sanitation by the UN General Assembly in 2010 provides a strong impetus for more action. It is essential now, therefore, that the international community keeps its promises on sanitation and accelerates progress in the remaining time before the MDG 2015 deadline. 

It is also important that we strengthen the sanitation sector especially in schools, health centres and our communities. For those of you who managed to go to Kawempe Primary School, you saw what was happening in one of the sports’ schools that we went to as Members of Parliament.

It is also important that we work on the MDG target and take it as an immediate and urgent political priority. Sanitation and hygiene are left out as a “whoever cares” matter. 

We should observe the country’s promises to improve sanitation and implement commitments made at the national, regional and global levels. The most recent was the high-level meeting in Washington where our ministers endorsed an agreement to commit money -one per cent of the national GDP - to sanitation and hygiene.

We should also allocate higher investments to sanitation. The current sanitation investment in Uganda is between 0.1 to 0.5 per cent GDP, which is lower than several estimates for what is required. Increased investment in sanitation and hygiene promotion is required, not only to realise health and welfare benefits of sanitation but also to avert large economic losses.

Address bottlenecks in the service delivery pathway. Financing will be more efficiently used if shortcomings in the budget, equity and markets are addressed. 

Target investments to the poorest, who we represent in this House. Sanitation inequity should be addressed through specific strategies to address the sanitation needs of the poorest, especially those who live in slum areas like Katanga and Bwaise.

Prioritise elimination of open defecation. Honourable members, as we mark the World Toilet Day on 19th, that is next week, in Amuria, we are looking at how to prioritise elimination of open defecation. Open defecation not only has higher costs than any other sanitation practice, it also has considerable adverse social impacts. Low cost and effective ways of stopping open defecation need to be scaled up. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amongin, for that statement and drawing our attention to the commitment by Government and the need to deal with the sanitation situation. Let us just have two comments.

3.50
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Amongin for the statement and for the shocking details of the precarious health situation in which our people find themselves. 

It is everyone’s right to have a safe and clean environment and certainly, we are depriving our children of the right to life because so many children have died because of the poor health. We are blaming the international community but I think each one of us has a role to play and the responsibility really lies with us. 

The local governments here in Uganda used to inspect homes to make sure that they are clean, that the homes are swept, that there is clean drinking water, that there is no stagnant water to encourage mosquito breeding, there is a rack for utensils and a toilet for every home. That is no longer done. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon this Parliament and the government to ensure that every home in Uganda has a toilet and that every home is a clean environment for everyone to live in. I think that the Government should bear upon the local governments to pass a bylaw to ensure that inspection in the homes is done. When this bylaw is passed, government should ensure that it is enforced so that we have a clean environment for every Ugandan. I thank you.

3.52
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the member for that statement, which touches some of our areas most especially. 

I happen to come from Mukono South constituency and a large part of it is a hard-to-reach area. Geographically, areas surrounding Lake Victoria are either hard rock or soft areas covered with sand. So it becomes a problem for the wanainchi to dig pit latrines either on a rock or on sandy soil. The result is what she has just mentioned- people looking for a small bush. Short of that, they have to go to the waters to defecate or use a kaveera. You can imagine an area with schools, women and trading communities but with no toilet. We have always made a call to Government that at times it needs Government action. 

We are grateful to our Government for whatever it is doing but some of those areas - landing sites and highlands - lack toilets and our people actually cannot dig these toilets. We need Government intervention.Government needs to put aside some money to dig these toilets and save our people. As a result, many diseases end up affecting our people and it is very bad. 

So, I support this statement and I hope that Government is coming up in a big way to assist some of these areas. You can imagine a professional - a teacher or doctor - being sent to that hard-to-reach area - (Member timed out.)

3.55
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Amongin for bringing up this matter and I also want to ask where our ministers are. When it comes to issues like this one, we should be receiving a statement from the line minister, but you see that they are not available. Most of the time, members here take personal initiative to bring out important issues like this. 

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the issue of public toilets even before we talk about toilets in people’s homes. From Malaba to Kampala, there is no place where travellers can stop to ease themselves. They have now turned my Namanve forest into a public toilet. You see buses parked there and travellers easing themselves. They do not have anywhere to go, and it is so sad to see travellers suffering.

The Kampala-Jinja Road is our highway and it links us to another country, but you find that all along those towns, you cannot find a public toilet anywhere. Even the local governments do not have enough money to construct public toilets in markets or taxi parks. It is so sad that the government is the first defaulter when it comes to the issue of toilets. That is why you see that His Excellency has improvised and now moves with his own toilet. (Laughter) 

Hon.Bakaluba was saying that as an MP, if he is touring his constituency, should he also move with his toilet? Can we buy moving toilets for our Speaker, MPs or ministers? It is because we do not have public toilets, Madam Speaker, and Government being the biggest defaulter, it should really be condemned – (Interruption)


MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this is a very important issue. In Kalungu, one time the LC III arrested residents in my area for not having toilets. In fact, they had poor toilets and they were being taken to prison, but the Police prison where they were being taken never had a toilet. I asked them, are you going to charge these people Shs 50,000 each when the place where you are taking them has no toilet? How are you solving the problem? You are arresting them for having poor toilets and you are taking them into detention where there are no toilets. That is the information I am giving you.

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you, hon. Ssewungu, for that information. Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I am urging Government to be an example. We request Government to set up public toilets along all our highways, in our taxi parks, in markets, in schools, police stations and prisons so that when we eventually go for the ordinary man in his home, we would have given him a good example as Government. Thank You, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Amongin has said that they went to Kawempe as a case study. I do not know why I was not informed. 

Anyway, the issue of toilets should not be taken lightly and I think that is why a day was allocated for toilets, because of its importance.When we talk about toilets, it may not be a very big problem to us as individuals because we can manage to put up our own toilets at our places of residence. However, when it comes to our voters- Here in Kampala, for example, the greater part of the city has people living in slums - Kawempe, Bwaise and otherareas - and it is very difficult for a low income earner to put up a toilet in slums -(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to provide is that the sanitation problem is more intense in urban areas where there are relatively higher population settlements.

The challenge we are encountering, among others, is that National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges 100 per cent for water fees and this pushes people not to connect the sewer line because it becomes very expensive. Eventually, they have to improvise by digging latrines, including in most public schools. They have toilet facilities but they improvise by digging latrines because of exorbitant water bills, which are unmanageable. That is the information.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague for that information – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. Okay, one more minute.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, many of our slums in the urban centres, especially here in Kampala, have been assisted by donors. They have come up to assist, but not the Government.When it comes to our UPE, it is worse. You find a school crowded with over 3000 students but with no more than 10 toilets. This creates a lot of complications.

There is a school that I visited where when the bell rings for break, which lasts 20 minutes, you see pupils lining up to use the toilet.A pupil may not even attend class simply because he is still in the line. By the time he reaches, it is already lunch time and that is time wasted. 

We have few toilets in public schools, especially in UPE schools, and the Government should come up and help. Our children are going to suffer from many health complications because of withholding nature.

THE SPEAKER: I hope Government will tell us who is in charge because we need toilets on the roads, in schools and in the cities. I hope you will tell us who will coordinate the toilet policy.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable Member of Parliament for Ngora District for the statement on the World Toilet Day celebrations. These will take place on the 18th in Amuria. The celebrations to mark World Toilet Day are a step in the right direction in as much as it complements efforts by the Ministry of Water and Environment’s Sanitation Department and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation to promote sanitation and toilets in Uganda.

The lack of proper sanitation or absence of the same is a big problem for many least developed countries.Initiatives to mark the World Toilet Day, in which the Ministry of Water and Environment is participating, will support – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was waiting to make a submission but now I have been forced to say this. I have seen previously, whether it is World Aids Day or World Day for the Disability, the minister responsible comes to make a statement.This time, thanks to hon. Jackie Amongin because she is the one that has made a statement. We would have expected the minister to make a statement on behalf of the Government, where they are able to tell us the progress that they have made before we go to Amuria. 

Now I do not know whether the minister is debating the statement of the member or that is the statement of Government on World Toilet Day. Can we be clarified on what is in that diary? Is it the World Toilet Day statement or are those notes in your diary about that day?

We need a progress report about how far we have gone, how many people lack toilets and when we shall be able to achieve 100 per cent coverage. That is what we want to get from your statement. If that is the case, can we have copies of your statement?

MS MUNAABA: Thank you very much. The reason why this day is being celebrated is to exhibit the different models of toilets that exist, which can be used, and the different initiatives that Government is undertaking to ensure that proper sanitation is promoted.

The ministry has been sensitising communities but the problem is still there, not only in Uganda but also elsewhere. So this World Toilet Day is being celebrated as part of the efforts by the ministry to raise awareness not only to Members of Parliament but to the whole nation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what the members are asking is: when is the Government coming to report on the status of toilets in this country?

MS MUNAABA: The Government is going to report on this. We took the step, which we should have taken first, of sensitising the whole nation but within one month we shall bring a statement here.

THE SPEAKER: So I think we will have to wait for the minister to bring a formal statement with facts, statistics and coverage of the whole country so that we can assess what we need to do.

MS MUNAABA: Rt Hon. Speaker, Tuesday is the 18th of November and that is the World Toilet Day which we shall mark in Amuria. We shall be able to raise that after. I am asking for a week thereafter because I will not be in the country from 19th up to 22nd. I will bring a statement the following week on Tuesday.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to inform the House that the World Toilet Day was adopted by the UN General Assembly last year, I think it was on 24 July 2013, and we had the first celebrations. Most of us actually did not know about this date. The first celebrations were held last year on the 19th of November and it coincided with a strike within Kampala, so we could not go to the toilets in Nakivubo where we had scheduled to go. However, we had a meeting of all stakeholders on this date at Imperial Royale. 

Madam Speaker, the date is actually 19th of November and as you are all aware, this is a crosscutting issue – (Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I vividly heard you asking the ministers where this toilet issue falls between the two sectors, Ministry of Environment and Ministry of Health.I had suggested that maybe we need a minister in charge of toilets(Laughter) and the reason why I am raising - (Interjection) 

Madam Speaker, I am rising on a serious point of order because what we are seeing is that the Minister of Environment is saying we should all give support and celebrate the World Toilet Day on the 18th. The Minister of Health, on the other hand, is saying it is on the 19th. I presume that from the way they are sitting, these are ministers in charge of sanitation and toilets. Is it in order to come here and start giving conflicting statements and inviting honourable members to go on the 18thand then the 19th? Are they in order to confuse themselves in front of this august House?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that it is not right to get two conflicting messages on the same issue.So we want to ask the Prime Minister to come and bring a statement on the toilets. I am asking this because hon. Nambooze raised the issue of absence of toilets throughout the highway. Who is in charge of the toilets on the highway; is it the Ministry of Works or Ministry of Health? 

People are building houses without toilets.people are building shopping malls in Kampala with no toilets. That is why I am asking, who is actually in charge of that issue? Markets are being built with no toilets. So, Prime Minister, it is a very serious matter.

PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter we are talking about is a very serious one. Whenever I go to my district in Wakiso, someone who is said to be in charge of health says the latrine coverage is 58 per cent; how about the 42 per cent, where do they go? 

I do not think there is any district here that can come up and tell me that they are having 100 per cent coverage of the toilets. Please, think about our places. Even those who have pit latrines are in danger especially if they do not wash their hands effectively. 

I worked in the University of London at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and I did a simple research; I waited outside these flush based toilets, with a lot of water, and I would tell my professors to put their fingers in an agar, which you know grows bacteria. I was amazed that 78 per cent had E.coli, which showed the measure of faeces in their hands. How about here? I see people running in and out. 

I think we should not waste time on festivals covering so many days. I was expecting the Minister for Health to talk about primary healthcare because this issue is embedded in primary healthcare. These days you are quiet about primary healthcare. In 1969, in Kasangati area, latrine coverage had reached 96 per cent using primary healthcare. Now it has come down to about 58 per cent. There is only one person in charge of these latrine systems in Uganda - primary health care – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to conclude on this matter.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Prof. Bukenya, and Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give you is that on the 11th and on the 1st of this month in Obongi County, we had the Obongi County Science and Technology Conference, which involved health workers presenting papers to do with science and technology for hygiene and health.We discovered that it is not only in Obongi or Moyo but also in universities and colleges around the country, to which some sons and daughters of Obongi have gone,that management of existing sanitary facilities is wanting. 

Much of the presentation made by hon. Amongin was about the shortage and the gaps but, Madam Speaker, there is a big problem with the use of the few that are in existence. So, the minister in charge of primary healthcare and the Minister for Health should extend this to the Ministry of Education such that through that ministry, it also goes to the universities. 

This is not an insult. We passed through these universities and colleges but the students who go the universities, God forbid, not all of them had used toilets in the lower schools they came from, from primary to senior six. So when they go to university, they find flush toilets for the first time and do you know what they do there? It is sad news. So we need to educate them also. First year inauguration and introduction of students to universities must include toilet education. Thank you.

PROF. BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, let me finish by urging the Ministry of Health to leave their offices and go where health matters exist. I am very worried because we are talking about faeces on the fingers and everybody must be having them. I can come here with agar and take your finger prints and then we say, “yes” or “no”. 

I am worried that the immunisation of our children is in jeopardy because the refrigerators we use to keep our vaccines also keep Pepsicola and orange juice, which is not acceptable. We might be using a vaccine, which is no longer potent. The systems that used to be there to test those vaccines are no longer there. 

Madam Speaker, today we are busy talking about sanitation; sanitation for me is basically the proper management of faecalmatter or human waste. I think that is embedded in the Ministry of Health and it must be embedded in the sub component of the minister in charge of primary healthcare. 

These sanitation days of feasting in Nakivubo may not be the answer for a better health status of our people. I hear on radio everyday about Marburg but if you talk about typhoid - I have a clinic although people do not know but everyone comes in saying, I have typhoid. Whenever you say you have typhoid, it means you have been eating faeces. Whenever a small child says he has acute explosive diarrhoea, that means he has been having a bit of salmonellaorrota virus because he is eating –

So I appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister here and my good friend, the Minister of Defence, to put pressure so that primary healthcare comes back to normal life. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Professor. Minister, please wind up; we need to go and do other work.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I gave the date that was designated for the World Toilet Day by the United Nations General Assembly, which is the 19th November. 

Madam Speaker, you have already indicated that we should come with a substantive paper. I just want to inform colleagues that sanitation issues are crosscutting. We work closely with the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Local Government. Generally, the coverage for toilets in the country has been increasing. 

We will come with a substantive statement as you have directed the Prime Minister.However, as politicians, we need to also help our people. Most of the districts have come up with bylaws. Yes, we will come up with a substantive paper and we will work with the Ministry of Water and Environment because some of the money for constructing toilets is put in a different ministry. For us we are on the prevention aspect.

Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that some of the districts have come up with bylaws and in these districts where we have had strong leadership, where the leaders are not shy, we have seen latrine coverage increasing to close to 100 per cent. There are districts that have now been declared open-defecation free. However, there are districts where we still have challenges. 

When you talk about issues of latrines, the leaders tell you they fear their voters will not elect them. Yes, this is a challenge, but it is high time we as leaders stuck to the truth and told our people the truth and enact bylaws so that we can be able to make headway. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I really want to thank hon. Amongin. When she came to tell me about the World Toilet Day, I had never heard about its celebration, but you can see how important it is. 

I want to urge the Committee on National Economy; we are always considering loans for roads but I do not know why we have never thought about public facilities on the highway. I think we are just constructing roads and not thinking about those other facilities. I want to ask the Committee on the National Economy to look at that. Each time they are considering a loan for a road, they should include the public facilities because apparently, no one is talking about them. 

MR ANYWARACH: MadamSpeaker, I would like to seek am seeking your directive or guidance on a procedural point. The ministers have been talking about coverage, members talked about usage and the professor gave us very serious analyses of the health implications and so on. 

In Nebbi where I come from, the moment you start from Pakwach where honourable minister Jacan Omach comes from, our problem is not coverage per say. Coverage can be about 92 per cent in one month, but the nature of the soil is such that even when they are digging graves in areas like ParomboandNebbi, before you realise it, you are actually burying someone in water because the area is permanently waterlogged. It is worse when rain comes; you find toilets are just washed out totally.

Now, the procedural question I am seeking here is, would it not be procedurally right for Government to come up with a report categorising the nature of soils in certain areas?We have the shores of Lake Victoria as the honourable Rev. Bakaluba from Mukono mentioned, and then also areas like Nebbi, some of whose sub-counties are permanently waterlogged.They can then give us a straightforward plan on how the locals can be helped to have stronger and weather-proof toilets that cannot be swept away with the oncoming rainy season. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think what we are directing the Government to do is to bring a statement on the toilet policy of this country - the coverage and the geographical features of the country, taking into account what members said about the lake shores and about other areas like hon. Anywarach is talking about. This is so that we can agree on how to move. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO COME UP WITH TANGIBLE SOLUTIONS FOR MENSTRUAL HYGIENIC MANAGEMENT

4.27
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to accord this Parliament some time to debate this motion. 

Madam Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to come up with tangible solutions for menstrual hygiene management.

“WHEREAS Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda grants the right to education to all persons and Article 34(2) imposes responsibility of providing a child with a basic education on the State and the parent of the child;

AND WHEREAS the Millennium Development Goal of achieving universal primary education in developing countries has largely been attained, the participation of the girl-child in Africa and particularly Uganda still lags behind the boy-child for upper primary and secondary education, and this is partly attributed to causes like early pregnancy, sexual harassment and lack of sanitation facilities;

NOTING THAT the gender unfriendly school culture, infrastructure and lack of adequate menstrual hygiene management practices such as soap, water, private bathing space, places for changing and disposing of materials used for managing menstruation undermine the need for privacy and this results in fundamental infringement of the dignity of the girl-child;

FURTHER NOTING THAT whereas the policymakers in Uganda have not indicated poor menstruation hygiene management as one of the barriers to educating a girl-child, the World Bank report named, ‘Toolkit on Hygiene, Sanitation and Water in Schools: gender roles and impact’, 2005, indicates that girls miss out a total of 48 daysin an academic year due to menstruation problems, the report further indicates that the girl-child lags behind the boy-child in education by missing four days of every month, and this is very alarming;

COGNISANT that research conducted by the Forum of Women Educationalists titled, ‘Sexual Maturation in Relation to Education of the Girls in Uganda’, 2004, reveals that lack of sanitary pads coupled with other factors like the absence of water and separate toilet facilities for the girls in many schools is responsible for the high girl-child dropout rate from schools;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1. That a comprehensive policy on menstruation hygiene management be formulated to enhance implementation of education programmes for the girl-child.

2. That Government sets aside funds for the Ministry of Education and Sports to support sustainable menstruation hygiene management programmes such as provision of washrooms, painkillers, sanitary pads, emergency knickers and changing rooms for the girl-child in schools.

3. That Ministry of Education and Sports incorporates menstruation hygiene management in its various curriculum in the following ways:
    • To make it one of the variables that is tracked by the Education Management Information System (EMIS);
    • Reports to be made on menstruation hygiene management so as to permit education sector reviews;
    • The programme to be monitored by school inspectors on a termly basis;
    • Menstrual hygiene management is incorporated into the Parents and Teachers Associations and School Management Committees’ agenda whenever they are meeting;
    • That Government places emphasis on menstrual counselling and support for the girl-child in school through the role of the senior women teachers;
    • That primary schools embark on providing information on menstrual hygiene within the comprehensive sex education framework for both boys and girls; and 
    • That the teacher training colleges incorporate menstrual hygiene management in addition to sex education in their training, to equip the teachers with skills to support the girl-child.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several members, both men and women.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank this august House for seconding this motion unanimously, in the way we have seen. 

There is a problem, which is so silent, and we seem not to have seen, but it is important for this country to address it. Just like now, when we were debating the statement on World Toilet Day, I could hear some members murmuring that we are wasting Parliament’s time on obvious matters. These obvious matters are very important because they are issues of health and social importance that we must address.If we do not addressthese matters, we actually postpone problems, which would end up causing problems in the economy of this country.

The girl-child in this country experiences a lot of challenges.That is why one report after another, world over, indicates a high dropout rate, especially in Uganda, of the girl-child from primary school and early secondary. Most people do not understand the key reason, and really, think menstrual hygiene would not have been one of the issues, but reports have indicated so. 

It is also important for us to get over the business of thinking we should keep quiet over the obviousmatters. So many people will think matters of personal hygiene, matters of menstrual periods should always be left to the young girl. In Africa, it is usually very difficult for the young girl to come out and speak about menstruation to her mother, friends and so forth. It is so unfortunate that this is something which, if we do not address, is likely to cause Uganda a very big problem in future because it is already indicated in the increasing high rate of dropouts of the young girls from school. 

Madam Speaker, when I was in the Eighth Parliament, one day I went to share a few issues on radio - just general issues on development programmes in the country, which were not related to education at all. Surprisingly, and it was a late evening programme, one young girl called on that radio and the issue raised by that young girl touched me. That is why I had to think about having Parliament do something about this matter. 

This girl called to radio station and said, “Honourable member, we always see you as Parliament of Uganda and leaders of this country demonstrating on the streets of Kampala on matters, some of which do not really touch us, the young children. I want to urge you, as Members of Parliament and as leaders of this country, to address challenges of the young girls who go to primary school.” 

This girl was giving me a scenario of how whenever she begins to experience her menstruation at school, she immediately switches off for those four or five days of menstruation. If it gets her when she is in class, she must find a way of getting out of the class and going behind the toilets or in the bushes in the school to dig a hole and squat in that hole until the bleeding subsides -(Interjection) -That was her experience. She fears that whenever she sits for long in class, it will soil her skirts.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, it is important that we include the matters of managing menstrual hygiene in our school programmes. As this motion enlists the prayers, I beg that this House supports the motion so that we support the Ministry of Education to make sure they improvise a kind of school kit for every primary and secondary school.This would enable them, at least to have an emergency toolkit in the school for the young girls to manage their menstrual hygiene, and make sure that the senior womenteachers in all primary and secondary schools help the girls manage their menstrual issues. I thank you very muchand I ask the members to support this motion.

4.39
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to table the motion affecting especially the young girls who fail to achieve what they want because of what is beyond them; they are born to many stresses by the fact that they are girls. 

I want to thank hon. Franca Akello for moving this motion because it is timely. It is has been really long overdue. I am not going to mention my age but when I started menstruating, I was a young girl in senior three. I did not know how to manage. We would put on yellow uniforms then and my uniform was all spoilt from behind. I did not even want to walk; I was shy for the whole month because everyone had seenthat my skirt was spoilt. That is how traumatising it can be, especially if we are not talking about sex education in school.

If we broaden the issue of sex education, then such issue will be addressed to the young girls. I come from a community of Teso where patriarchs still dominate. A girl must marry and a boy must go to school. If we are to change this trend, the provision of sanitary towels, especially emergency sanitary towels for the girl-child, must be addressed.

When these girls start menstruating, the parents cannot buy the sanitary pads and they will tell the girls to try other options. A bodaboda man can pull out Shs 2,500 to buy a sanitary pad. When this girl is defiled and she gets pregnant, who is to blame? Is it the girl, the parent or God?

Madam Speaker, we would make history if only we allow these girls, especially those who are going to school at primary level, to access a package of emergency sanitary towels in the school environment, so that when they get their menstrual period, they know where to go, they know that the senior woman teacher has emergency menstrual pads that they can use. This is very critical.

When you look at the reason why most girls are not able to perform well at school while boys – actually, there is no way she can compete with a boy-child when the girl-child every month loses four days of going to school while the boys are in school. How do you expect a girl-child to work at the same pace with a boy-child?

Madam Speaker, this is a very touching issue, and I know that I have a daughter and when she starts menstruating, she will need the attention of a mother and father who cares. That is why I appreciate the men in this House who are seated and acknowledge that the time has come, the time is now for us to decide the destiny of the young girls who go to school and cannot access sanitary towels, by engaging Government to ensure that menstrual hygiene is well managed in schools. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude.

MS AMONGIN: As for the honourable colleagues who went with me to Kawempe Muslim Primary School yesterday, two young girls testified before the whole assembly and they said, “Honourable Members of Parliament, we are young girls in Kawempe Muslim Primary school, we menstruate and we are street children. No one buys for us pads when we are menstruating and we go around looking for someone who is able to help us.”

I almost shed tears because these are street girls, but they also want to get some education and at the same time they are menstruating. They did not apply to be girls; it is God’s nature. This is the reason why we must take this motion seriously and ensure that we make a provisionfor the next financial year through the UPE grant. There must be money meant for emergency sanitary management in the school environment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.44
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion.

I am going to give this House a simple calculation. A cheap packet of sanitary pads is Shs 2,000 or even Shs 1,500. A term has a minimum of three months. A child would require, that is if she has a mild flow, at least three packets in a term. Multiply three packets per term by Shs 1,500 and it will give you Shs 4,500.

Assuming in a class there are 50 girls, - remember being a UPE school, they may be more but let us take the minimum of 50 - if you multiply 50 by Shs 4,500, you get Shs 225,000 per term. If you multiply this by three terms in a year, it will give you Shs 675,000. 

I want to give an example of my district, Wakiso, which has 256 schools. Multiply 256 schools by Shs 675,000 and you will get Shs 172,800,000. By the way, that is only one class. Now, I am only estimating for only one class, but remember these children - (Interjections) –Listen, colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS SENINDE: Remember these children may start menstruating from P.4 to P.7 but now I am estimating for only P.6. Take the bare minimum and give Shs 172,800,000 per year. This is just Wakiso, but Uganda has 112 districts. If we multiply that by 112 districts, you will get Shs 19,353,600,000. I am just giving this simple calculation to give us a picture – (Interjections) –Colleagues, listen to this; this is just to give us a picture of what we are legislating for. 

Much as I appreciate the fact that we have a challenge of the girl-childdropping out of school, much as I appreciate that it is a natural thing for all of us women, we shall have a challenge. Parents are failing to buy food for their children. Parents now must also play their roles. It is time for parents also to play their role of helping and guiding these girls in managing menstruation.

I do appreciate the issue of coming up with a policy to ensure that schools have bathrooms and toilets for girls; that must be mandatory. That must be a must for us. We must have girl-friendly schools with such sanitation facilities. But honestly, - (Interruption) - I am not giving information! I am begging that we play our roles as mothers here and as leaders and female leaders. Let us go down and set up programmes; let us go down to our constituencies and sensitise the mothers – (Interruption).

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, whereas I appreciate the concern raised by the commissioner of this House, who at the same time happens to be a woman and at the same time a mother of daughters who menstruate, when that motion was moved by hon. Franca Akello, there was a prayer that emergency sanitary towels be provided to help those who are in school.Is the honourable member, the honourable commissioner, in order to stand before this Ninth Parliament and say that the role should be thrown back to parents?

We already appreciate that parents are trying, but we are saying we want emergency kits. At the same time, we are highlighting the number of pupils from P.4 to P.7; most of the girls in P.4 and even some of those in P.7, in fact majority of them, do not menstruate. Madam Speaker, is the honourable commissioner in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us discuss the principles. I do not think we should divert the debate by talking about the cause; let us first agree on the principles. What is it that we want to do? This subject is important, honourable members. Maybe you can afford for your children, but there are children in this country who cannot afford these things. (Applause)

Also, there are other alternatives - not those ones of Shs 1500. There are others which are being made and they are reusable. So do not just think about cost; think about the principles and how we can support children to remain in school.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I must not be misunderstood. What I said was honest and we must be honest and sincere.

Madam Speaker, the reason why I raised this is because the motion needs to be amended. In the prayers, we need to add the phrase, “for emergencies” because it is not there in the prayers. That is the spirit in which I raise this. I do support the motion but I had to raise this as a concern, dear colleagues.

MS AKELLO:  Madam Speaker, allow me just to make a clarification on the matter hon. Rosemary Seninde is raising. 

When I was reading the motion, I noticed theword “emergency” missing and I mentioned it. That could have been an oversight during typing. Generally, when you look at the spirit of this motion, the spirit behind it is not requesting Parliament to ask Government to provide sanitary pads for every child that goes to school. It is asking this Parliament to urge Government; we are urging and not directing Government. We are urging Government to provide, through the Ministry of Education, emergency sanitary pads - a toolkit that will provide emergency management in case a girl starts menstruating.

In any case, it is also not a must that the girl will menstruate on a school day; so if she starts menstruating today and she is given emergency aid by providing a sanitary pad, is that really going to cost government too much? That is what I wanted to clarify.

4.53
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I really thank the honourable member for bringing up this motion.

I really need to understand, first of all, what she means by menstrual hygiene management. This is because it is quite broad. You are praying that the Government comes up with a comprehensive policy on menstrual hygiene management; what do you expect Government to do under the hygiene management? It is so broad.If you are talking about bringing emergency pads, who is going to use the emergency pad? I know we are - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I stand on a matter that the fathers here and those who have not yet got children are concerned about. This is a woman, who came here on the vote of fellow women, who were once girls and suffered shame because they could not manage the menstrual cycle; so is it in order for this honourable female Member of Parliament - (Laughter) - to stand before Parliament, even when children are watching, fellow women in Parliament are listening and men who are fathers of those daughters are hearing, to pretend that she does not know what menstruation management is, when she knows it very well and went through it? 

These girls get pain, cramps in the back, and they need aspirin, panadol; sometimes these girls have to use their skirts to block the bleeding and if they keep that piece of cloth on them for two to three days they start smelling. What do you call that? How would you like the Speaker to help you understand that? Is it in order for this lady to embarrass us with this kind of statement?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know when you come here you legislate for the whole country. So if anyone can satisfy me that all their schools first of all, have enough latrines for the girls and the boys, that all of them have got water for them to use, then you can ask what management is. If you have them, then you are fine. 

Let us be serious, honourable members. We have talked about toilets being a problem for the whole country; now what about when girls have got that problem in school where there are no toilets or latrines?

4.57
MS MARGARET BADA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Franca Akello for bringing this important motion on the Floor of Parliament. 

Indeed, to experience the menstrual period for the first time is very shocking, very scary and very shameful for a young girl who does not know what is happening to her. It is worse in mixed schools, where there are boys and girls. The moment the skirt is stained, the boys will say that she has drawn maps and because of the embarrassment, the girl will go home and will never come back until the period is over.

That is a natural thing which has been happening in life since time immemorial. I am happy that she has talked about management. I think management is very important. What we need actually for the young girls to know is that at a certain time in life, they are going to experience this period.

Even during the time of my mother and grandmother, they never used to have even pieces of cloth. They used certain soft grass for menstrual periods.Because they are very well educated, they can use it very well because in the past, they were using only these leaves. So you see how difficult it was. But because the girls are well trained, they can take care of themselves. 

So, it is very important for both the mothers and the female teachers to sensitise the girls that at a certain moment they are going to have that period and when it comes, they must know what to do. Then the girls will not be scared when it appears for the first time.

Secondly, they must be assisted with very good pads. In the past, before Always pads came into existence, they were using pieces of cloths, especially cotton. If you prepare it very well, it will not disturb you. So we need to find a cheaper way of providing sanitary towels for these girls, so that when the time comes, they know what to do. I also remember – (Interruption.)

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that these days, there are NGOs which have come up with very simple materials which help these young girls. They do not even cost one thousand shillings. 

If we put the principle in place, then something can be done. If it is there, people can manage to do those simple things, not necessarily what hon. Seninde is bringing up of Shs 2000. I thank you

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you for that information. Now, once we have these sanitary towels and the girls are aware of them, then when the time comes, they will know what to do. In our time, we were told to ask the older students to educate us. The most important thing is the education.

We also need separate toilets for the girls and there must be water. I remember I was talking about the girl-child education on a radio programme and then a senior woman teacher said, “Honourable, we need water. If we could have a toilet near the office of the senior woman, the girls could hide there”. But I told them that getting plastic toilets may be expensive; what is important is get a barrel, put some water there and make sure that there is a bathroom and a place to put the sanitary towels. If you dump them inthe toilet, within a month or two the toilet will be filled up. We therefore need to have an incinerator to burn the used pads. In that way, you will not fill the toilets. 

So what we need in schools is one, education by the senior women teachers, and at home by the mothers, and the provision of sanitary towels for these children. They also need to know where to dispose these towels. What we need in schools are some facilities for emergency. It is true a girl may not remember the day when menstruation will come. So let them be provided to the senior lady so that when it comes, she can run very fast and use them and the girls will remain in school. I thank you.

5.03
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In our culture, it is a taboo to see blood of a menstruating woman. It is again a taboo for a man to sleep with a woman who is in menstruation. 

When we are talking about sanitary pads, it is not something that can be taken lightly. When I was in primary seven, a girl menstruated and we saw blood behind her and all of us ran after her, just laughing and we drew pictures on the blackboard, and that girl left the school. So when we are talking about pads, we should not take it lightly.

Of course, most of us here can afford them, but deep in the villages, they cannot afford barely one thousand or five hundred shillings. So as she has brought this motion, I supportit as a man, because I have children and relatives who are women and my wife is of course a woman.

So when I see some women here representing some constituencies and they do not come up and say, “Please men, support us”, I get embarrassed. You should actually withdraw those two statements, you two ladies. It is a shame!Let us have a government policy. 

I was in Sri Lanka for benchmarking on health and they provide uniforms, sanitary pads, and other provisions and they are put in place. If a student gets in that period, they can run to the senior teacher and get assistance for that emergency – (Interruption)

MR SEWUNGU:  Thank you, hon. Tayebwa, for giving way. At least it is common knowledge that hon. Ssewungu is a teacher, and I was a head teacher. 

On Monday, we were in hon. Seninde’s constituency at a school known as Kigungu Primary School, with another honourable member - I do not know the district. I asked the head teacher there, “How do you handle sanitary issues and girls’ menstruation while at school; can you show me two reserved uniforms and a skirt for girls, plus where they clean from?” He said that they did not have money and I told him never to answer me that way. Whether you are getting Shs 100,000 as capitation grant, you should have saved some little money to buy few sets of uniforms to help the girls.

Secondly, as hon. Tayebwa has said, this is a professional matter. Yesterday, doctors were here posing about their professional language. At Shimoni, Madam Speaker, where you studied, I was conducting an SST lesson and a girl went into that condition, a boy came to me while I was teaching and said, “Mr Ssewungu, a girl next to me has got a problem, what can we do?”I professionally pulled out all the boys from the class so as to handle my girl, and to also get the senior woman to go and help the girl.That was professional.

So, what hon. Tayebwa is saying is that there is no way you can fail to give emergency help for such matters because it is natural.It is not going to go away; it will remain there. That is the information I wanted to give. I support this motion as a professional.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, as the motion was actually suggesting, let us develop a policy and also have a toolkit in schools and even some public areas. These children are really suffering. I thank you.

5.07
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member who moved the motion. I would like to invite Members to appreciate the fact that we are legislating for a stratified society, and we need to realise the fact that some of our societies are highly vulnerable.This vulnerability has put the girl-child in a very difficult situation.

Members are aware that fromthe investiture of UPE, there has been a growing feeling among parents that perhaps the Government will take over everything, and it is the duty of legislators to try and work around the policy framework. If indeed this is to remain the case, we must agree and help the country to realise how much, for example, of the UPE intervention can go to the issue of subsidising again. 

I remember on the Floor of this House asking the former Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, about the dwindling subvention on UPE. He said that the numbers are growing but the subvention remains the same, but in essence he was saying it is reducing.The policy issue we must address as Parliament in the next financial year, if we moved properly, is how much we can amend the existing framework of UPE subvention to subsidise hygiene,with particular reflection on vulnerable communities. 

Like I said in my preamble, we are legislating for a highly stratified society to which we must be sensitive.We must make sure that we do not generalise education per se because different communities and societies experience different challenges.

Just imagine a young girl who treks 10 kilometres to go to school with that kind of problem. In fact, for you to say that it takes four days away from school is an understatement.I believe we have a duty to look deeply into the framework of subvention to make sure that perhaps taking advantage of the next financial year, we properly move and reflect on how much we can broaden this subvention to capture elements of subsidising hygiene for the girl-child.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the honourable member moved a motion to draw into perspective the duty of teachers and school management committees. It is part of our duty as leadersto progressively educate our parents and management committees -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Members, the subject is very important but we need to conclude it. So, I put the question that this House do approve the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
THE SPEAKER:Honourable members, we want to ask our Committee on Education to follow up on this resolution and engage with the ministry to start discussion on what the possibilities are and the timeframe and report back to this House.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, there is a pertinent issue that is not embedded in this motion about incinerators. We raised this issue before the Committee on Education- my vice-chairman is there. We have urged the Ministry of Education to provide incinerators in institutions and primary schools but they have failed. It is not reflected in the motion. The moment you have emergency sanitary pads and other such materials, you need to have an incinerator at the institutions. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the issues we want our committee to engage with the ministry - the details, modality, content of the package and the management.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the members for supporting it. I have been in this House for eight years, and this is the third time this matter has been brought to the Floor in such a strong manner and endorsed by the whole House.

Madam Speaker, to give the urgency and importance that this matter holds, I would like to beg that we put a timeframe on the matter.If we do that, failure of the Executive and Government to adhere and implement this matter shall automatically lead us to appropriate reactionary measures in the budget appropriation process next year. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we expect a report at the beginning of the thirdMeeting of the Ninth Parliament. We want a report in the first week of February 2015.



THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sorry to come in after you have closed, but our colleague, the Minister of Education and Sports, reminded us on the Front Bench that indeed a policy exists. So with this motion, we will be able to harmonise the views of honourable members of Parliament and Government and actually we could come earlier than February on that subject.

THE SPEAKER: Now, that is an assurance from the Minister of Defence. He is defending all the children. If you can do it before we break for Christmas, we would be happy. We are adjusting the timeframe to before the 18th of December.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I was coordinating the issue with the Minister of Education and she told me that they could formally come with statements in a week’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Will it take into account the contents of these documents?

MS OPENDI: She said there are various interventions and the policy exists and she could come in but if you wish to give her more time -

THE SPEAKER: We expect a statement next week from the Minister of Education and Sports on this subject. Thank you.

Honourable members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Andrews Day and Boarding School Wanyange. They are represented by hon. Migereko and hon. Agnes Nabirye.  You are welcome.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter. When the Minister of Education comes and gives a report here, it is going to pre-empt what the committee is supposed to do and we may not address all the issues. I would still suggest that we give leave to the committee first and after we have presented the minister reacts.

THE SPEAKER: Let her present what she has in plan and then we can build on it as a committee.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter about the registers.

There is a difference between somebody who has not attended and one who comes late. Many of us are here but not registered. Honourable colleagues, this is a serious matter because somebody who has not come is not the same as a latecomer. We are here debating yet we are not recorded in the register. So, is it procedurally right for us to go on debating when some members are not captured in the register?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that register is for arresting absentees and the latecomers.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE 
GOVERNMENT TO CREATE CHILD LABOUR FREE ZONES

5.19
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to create child labour free zones.

Madam Speaker, this motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Quality Education:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995 provides for the protection of children from social or economic exploitation and employment likely to be hazardous or to interfere with their education or social development; 

AWARE that Uganda ratified the International Labour Organisation Convention No 182 and 138 on Elimination of Worst Forms of Child Labour and Minimum Age of Employment respectively, which oblige member states to implement compulsory and free basic education, among others;

AND AWARE that the Government of the Republic of Uganda has policies that promote universal and secondary education programmes to ensure children access formal education;

FURTHER AWARE that the Children’s Act, 1996 and the Employment Act, 2006 prohibit employment of children below 12 years and employment of children below 14 years in hazardous labour conditions;

COGNIZANT of the fact that the employment laws and the Children’s Act permit children above 12 years to carryout light duties that do not interfere with their education, this has continued to raise issues of when these children should be carrying out these duties at the same time attending school and it is also difficult to distinguish between what is light work and what is not; 

AND COGNISANT of the fact that despite the Government’s intervention on universal primary and secondary education, a big number of children are in child labour or engaged in economic activities that make them vulnerable to child labour; 

FURTHER COGNIZANT of the fact the Uganda is signatory to the Kampala Declaration on Working towards Child Labour Free Zones, 2013; 

NOTING that child labour not only deprives children of their right to education and protection from exploitation, it also has broader consequences for national development; 

AND FURTHER noting that eradication of all forms of child labour constitutes an important issue for development and human rights;
 NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1. That it collectively urges Government to adopt and support an area based approach policy that focuses on rights of all children in an area to be agreed upon. 

2. That Parliament urges Government to amend the legislation with regards to education, employment of children, making universal primary and secondary education not only free but also compulsory, child employment prohibited and provide punitive sanctions for noncompliance for parents, guardians and employers, thereby creating child labour free zones.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MS SENINDE:Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the colleagues who support this motion. 

First of all, I want to make it categorically clear that the recent International Labour Organisation report of 2013 revealed that in sub-Saharan Africa, the number of child labourers has increased and around 65 million children are in child labour.  In Uganda alone, an estimated 2 million children are engaged in child labour and these are between the ages of five to seven. This translates into 16 percent of the total number of children in Uganda involved in child labour. This is overwhelming in the primary sector,which accounts for about 93 percent of the total child labour.

When we talk about child labour, sometimes people confuse child labour with child work. When we talk about child labour, we are talking about work that is mentally, physically, socially and/or morally dangerous and harmful to our children and that denies them the right to education. 

Madam Speaker, we very well know that child labour is among the major causes of child abuse and exploitation and is a fundamental violation of our children’s rights. I want us to understand that child labour deprives these children of the most fundamental rights like I said, but it also forces children out of school and affects their education. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make it categorically clear to this House that the aim of education is to provide or give knowledge of not only facts but also values. If all these children are engaged in child labour, that means they are lacking the chance or the right to also gain those values.Yesterday, a report was presented on the narcotics Bill. I want to remind this House that most of our children that are involved in child labour who are not in school in most cases end up involved in drugs, and of course we know the consequences of drugs. 

The crime rate is on the increase, and of course we cannot rule out the fact that these children who are not in school engage or get involved in those kinds of crimes.  When our children remain illiterate, it is a very big danger to this nation. I always ask myself a question that as a Government, as Parliament, as parents and communities, if we do not come out to help in this situation - because this is a very big challenge to the nation - we are going to have a terrible future generation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg my dear colleagues that we really urge Government to ensure that we amend the education law in order not only to look at the issue of universality of education but also making it compulsory. Why? This is because we shall be able to provide sanctions to all those parents who do not take children to school. 

I want to give an example, as I try to conclude. In Wakiso District, we have succeeded in coming up with some child labour free zones, in Entebbe. The community has actually come out to mobilise the group to contribute a small amount of money, like Shs 100. They contribute that money on a monthly basis and they use it to help the children who are out of school. 

Actually, these communities go amongst themselves, they look for the families where children are not going to school and are involved in child labour and they take them to school because the Government has provided free education. Some of these children head families and maybe they do not have an opportunity to get books and probably uniforms. So the communities have got involved in helping these children get the books and at least get the uniforms and probably even payfor their food at school, and it is helping; it has made a big impact.

India has done that and they have managed to succeed in withdrawing over one million children from child labour using this kind of policy. So, if we come out with a policy in this House, of forcing all children to be at school, I have no doubt we shall be able to succeed - (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having said that, I beg to be allowed to lay on the Table the motion – it is signed - to this effect.Also allow me to lay on the Table the Kampala Declaration Working towards Child Labour Free Zones, which was passed on the 19 April 2013 in Kampala. Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.29
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West Kalungu): Thank You, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I want to thank the mover of the motion.

Let me state here that for the period a child stays in school, he or she will never go out with nothing. What is important is keeping a child at school and not keeping him working. 

Madam Speaker, I want to give brief statistics here, which were given in the National Labour Force and Child Activity Survey of 2011-2012 and they were published in 2013. The UN Department on Child Labour of 2013 gives statistics of working children at the age of 5 years old to 14 being at 30 percent in Uganda. Those attending school at 5 to 14 years old are at 88 percent.I will lay this on the Table because these figures are alarming, and you have given me three minutes and I donot want to disobey you, Madam Speaker.

Platform for Labour Action in their annual statistics indicate that two million children were engaged in some form of child labour. Platform for Labour Action in their report of December 2013, which was about child labour,again gave its figures. The UN Children’s Fund also gave a big number. Even UBOS, 2009/10, gave its survey report.All these indicate children who are working.

I am at least lucky to have got the chance to teach children who had become soldiers - they were working with Kony - while I was teaching at the Military Police. The majority of these child soldiers, when they were brought back, wanted to study but they failed because they could not get anything to make them happy. Instead, they would run out of the barracks, go and drink and look for other sources of money, but we had to create methods that would make them love school. 

On this, I can give evidence from the report of Prof. Jjuuko from Human Rights and Peace Centre where he wrote a working paper on UPE. The most important thing we must pay attention to as Members of Parliament is creating a good environment and factors that attract children back to school.I said it here one time in Parliament when I talked about the Basoga.These are some of the most important things that will attract children back to school.Much as we are going to create labour free zones, Prof. Jjuuko said that as we pull back children from work let us make these UPE schools attractive - music, food, sports and so many other things. 

We also have a problem with our Constitution; when you read Article 34(4) and (5), it talks about the working age of children as 16 years and yet in the National Child Labour Policy and the Children’s Act, the employment age is 12 years. Here, we find problems; what should be done about this? Article 30 of our Constitution just says that you should have education; what type of education? We donot know. 

As I end, I want to say that we have ratified a number of international legislations, declarations and conventions; it is not about ratifying but putting them into practice, as the mover of the motion has stated. Most of our children – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery there are representatives of the National Association of Teachers. They have come to listen to the motion.

5.33
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the commissioner for this motion. I also belong to that forum on education. It is unfortunate that we are debating this motion when my colleague, the minister in charge of youth and children, is absent in this House. 

Child labour in Uganda has become a way of life. In West Nile, our children are being used in tobacco gardens from planting up to harvesting and selling. We have seen our children used as sugarcane cutters. They come from West Nile up to the sugarcane plantation. We have seen our children used as stone crushers, from West Nile up to Muyenga here. We have seen our children used as labourers on the streets to vend or to hawk commodities. There could be no better opportunity for this motion than today and I hope the House will support us and ensure that we put pressure on Government to ensure that child labour becomes history in this country.

We have seen parents maim their own children just because they are resisting child labour. I have pictures depicting different forms of children labour here on my iPad. When you move on the streets, you will be confronted by children vending. This is one of the worst forms of child labour. 

Therefore, I do support this motion and particularly prayer No.2, where we need to make amendments. The Children’s Act was amended, UPE Act- Before I came to Parliament, I participated in the formulation and passing of an education ordinance in Arua, but we need to keep an eye on the enforcement of these laws. We have a weak enforcement mechanism in this country in as far as laws are concerned. Therefore, as we support this motion and pass these resolutions and prayers, we need to keep an eye on the enforcement mechanism that we need to engage.

Most times when these cases of child labour are reported at the Police, they cry foul about incapacity in terms of manpower, equipment and tools -(Member timed out.)

5.37
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much,Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank my sister, the hon. Seninde, for moving this motion. 

I do not remember being forced to stay at school when I was in primary. It is the parent who would fail to sustain their children in school but no child was being forced to stay in school because the environment was friendly to the children.I wonder why the Government of Uganda has allowed everybody to have a school. It is only in the teaching profession where everybody thinks they can teach. You cannot simply become an engineer in this country; you cannot simply open a clinic because NDA will be running after you. But for schools, every Tom, Dick and Harry is opening up a school, even when they do not go through the ethics or the psychology of maintaining children at school.Every corridor in the trading centres is a school with no school field, no music. They think that just getting good grades should be the order of the day. 

The profession of education needs to be regulated. If anyone has to open a school, let that person be a professional teacher, so that the ethics of maintaining and sustaining the children in school is taken care of in that school. If everybody who gets money is going to open a school - actually in the rural areas everybody who lacks money opens a school so that they can extort parents and then run away. These are some of the issues why children cannot be in school. 

The second thing is that the teachers themselves are frustrated; they cannot tell the children to be in school when they themselves do not want to be in the schools. They are not paid; their salaries are on and off. We need to sit and think about the environment and how to make the children stay at school with lovely teachers, teachers who can hold them. You do now know how much I loved to be held by a teacher. But which teacher now can hold a child when they are thinking about what they will eat at home when there is no salary or anything?

Madam Speaker, the second thing I want to do is to implore us, the elites, to change our practice of trafficking these children to bring them to our homes as house boys and house girls. Let us change that. While we talk about trafficking in persons, some of us are culprits. I think we need to change that attitude. Let the children stay in school. If there is nobody to pick them for any labour, they will not do it but for as long as we continue to traffic them, we the elite who want house girls to keep our homes, then I am sure -(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS BEATRICE BARUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and the seconder; this is a very important issue because in all our constituencies, you find children whom Government spends a lot of money on supporting them in primary schools but they are not in school. They are working in people’s homes and indeed doing a lot of work. 

I want to suggest that as politicians, even local governments, we cannot enforce this, but Government has introduced the crime preventers - the 10 people in each village who are not elected. Maybe those can check in each person’s home and when they find somebody young, maybe they can either arrest that person or send that child back to school. But enforcement in this country, as everybody said, is difficult because people who would do the enforcement fear for their support. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One day, I was moving along Kampala Road and a woman - a beggar - was carrying a baby who was about five months old and she was using this baby for begging. She held the hands of the baby and they were shaking. Looking at the kid, I almost shed tears and wondered where the law was. Our biggest problem will start from the politicians of this country. It is the politicians who have made enforcement of laws on almost everything difficult. That is why we have so many children being pushed into working when they are not supposed to work. 

People used to fear but today in my village, a parent will first stop the child from going to school to help him clear the garden. He will stop the child to first help him graze animals. I come from the lake shore where a parent will send the son to go and fish in order to get money for him and nobody will care to stop the parent and yet the laws are in place.

Madam Speaker, I think this must start with us the politicians. Like my colleague has said, no politician will stand to ensure that the law is enforced. What matters is the vote and what will come out of it, nobody seems to care. If only the leaders would stand firm and say no, then we would even make it easier for the law enforcement organs to implement some of these laws that we have made.

We are only adding on this but the law against child employment, against children being engaged in activities like young girls who are working in bars, hotels and lodges, is already there. Parliament should now say, from now on, let us see how enforcement of some of these laws that are available will be taken and then we will move forward. Otherwise we will make more laws but nothing will change. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Child labour is a serious problem in this country and indeed I want to support that universal education should be made compulsory and if we are to make it compulsory, let us begin with the street children. These children are used by their parents who send them to collect money by begging as a form of income. Sometimes when you give out a coin, the child runs and gives it to someone who is older. This means the parents sit aside and wait for the child to get money and pick it from them.

I experienced child labour in my constituency; I represent the fishing community along the Albertine Graben. Children are just loitering collecting “Muziiri” and the parents are very happy because they get money when their children are helping them but nobody is there to ensure these children are in school. 

For the peasants, in the planting season, you will never get children at school. In the harvesting season, children are busy in the fields with their parents, which is very sad. If we make school compulsory, these parents will be held accountable. 

Finally, I want to talk about the school environment and thank the colleagues who have emphasized the school environment factor. I am a teacher by profession and I specialized in early childhood education. Play is very important and we need to motivate children at school; we need to create a conducive environment for children to stay in school. We need games and music; in summary, we need co-curricular activities. 

Children are now forced into academics. A child is supposed to grow wholly. We develop the cognitive, that is, the brain; the psychomotor, that is, the physical; and the affective, that is, the spirit. So, if we do not emphasize all these aspects, our children will continue to drop out of school and we shall not get the Ugandans we want. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the motion and in particular, I would like to support the prayer that school-going-age children receive compulsory education. As we speak, we have school going children who are not in school at all and therefore Government should really put a tight hand so that these children access school. 

Now the issue of labour is found both at home and in school and the attitude towards work is wanting. At home, you will realise that children are forced to first do housework before they go to school and this makes them go to school late or they fail to go completely. Then at school, you find that work is used as a punishment. I remember a school where when a child breaks the school rules, the child is told to go and plough or destroy an anthill and level it to ground level. So that attitude towards work is very wanting. Therefore, whereas we want our children to learn how to work, there is need to give them work which is proportionate to their age so that it does not affect their health. 

As a way forward, for communities that are in hard-to-reach areas, I urge Government to continue providing boarding facilities in these areas like Karamoja or the islands so that these children are kept in school regularly and the school dropout rates will be reduced. 

So, Madam Speaker, I support the motion that these children be helped so that they are all in school and indeed they should be helped until they complete their education. I thank you.

5.50
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to thank the mover of the motion. This motion is long overdue; it would have been moved by the time the UPE came into force. 

I have been an implementer of UPE but I want to put it right that Government has lost billions of money under UPE because UPE is not compulsory. This country has been grappling with a problem of ghost pupils. We cannot get rid of that problem until UPE is made compulsory. 

At the beginning of every year, children and parents get excited; they enrol in schools but two or three months later, they drop out of school because the parents realised that they cannot do all the work in their home without their children. And the schools maintain these children in their enrolment records. So, we continue to lose UPE funds because UPE is not compulsory. I thus highly support the prayer of the mover of the motion that UPE be made compulsory.

Madam Speaker, I want to add to what my sister, hon. Flavia Kabahenda, said about the issue of housemaids. Today, you find a nine-year-old being employed as a housemaid. You do not know how much these girls are traumatised. I have witnessed this in my constituency; we have been able to draw some of these girls from people’s homes. You find a housewife sleeping at 9.00 p.m. and leaving a nine-year-old to continue working up to midnight. You find a family eating beef and matooke and the nine-year-old, because she is a housemaid, eating posho and beans. What we are talking about is too bad for a young population of this country and we need to make sure that we create these child labour free zones. We need to protect all the children of this country; we need to enter homes of various people. 

Madam Speaker, when these young girls are left in those homes, they are exposed to very many risks. So many rapes take place in those homes because the rest of the people in the home have gone to work, the young children have gone to school and this little girl who is left there is faced with a lot of challenges. I want to suggest that -(Member timed out.)

5.53 
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and the Forum on Quality Education for this very important and noble motion. 

I come from the Lake Albert area of Bugungu where absenteeism in UPE is at 50 per cent, the dropout rate in UPE is at 80 per cent with only 20 per cent completion. This is because these children are either now breadwinners, dealing in mukene at the lake, in cotton when it is the season, and yet there is even no good price for cotton. They are also dealing in tobacco and engaging in all sorts of activities like grazing and other activities. 

My concern as a son of a headmaster who took over from colonial head teachers, and as a grandson of Sir Tito Owiny’s chief, is that at that time even in the early days, before UPE was introduced, we had 95 per cent attendance - almost 100 per cent. There was no UPE and we had 99 per cent completion. We now have graduate sub-county chiefs, we have elected leaders but standards are going down. I think we need to ask that question: What was unique with these unelected chiefs who made sure that everybody in the community went to school and remained there? I think that is what we have lost - the societal community family values. 

As we make the laws, we need to review the delivery mechanism of the education system. The cultural institutions and the foundation bodies then, most of them religious, provided us with holistic education not just because some government was paying money. So, I would like to strongly recommend that Government just funds the education but should leave the bigger mandate of running of schools to the founding bodies, to religious institutions, so that they instil holistic and family values. We used to start with prayers in the morning but these kinds of schools under LCs who do not have permanent mandates and interests are killing education. 

When you follow up, these girls who are going to the lake get early pregnancies, early marriages; the boys begin to take kaveera and they begin taking drugs. So, it is a big disaster beyond just running out of school. So, we really need to rethink and review the delivery mechanism of education and make sure that we protect these children, because if 80 per cent are dropping out and only 60 per cent are attending, then we have no UPE.

5.56
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Rosemary Sseninde for moving this motion. I am also a member of the Parliamentary Forum on Quality Education and in Moyo District, my legacy is promoting education.

The impact of child labour is so great on education, on the health of children and on their social welfare. In Moyo District, the dropout rate is 70 per cent; that means the completion rate is only 30 per cent. Therefore, I support this motion and I would like to inform Members that this motion is not just out of the blue because the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Quality Education has done some research. He took us for a field visit in Entebbe Municipality in one of the schools where the headmaster told us that previously, the enrolment rate there was 40 children but when the labour free zone was declared, an NGO came in to support them on how to run it involving all the stakeholders like the parents at home and helping them to form a committee to ensure that all children in that zone go to school. Also, the school children formed a committee to ensure that their fellow children come to school and when they do not, they also follow up. They also ensure that the stakeholders in education also come in. The enrolment went up to around 400 in three years. 

Madam Speaker, we were told that that was a school that had never got a first grade. The best performers were in grade U but for the last three years, they have been getting first grades and they are continuously improving. So, I really want to support this motion because I know most of our children are suffering under this child labour and the impact, as I have said, is so great.

Children who do not attend school have poor performance; children who do not go to school are forced to even go to the fields alone and that is -(Member timed out.)

5.59
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Madam Speaker, I represent Luuka County. Luuka is in the centre of Busoga and is surrounded by all the sugar factories in Uganda and the major one is Kakira Sugar Works. Most of my voters are out-growers and their economic activity is to grow sugarcane and sell it to those sugar factories. Of recent, I happened to get a chance and I was with a civil society organisation which was carrying out a campaign such that people are sensitised on the fact that girls should remain girls and they should be in schools and boys should remain boys and stay in school. I moved with that civil society organisation all around the constituency and we were gathering views from the parents, but the parents also were complaining that most of their children have dropped out of school. Even for those who have decided to remain in school, whenever results are released, Luuka is among the three worst performing districts. 

Their worry was that Parliament has over-legislated on issues of children. When they send their children to school, some of them do not reach school and when they come back, the parents would ask them and they would try to punish them but the children would tell the parents that, “You are caning me but tomorrow I am going to report you to Kadaga; I am going to report you to the Police because the laws are there.”

Madam Speaker, it is a very serious challenge. As we are here grappling with the rate of dropouts in primary schools, the parents out there are also complaining that the laws are restraining them from disciplining their children. So, I want to support the motion, but I think we should also put some stringent laws that can scare our young children from dropping out of school. We need to put some fear in them that when you drop out of school, such and such a thing will happen to you. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.03
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion, with an amendment that it should not only be Universal Primary Education that is compulsory but also Universal Secondary Education since in senior one, a child is still 12 years. So, if we are to limit it to only Universal Primary Education, then definitely it would mean a child and parent could say, after all, the compulsory stage has been completed. Since the government policy covers up to secondary level, especially at O’level, then we should extend by causing an amendment to this motion so that it also covers up to that level. 

That notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, we have got so many laws and policies in place which govern children and the level of education in this country; for example, we have got the Children’s Act, which is already in place. We have also got polices in place like the National Gender Policy, the Uganda Food and Nutrition Policy, the Orphans and Vulnerable Children’s Policy, the National Youth Policy, Elimination of Child Labour Policy and many others in place. I think the biggest challenge is not for us to continue enacting laws; it is not the laws which are lacking. The biggest challenge we have is the implementation.

As we do the implementation or operationalisation of these policies, what about the capacity we have as a country? I remember in the subcounties of Sironko, one time they passed subcounty bylaws and the districts passed the ordinances. Previously, very many children could go for harvesting of malewa in Mt Elgon and during the coffee harvesting season, very many of them would be involved in harvesting coffee. During the circumcision period, very many children would run out of schools to go and enjoy the circumcision dances. 

However, when they passed such ordinances and bylaws, the challenge we had was that all children went to school, the parents became supportive but the school capacity could not even hold these children. The classrooms were not enough, the teachers were complaining, and children would sit out because the seats were not enough. 

So, as we do support this motion, I think we should also have it in mind that Government needs to put in much more, especially the Ministry of Education, to ensure that as we send all children to school, the schools have the capacity to accommodate these children. Otherwise, we shall continue passing laws, we shall support the motion, we shall enact more laws but in the end, they will hit a snag if we donot build capacity as a country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.06
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I would like to request that this Parliament also takes it upon itself, especially each Member of Parliament, to make sure that whenever you go to your constituency or when talking to your people, matters of child labour and child education are always on your lips. This is because whenever we speak about it, the people will understand, and unless you seriously make a point as a Member of Parliament, people may end up just hearing that Parliament has passed a law and not take it seriously. 

My mother-in-law does functional adult literacy lessons at home, and whenever I go to see her, I find her class full of children instead. So, one day in April this year, when I passed by to see her, I asked her whether she had changed the programme from functional adult literacy to children literacy programme. She tried to explain to me the challenges of parents around the villages who do not want to send their children to school. So, the problem is not Parliament, it is not the law, it is also the parents themselves. You wonder why, with all the programmes of UPE and what Government is doing, a good number of children still remain at home. 

Child labour is not only done by people who traffic children from villages to Kampala, Jinja and wherever they are working; child labour is being done by parents as well. I remember in the Eighth Parliament, it was my slogan and whenever I went to radio talk shows, I always told my people that whenever I am driving around and I find you going to the garden with your young girl with a little baby on her back and it is a school day, I will arrest you. I will pick you and drop you at the police station. Actually, that scare alone was enough for parents to at least listen because whenever you as a leader speak and do it, they will fear. So, it is very important for us to take this motion seriously and also take some bit of action as leaders because it is our responsibility. I thank you. 

6.09
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is an impression that has been given by some Members of Parliament; I remember in 2008, I had just come here into this House and an amendment was made, which made Universal Primary Education not only free but also compulsory. We should be asking ourselves why there is no enforcement. I just want to make that correction because even the mover of this motion alluded to it but she was also in the Eighth Parliament.

I want to make some distinction because we may err. I have just been exchanging notes with hon. Betty Nambooze. I am proud of my history and my upbringing. I used to do all types of work to get money to pay part of my school fees and get my scholastic materials. However, by definition, the article I am reading here on my iPad gives a very good distinction, which Members of Parliament may benefit from; let me read it verbatim: “The term ‘child labour’ refers to work that is mentally, physically, socially or morally dangerous and harmful to children; and interferes with their schooling by depriving them of the opportunity to attend schools, obliging them to leave school prematurely or requiring them to attempt to combine school attendance with excessively long and heavy work” 

I think if at all those are the confines within which the mover of this motion brought this motion, then we shall be able to sensibly support the motion.We need to examine the factors that have made our children drop out of school which are not necessarily labour related and address them. 

Government is here and Members of Parliament are debating this issue of having children out of school when they are supposed indeed to be in school and there is an enabling law to that effect; I hope, Madam Speaker, you will give the Leader of Government Business an opportunity to address us on why there is a law which is not being complied with and no enforcement whatsoever is being done. 

We are Members of Parliament, we crisscross this country to go into our community outreaches and - (Member timed out.)

6.13
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Right now, if you drive between Clock Tower and the Kibuye Roundabout, you will find so many children vending all sorts of goods there. In my constituency, I was trying to talk to schools about teenage pregnancy and school dropouts, and I was asking them about the factors that cause this. One of them is what we discussed earlier, menstruation. A P.6 girl-child told me to come to Parliament and present it so that maybe Government could find a way of providing emergency sanitary pads for those children. I am happy that my colleague has already presented it. 

The other one is child labour in sugarcane gardens. It is a very serious issue, but again a challenge comes on the issue Dr Bayigga mentioned. He was trying to imply that not all child labour is bad because they will justify by saying they look for money to pay their school fees or to survive. 

We have another factor: parents send children in the evening to go and sell or vend some goods especially in the villages. This has caused a lot of rape cases and it discourages children from going to school. If an adult can change his walking style when he has money in his pocket, how about a kid? -(Laughter)-How about some kid who has some coin in the pocket? That kid will not be able to go to school. So, it is a very big challenge.

There was something presented by the chairperson of the forum for children, hon. Mutyabule. I do not know where that ended -(Interjections) – hon. Mutyabule of Namutumba - it is allowed for you to be called by constituency or by name. There is the Child Act that you have been referring to here. Hon. Bayigga said that in 2008, this issue was debated on the Floor of Parliament. So, where is the problem and how do we define good child labour and the bad one? That is a big challenge, because people will be hiding behind the good child labour we are talking about yet they are carrying out the other bad child labour which is spoiling our children. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion.As she said, the number of child labourers has increased in sub-Saharan Africa. This should give us some thought. Why is it so? What are the underlying concepts that bring this up? It is until we examine the root causes of this problem that we will be able to address it fairly. 

At the same time, we also should be able to find out who the partners are who should come out to examine the problem. The government is the first partner, other development partners, for example the UN bodies like the UNICEF, alongside save the children organisation and many others including parents. What have these partners done because this is not the beginning of this problem; it has been in existence? What have they done to be able to address this matter? There must be a comprehensive strategic plan for this. Who should steer it up because when these partners meet, they should be able to examine and analyse all these causes and find out what should be done by whom to be able to address this matter?

Many colleagues have talked about compulsory education. This is a wonderful point and surely, it is that undertaking which can help us also overcome this problem. Under compulsory education in Uganda, we consider the passing of the Universal Primary Education. Why did we start the Universal Primary Education? It means there were also some other challenges. So it is now for us to find out what the challenges are that hinder us from having this compulsory education because it is our point of concern. We should be able to address this problem. All these partners should be able to look at this.

Finally, it will also be better for us to give the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development duties to give us reliable data about this subject, which can help us in planning for this. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be able to take up thisand inform us how many these children are and in which area. In Karamoja, for example, we have a lot of these children we are talking about; the majority of these street children come from there –(Member timed out.)

6.19
MRS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion because in the current world, education is key to success. All of us are here simply because we were able to attain the minimum that is required to be here. So, it is a very big challenge today that most parents are reluctant or almost giving up on their role of bringing up their children and more so supporting them in their education. 

Madam Speaker, I think that it is very important for us to also look at how we can legislate to ensure that parents participate or play their role. In most cases, you find that with UPE and USE, most parents assume that education is left to Government and so at times, they do not play their role. When Government provides the structures and pays the salaries and then they do the needful, parents are somehow reluctant in playing their role in the education of their children.

In Namayingo District, this is a very serious issue. I also represent the islands where even this year, the district attempted to close some primary schools in the islands simply because there was almost zero attendance at the beginning of the year. Most children go fishing and parents are aware. They send them to go fishing and to look for money and most teachers just sit at school, play around with the few children there and at the end of the day, get their salary. I think it is very bad.

We also have some sort of gold mining in my district and every time you pass around, you see many children “officially” on the road processing the gold.So you wonder what happened to their parents. Have parents forgotten that they have a role to play in the lives of their children? It is very important for us to ensure that parents are compelled to comply or to help their children, more so in their education.I am aware that work is important and biblical but also at times - (Member timed out.)

6.23
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to support the motion but add that as Parliament and as a country, we are talking about dropouts but what about those who do not start at all.

We need to make our schools very attractive to start with. Many of you have gone outside this country and seen what happens in the kindergartens in Britain or America. Even in this country, if you look at what we call “international schools” and compare them with our traditional UPE schools, I think all our children in the villages would like to be part of the programmes of the international school system. That means their programmes are very interesting, attractive and if a child joins such a school, he is not likely to wish to drop out in search for labour.

What about you, Members of Parliament, how many of your children drop out? When you are taking your child to school in your car with shoes, pens and a good bag, the child would like to stay in that school because it has a conducive atmosphere. So, our role as legislators is to ensure that we can attract our children to schools and even wish to stay in those schools. 

I remember we had a very big debate about school feeding here and we said that it should be the mothers and fathers to pack food for their children. I support it but then we know there are areas where parents cannot do it. If, for example, we provided porridge at break or at lunch time, many of our children would love to stay in such schools. So, when talking about laborious labour that keeps our children out of school, it is because we also have a duty to ensure that they are attracted and always wish to be in school.

What about our syllabus? You know for many of our children, after education, it is not very attractive. Parents sell their land, goats and cows to ensure that their children go to school, but after P.7, after S.4, what happens to the child? Can we quickly have our Skilling Uganda programme so that all our children leave school with skills? Otherwise, it is not attractive. He has finished university and he has no job. So parents wonder why their children cannot start working early;afterall, even after P.7 he will join those who did not go to school and go in to the sugar plantations, banana ferrying and cutting stones. There isn’t a big difference. So, how can we quickly start our programme of Skilling Uganda so that children have jobs even at P.7 and even after S.4? 

Can we, for example, fight poverty in the villages more aggressively than we are doing now, because some parents cannot afford a book? We know that some parents cannot afford a pair of shorts so they tell the child, “Can we go to the banana plantation and work the whole day just for feeding and existence.” To such a parent, school is not a priority in the poor man’s home. Can we quickly and aggressively -(Member timed out.)

6.26
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I fully support the motion for the following reasons:

First of all, elimination of all forms of child labour is linked to the provisions of formal fulltime and quality education. One thing that we must appreciate is that most of these children that are taken for child labour affect even their families. When a child is taken for child labour, it means that you are putting perpetual poverty in this family. We are saying, let us first get these children out of labour otherwise we deprive them of childhood and the opportunity for potential growth. 

The families depend on these children for survival because they know that this child will go out and get money. Therefore, the families now tend to think that the children will be able to make them survive. I can give examples of many families in Luuka District. We have sugarcane plantations and most of these children do not go to school, - I think you have seen stories in newspapers - they go for sugarcane cutting. In the sugarcane plantations, there are so many other vices; we have girl-children getting pregnant, we get boys raping girls within the sugarcane plantation. 

This is a very big problem.If we are to handle this, we need to combine efforts from the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because it combines both lack of education and poverty.

The other thing that I would like to recommend is for the districts that are affected to come up with ordinances. The example I can give is that in my district, we had to come up with an ordinance but because we were combining politics and education and development, we failed to implement them. We were saying if we stop the children from going to cut sugarcane, then we are not going to get votes from the voters. We need to differentiate between education, development and politics.

Lastly, the complexity of child labour is such that it goes on in various sectors of society and affects other children who are not yet in employment. When most of these school going children see their colleagues earning money, they will think that it is the order of the day, so many of them will think that instead of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have 30 seconds to conclude.

MS KAABULE: What I wanted to say is that let us not only legislate for those going to school, let us also keep those who are in school from getting out to join their colleagues who are already out of school. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.30
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I would like to second her. 

This is a very important issue that we are debating. I think the most important thing that we need to know is what causes this child labour. Look at the percentage of poverty; in the last State of the Nation Address, the President said that 68 percent of the households of Uganda are living on subsistence farming. These are people who are living on something small. They produce something just for the stomach but have nothing extra; so 68 percent of the population of Uganda is very poor. So, I attribute this child labour to poverty; it is one of the major causes. 

I want to give an example of a family which I saw in Kapchorwa one time; it is a subsistence household that lives on casual labour. The children go for labour, the mother and father too but when the father gets his money, he goes to drink; the mother and the children use their money for food and other things.I experienced a nasty incident when the father and the girl fought. The father came and used a piece of soap which the daughter had bought using her money which she had got from labour. She told her father, “Why are you using my soap? I want to use it for washing my uniform. The other little money I had, I used it for buying books. Why didn’t you buy yours?” 

This girl did not stay in the family for long because the relationship between the parents and the children was very strained. She had to run for early marriage. Therefore, one of the causes of school dropouts and child labour is poverty. People go to look for money.

Another one is alcohol. I have seen alcoholic parents leaving all the housework for the children and the children end up even looking after the young ones. I think there should be a strong policy on alcoholism so that this -(Member timed out.)

6.33
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. The mover of the motion needs to clarify on something; is the motion seeking for the creation of child labour free zones, leaving the rest of the country to practice child labour? How do you define those zones?

Secondly, we are talking about education but there is a form of education called apprenticeship - training on the job. I am a product of that kind of education. When I was a child in Obongi, I worked; my father taught me how to work. I went through schools where I met children of the privileged. I was in St Joseph’s College Ombachi, a school which was powerful then, and I came to St Mary’s Kisubi for A’ Level. Madam Speaker, today some of the children who came from privileged families and who did not make it successfully through school and did not learn how to work are wasted children. Some of you, my colleagues, are parents of wasted children who do not know how to work - (Interruption)

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for allowing me to give this bit of information. The definition is between work and labour. Even we, as Members of Parliament, should ensure that our children know how to work. Otherwise, a child that does not know how to work cannot make it through this world. 

The word “labour” ends with the word “laborious” - excessive labour that stops a child from continuing with education. I think that was the definition we got. If your parents taught you to work, they were excellent parents and for all of us here, especially the mothers, your child should know how to cook, sweep, clean and even go the plantation with you; they should know how to milk a cow and to graze it too but they must go and stay in school. I think that is the difference. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for that. With that kind of presentation, I pray that we should give room for apprenticeship to teach our children how to work. With my children in front of me, including those in primary one, I tell them to polish their shoes, wash their underpants and they must sweep their room. If you come to my home and you arrest me because I am teaching my children, you will have committed a crime against me. 

We must also be careful in taking care of children who hail from privileged families. There are people seated in this Parliament who have invested money in the education of their children but the children came out of school as wasted people. They cannot fit in offices and cannot also fit in the garden. That is very bad; we should not take Ugandans in that direction.

Lastly, apprenticeship is very important; let us not legislate for children who are in school only. There are children who are also out of school who need to be taught and trained and our legislation should cover all of them. I beg to pray. Thank you.

6.37
MS THEOPISTA SENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I stand to support the motion but we must get the distinction between child labour and child work. Child work is exquisitely defined by the ILO Convention on the Elimination of Child Labour. If we had time, we could have looked at that so that we do not confuse the two. Child work is not bad at all. Child labour has been properly defined by Dr Lulume, so let us be very clear on this. I want to remind you that Uganda is a member of the UN and more so the International Labour Organisation.

In the 1980s, Uganda had a problem of child labour in plantations, fishing areas and prostitution, mostly at the border areas. This prompted the trade unions of Uganda to ask the ILO to help us out of the problem. What they did was to come down and engage Prof. Mwaka to do research on this and the numbers that came out were alarming. That prompted the trade unions, the ILO and the Ministry of Labour to launch a campaign against child labour. 

In view of the above, as we were trying to start fighting against it, civil war broke out and that was on and off, together with the HIV epidemic which aggravated the situation. Now it has gone out of hand, despite the fact that we have in place UPE and USE. So the problem we have here now is that the laws that we have about elimination of child labour are quite many, stipulated in different areas including the Employment Act of 2006. So we need to emphasise the policy of education, more so UPE and USE, and to institute punitive action against any person who lets his or her child work in hazardous conditions. 

It is only the enforceability of the law that is lacking. Let us accept this because we have a number of laws that are really good on the shelves but they are not being enforced. What is the problem? We need to examine ourselves; what prompts this? We should be very vigorous to enforce these laws. 

The last point I want to make is about the employers who use these children. It happens more so in the plantations and the fishing areas and other areas because there are many other areas of work that are coming up. This is because they have cheap labour; children are paid anything. Government should know that we cannot fight against child labour if we do not review the minimum wage policy of this country. Because of this, employers use children because they are cheap and make high profits out of them other than getting mature people who would demand much. I thank you.

6.41
DR TWA-TWA MUTWALANTE (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion.

I would like to make the following observations:First, I would like to give some information to hon. Fungaroo.When he stood up to make a presentation, he wondered whether the child labour free zones are targeting certain areas and leaving out others. The principle is that we shall have a snowball sort of programme; eventually, the whole country will be child labour free.  So, you can start with zones, then go to county-free, district-free and eventually a child labour free country.

Honourable members, I would like the country to know -(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Twa-Twa. The last time we were here discussing the economic free zones, they were specifically gazetted areas where the law was going to apply. This time, we have the child labour free zones and you are now telling us that they are going to start as small zones in particular areas and they will eventually move to the districts and the rest of the country. 

I do not know if we are proceeding rightly or if the mover of the motion had that in mind or what she meant by the labour free zones. Maybe you could clarify more about the chronology of the labour free zones we are talking about.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Members who are supporting this motion. Our prayer No.1 is basically about child labour free zones, so I want to give Members the definition so that we understand it properly.

Child labour free zones are geographical areas where all children are systematically taken out of labour and integrated into formal full time school. The area based approach involves all stakeholders within the communities, including the teachers, parents, children, unions, the community groups, the local authorities and the employers. The power to effect this change comes from within the communities who set the norm that no child should get involved in work without school. 

DR TWA-TWA: Thank you very much for that clarification, mover of the motion, but I think the principle applies as I explained. 

My second observation is that colleagues and the country at large should know, like the saying goes, that not going to school is very painful in old age. By denying these children school when they are young, you are actually causing them a very big problem. You are traumatising them when young and as they grow up, they will realise they did not go to school and that they cannot easily integrate in the community, which is very dangerous. So we should encourage our communities to buy it and utilise the programmes put in place by our Government. I am talking about Universal Primary Education, which although we say is free is actually paid for and Universal Secondary Education, which is also paid for by the government. By making these children lose the chances to go to school, we are - (Member timed out.)

6.47
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support all aspects of this motion. 

I think one prominent recommendation brought by the mover of this motion is the idea that UPE should be made compulsory and I will address my submission to that. For all purposes and intent, I think this is intended to keep children in school and in effect avert child labour. The issue of education foundation is very prominent here. This is extreme to the thematic curricular policy issued by the Ministry of Education where a child’s foundation learning is done in vernacular. Madam Speaker, these might need to be revisited since it is doing a disservice to the children whose education it is supposed to promote and enhance and is also proving difficult to be implemented. 

The matter of disservice here arises from the fact that the children are already disadvantaged in the English language yet the examinations that they are to sit, which in effect determine their future, are set in English. By the time a child reaches primary seven, where he or she is supposed to do PLE, the level of English command is too low to be able to comprehend questions set so that they perform satisfactorily in exams. 

It is no wonder, therefore, that those children from areas similar to my constituency, Kioga, have continued to perform badly and even deteriorate further and this has led to serious school dropouts. Many of them end up doing fishing jobs meant for adults and not children. This is a very complicated situation where a child involved in a number of child labour activities and eventually leading to undesirable circumstances. 

Even teachers are now finding it extremely difficult to implement the thematic curriculum policy because they are not equipped to articulate educational concepts in the local languages. Many local languages, including Luo that I speak, have not yet developed terms and expressions to articulate modern concepts that children need to learn. Madam Speaker, it is for this reason that I propose that for a child to remain at school and avert child labour, the issue of thematic curriculum policy by the Ministry of Education needs to be revisited. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the debate. Really, what they are asking for is a review of policy and these strategies by the government. There is nothing which is immediate; they are saying please consider making changes, amending the law and so on. So, I want to put the question that this House do approve the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.


MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE FACT-FINDING MISSION ON THE CONFLICT 
AT THE BORDER AREAS BETWEEN UGANDA AND SOUTH SUDAN 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us receive the report. I had wanted to see the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Foreign Affairs here for that report but maybe we can receive it and then we can debate it next week. I do not know what the mover of the report thinks.

6.51
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I am ready and I do not think it will be fair for this country that we should make an appointment for a minister to be in the House for us to present a report.

THE SPEAKER: I was saying that I would have been happier if they were here, but you can present.

MRS	CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, but the fact that they have not come means they do not consider Parliament important.

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, whereas hon. Ogwal is ready to present and you have given her a go-ahead, this presentation, including visuals, would work together very well with the ensuing debate. For the presentation to be done now and then the debate on Tuesday would result in a disconnection.Moreover, on Tuesday, there will be some members in the House who would have not heard the presentation. My proposal is that the presentation and the debate would work together very well rather than separate them. It is better to do both on Tuesday. I submit.

MRS	CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think considering the plea made by our colleague and since this report is quite important, because it concerns the lives of Ugandans and the plight of Ugandans who are being traumatised right now, I think I will concede. The only problem, Madam Speaker, is that you are aware next week I will not be around. So I do not know whether we can push it up to the other week. 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you went with a delegation; you were not alone in that delegation. I know you want action - you want the country to know what transpired and you want action from the Government; you could either delegate one of the members who went with you or if you insist, we can give you the week and -

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, actually, this thing is urgent and it is important. The more we delay with it, the more it will defeat the purpose. I had a delegation but because of the passion, I would have wanted to be here.There are some of the issues in which I feel I could be of use, particularly the historical perspective of the conflict. However, if you feel that it can be done in my absence next week, I concede. It is important. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and my senior honourable Member of Parliament who led the delegation to Moyo. I am from Moyo and given the fact that hon. Cecilia Ogwal was there and she knows and she is here, she has the report, could I be guided that maybe you allow her to present here and now so that the minister can come on Tuesday and debate. Even if she will not be here, other people would be able to answer because the situation is even changing; there are new developments and the more we delay, we may find that the report maybecome obsolete because there are certain happenings which need to be added. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the leader of the delegation had said that she would accept our deferring the presentation untilthere are more Members in the House. Two, you want action from the government and I think I want those ministers to see what you actually found because if we present today, they are not here then they will read the Hansard but without the visual aid. 

I think we will give you the week, you come back and present. Prime Minister, we want the ministers concerned; the Minister of Foreign Affairs should be here and the Minister of Internal Affairs should be here.Of course, we are happy that the Minister of Defence is always here but he must be briefed and his colleagues led by you, Prime Minister. Thank you very much, honourable members, for the work done. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.56 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 November 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
