PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10954COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRThursday, 16 November 2023Honourable members, I had a chat with the Commissioner-General of Uganda Prisons Service and he said that out of every 100,000 persons, 168 end up in prison. All their prisons are full and they have no space for more prisoners. As we legislate and go through the budgeting process, we should be able to think about the infrastructure in prisons, not only in Luzira. It should be all over. Of course, we will always continue having people who break the law. Since we will continue having them, let us see how we can support Uganda Prisons Service and see that their infrastructure is improved in the next financial year. Honourable members, this weekend we shall be witnessing the royal wedding of the Kyabazinga  of Busoga, His Majesty William Wilberforce Gabula Nadiope IV , and his queen, the Inebantu , Jovia Mutesi. As his subjects, we wish him well in his wedding and marriage. However, as I said before, you find that there are some social media people who know it all. Why don’t they leave people to settle? Why don’t they wish other people well? People want to poke their noses into others’ personal lives. They should leave the Kyabazinga  alone. If they are saying he has many wives, who tells them a man should have only one woman. (Applause)  Yes! Let the man go and wed his Inebantu . For us, we support the wedding. We wish them well. As Parliament of IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 14TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE SPEAKER: Honourable members,  I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will not get tired of reminding you to clock in and out; I am counting the days. (Laughter) The money that is being paid to the members of Parliament is taxpayers’ money. Therefore, when we see people who do not want to come to the House, then, they should be accountable for what they are doing. I am very happy that I have Members on my Front Bench. (Laughter)  Kindly, continue coming and we serve this nation. As I have always said, we should be able to leave this nation better than we found it. If we can, we should be able to serve humanity and the rest will be done by others. Honourable members, yesterday, I communicated that we would devote today for Members to discuss their issues. All Members can bring up their issues; the ministers are here. I ask the Government Chief Whip that we need more ministers to respond to Members’ issues – and you cannot know which issues are coming up. So, we need them. 10955THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023Uganda, we congratulate him and will continue praying for the family. Thank you very much. (Members rose_) Yes? On the communication? Let us, first hear from the Government Chief Whip. 2.06THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank you for your kind comments on the Front Bench. I would also like to indicate that today, His Excellency the President is presiding over the national pass-out of our young people, who are called the “Patriots”, at a function organised by the Office of the President. Her Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and a number of ministers have joined him. I was there and requested for permission to leave. By the time I left, he had not yet arrived. We may, in the circumstances – because you had indicated that you needed more ministers. I believe they will be joining us at intervals because I left quite a number of them at Kololo. I pray that we, who are here, will handle businesses that we can handle. For those that we cannot and that are more technical and require technical responses from the sector heads, we will definitely request your permission to have them deferred and they are answered by the ministers of the respective sectors. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. We have a pending item on the Order Paper regarding the response to issues that were raised by the Opposition. I have received a letter that there is a very urgent meeting that requires all the security leaders and the meeting is supposed to be out of the country. Therefore, we may not have that item even on Tuesday. So, take note. Yes, Hon. Acon? 2.08MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on your communication regarding the prisons. We are aware that the rules that we make are there, but sometimes we break them. Madam Speaker, we have many people who are in jail and some of their cases are not being heard. We should find lawyers to help these people. Also, when they are arrested or we are arrested – because we are meant to break the law. Even we who are here, I think we should find a way of negotiating or seeing that not everyone who is arrested is taken to dig in the garden for the whole day.When you find some of these people - they are digging the whole day, they are caned and beaten. We should find a way of favouring these people and the prisons are crowded because most court cases, for sure, are not being heard. Somebody who has stolen a chicken or cassava is treated like somebody who has committed murder. Madam Speaker, we need to come up with a solution to this issue. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to remind you of the four roles of Parliament. When you look at our roles, there are some things that we cannot do. Ours is to ensure that they are comfortable wherever they are; we do appropriation and oversight. That is the role of the Executive. Government?2.09THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, under the laws of Uganda, by the time one ends up in prison, that implies that you have gone through the due processes; you have been charged in court, and either remanded, convicted or sentenced. No prison staff or officer has the right to beat an inmate and at that point in time, you are beating an inmate for what? Extracting evidence, extracting confession? Two, prisons the world over are meant for reform and you are aware that even in the case of Uganda, we have a number of prisons that 10956COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRdo have farms attached to them. Part of reform - Hon. Acon, you and I both come from a part of Lango called Kidere. I believe that when we were growing up, what you are talking about - digging - we did it. Plus, fetching firewood and cooking. Whatever is being done, like you are talking about digging, in my humble opinion, is part of reforming the inmates. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER:  It is nothing out of the ordinary. MR OBUA:  Absolutely. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. James? All of you are going to speak. Is it on my communication? I am going to give you time for your issues. 2.12MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County, West Kanungu):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for the passion you have for the young children of Uganda. I think that is what prompted you to have a discussion with the head of Uganda Prisons Service. You have mentioned that the head of Uganda Prisons Service alluded to the fact that we have many young people involved in criminality. Madam Speaker, that speaks volumes and we need to find out why these young people are involved in criminality. You are well aware that 80 per cent of our youth are unemployed. Finding a solution for the unemployment of our youth is critical and that would be a solution.In addition to what you have suggested about amplifying the infrastructure, there is a need to critically analyse how we can have the youth of Uganda busy in productive activities locally and internationally. There is a critical issue; we need to address the unemployment issue in Uganda. If we continue looking at it as normal, then we are going to have more people and criminality increasing because we are not looking at how we can engage. I thank the President for these skills. There is also another milestone we need to move to. If we are skilling people, we need also to empower them and give them equipment to utilise and have the youth engaged in the local areas, because the influx of the youth from the villages to Kampala, hoping to get a remedy, is futile. We need to disengage the youth and have them locally engaged such that we can have productive youth in Uganda. I salute you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Actually, the skilling project is very good. The last time there was a function in Kololo, there were over 10,000 youth under the skilling project. That is Kampala. The question is: when will it reach Kachumbala, Bukedea, Kinkizi, Rubanda and Kween? Can we have it throughout the country so that we engage all our youth in doing that? We provide our youth with skilling materials, welding machines and sewing machines so that we engage them and stop them from being idle. That should be done throughout the country. Much as we talk about the Parish Development Model (PDM), it benefits only 39 per cent. Where is the 61 per cent? Emyooga  is also for a limited number, not for everybody, but we have the most active, the youth. What do we do with the youth? Government, what is the way forward? MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, let us start by appreciating the fact that the world over, Uganda has the youngest population. That is a fact and our population is growing at a very fast rate. From the time we gained independence with 6.2 million people, we are now talking about over 45 million people, and yet the size of the country has not increased. Two, just like you have alluded to the fact that we have the Presidential Initiative on Skilling the Young People, it is a very good initiative. I believe that His Excellency the President is progressively moving to the countryside. I know, apart from the ones you have enumerated, [Mr Obua]10957THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023there now exists a presidential skilling centre in Lira that takes care of the Lango Subregion. They have been recruiting young people, especially those in villages, to be skilled. Probably, we may need to interrogate that programme and see whether we can support His Excellency the President further, and we roll it out from one subregion to another. In addition to that, we also obtained a loan under the Ministry of Education and Sports from the World Bank. This loan was meant to establish centres of excellence in the five original Uganda Technical Colleges; Bushenyi, Elgon and Lira, to mention, but a few. Under that project, we annexed a number of technical institutes. When you move to Kaberamaido Technical Institute, you will see the development because it is annexed to UTC Lira - even Kigumba. The Government is doing all it takes both for formal and informal education. For Ugandans who cannot attain formal education, the Government is emphasising more of informal education. As Parliament, it is important that we support the Government policy of establishing a technical institute per county or per constituency because that will enable young people who cannot attain formal education to be recruited and skilled in the respective technical institutes. Madam Speaker, thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I think what the ministry needs to do is to establish the National Youth Service. That would be a remedy to unemployment because if you have the “national”, we will not be talking of only Lira. You would be giving an example and say, “Today, we have a skilling centre in Lira.  Tomorrow, we shall have it in Busia”. It should be a national thing, not an initiative of only a few. As leaders of this country, we should be able to support the Government in ensuring that we have this kind of skilling centres. Yes, honourable minister?2.19THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For those of you who have raised the issue of unemployment - job creation for young people who now comprise 78 per cent of our population – and – in addition to the development of human resource capacity, which is through skilling, we have set up centres across all the regions. As the Government led by President Yoweri Museveni, we are emphasising key strategic areas that create jobs.The first is commercial agriculture. That is why you see we are investing in the Parish Development Model (PDM) and Emyooga  because we believe that when we invest in commercial agriculture, then jobs are created. The second point is industrialisation. Every factory that we set up employs, on average, 200 young people. We are supporting the 22 industrial parks so that we can attract investors to put up factories to help employ our young people.The third sector that all of us should support is the service sector. When you put up a hotel, you employ young people. Therefore, as we pass budgets and policies, we should all focus on concentrating and supporting these four strategic areas of commercial agriculture, industrialisation, services. These are key in creating jobs and supporting the economy to grow. In addition to the human resource capacity building, we should, in my opinion, continue to support the vision of the President in creating jobs; and these are the key strategic areas that – THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, if we are talking about commercial agriculture and looking at issues of having tractors, how many districts have received tractors from the Government? (Applause)  We need to look at that.10958COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRWe have been singing about mere seeds of Shs 4 billion – and - you are the ones who made us depend on it. When we were growing up, we knew that we always had to keep seeds for the next season. Since you said every planting time you will be giving us, people decided to eat everything. In the last planting season, we only needed Shs 4 billion; did we get it? HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.THE SPEAKER:  We appreciate and we want to support the Government in commercialization, but let the Government also help the population outside. I am not complaining; I have tractors in Bukedea, but what about other people? Alebtong has – maybe because I am the Speaker, but what about elsewhere? Let us be sincere on this. Let us empower the population to do commercial agriculture. 2.23MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Madam Speaker, your communication – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, are you all reacting to my communication? - I thought we are going into matters of national importance. (Laughter)MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, sometimes I say you are God-given to this country. Why I say so is because every communication you make in this august House concerns issues that are a thorn in the flesh of our people. Before I go to that, Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the leadership of the Uganda Prisons Service. It has improved and professionalised itself to the extent that we are becoming a model within the East African region. I thank the Commissioner-General. Even as we speak now, we have very few cases of human rights abuse - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I am very sorry to interrupt you. The Commissioner-General of Uganda Prisons Service is one of the people who can supply the whole country with seeds. He is a very hard-working person. Therefore, when he says we should appreciate the Commissioner-General, it is because he has done his best. He is one of the people who can get applause from this House.MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, your words are always right. True, the Commissioner-General of Uganda Prisons Service is a performer.  It is my prayer that as Parliament of Uganda, we should support the Uganda Prisons Service. When I was growing up, we had Masafu Prison, which was built to handle 42 inmates, but almost all the buildings were falling down. Due to the little innovation that was done there, Masafu Prison can now be talked about. Although, we have a very big population of young people in Masafu Prison - as one of my honourable colleagues said, we should have other means to counsel our younger people so that they do not fill prisons. Madam Speaker, Minister Bahati gave a very good submission concerning us putting all our efforts to creating jobs for our young people. Unfortunately, some of us who come from densely populated areas, like Busia, do not have an opportunity to have commercial agriculture. Our prayer to the Government is that the few services that we have should be protected for our people in Uganda. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Macho, tell us what activity you have in Busia.MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, in Busia, obviously, we are cross-border traders. (Laughter)  The cross-border trading we do has promoted the integration of East Africa and led to the growth of our border towns.  My point is that Uganda should protect the small business services that we have for our people. If you go to Kisenyi right now, here in Kampala, you will find all the small businesses done by Somalis. If you go to Bunga, Buziga, Ggaba, all the small businesses are owned by Eritreans and Ethiopians. They are denying our people work. If you go to Kiryandongo - they [The Speaker]10959THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023say it is worse; they are doing every business, and our youth have nothing to do. This has brought a very big problem to the extent that the youth who are idle end up committing crimes and going to prison.Madam Speaker, I agree with you that Uganda Prisons Service needs to be supported. We need to give them enough money in the Budget so that they can be a food basket to our country. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from St Gregory Kibale Junior School from Namutumba District. They are represented in this Parliament by Hon. Mariam Naigaga. You are most welcome. Please, stand up. (Applause)  Welcome to Parliament of Uganda. Thank you very much for coming.Still in the Public Gallery, we have teachers and pupils from Kiribedda Green Valley Primary School. They come from Kassanda, represented by Dr Michael Bukenya, Hon. Kabuye and Hon. Flavia Nabagabe. You are most welcome. Where are you? Thank you for coming. (Applause)We also have a delegation of executive committee members of Agago North Civil Servants Development Association, Agago North County; they are represented by Hon. John Amos Okot and Hon. Beatrice Akello. Where are you? You are most welcome and thank you for sending us these members of Parliament. (Applause)  Hon. Amos Okot, stand up. (Laughter)  This is your member of Parliament.2.30MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is right to welcome our people. They came for a two-day training that started today and ends tomorrow. We were privileged to get some staff of Parliament as facilitators on SACCO management and resource mobilisation.  (Applause)These are civil servants from Agago North County and this training came after seeing that many of them are manipulated by microfinance institutions. In many cases, when they borrow money, they do not keep their ATM cards with them. As a result, we came together and formed our own SACCO to solve our problems with our own initiatives. I thank them for coming and the honourable members for welcoming them. (Applause)Madam Speaker, allow me to say something about your communication - (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, allow Hon. Okot to speak.MR AMOS OKOT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank and congratulate you. In our home area, if a mother gives birth to twins, she is definitely considered higher than any other person in that clan; you are now one of them. (Applause)  Of course, we call you “ Min rudi” , which means “double and double”. Thank you for being “double and double” and also a good mother.There are two issues. First, it is true that it is the role of this House to allocate funds to the Uganda Prisons Service. We have seen the outcry that the prisons facilities are so full that they cannot contain more prisoners. However, when you interact with the inmates, close to about 60 to 70 per cent are in detention, sometimes without trial. You find somebody who has stayed in prison for one to two years without trial and that alone adds to the number making the facilities too small.Maybe this time, the DPP, the police - or whoever is concerned with investigations or sanctioning of the files - should do their work and do it quickly so that suspects are tried. If the person is found guilty of the offence, he can be imprisoned. For example, the former Speaker of Agago District Local Government called John Bosco was arrested during election time, but up to now, he has never been arraigned before court. When you visit him, he wonders why. You move around, but fail to get someone to have his file move. That is one 10960COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRexample I could cite, but the majority in our prison facilities suffer in the same way. Lastly, you said we should clock in and out as per the rules, but on the side that I normally use, the clock-out machine does not work. They should fix it so that we do not keep crossing - THE SPEAKER:  You can use either of them. MR AMOS OKOT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. May God bless you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Amos Okot mentioned something that is pertinent, especially under the Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2023 on the manipulation of civil servants by moneylenders, who take their ATMs. After they take an ATM, they keep removing somebody’s money. Finance guru, what does the law say about this?2.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has not come to our attention that people are asked to present their ATMs as collateral. To the best of my knowledge, there is no law that recognises ATMs as collateral security. I, therefore, believe that if this is happening, it is a relationship between the borrower and the lender – (Interruption)MR AMOS OKOT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is information that I think the minister is not privy to. In the last caucus meeting in Entebbe, the President directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with a law to stop microfinance institutions as soon as possible.  (Interjections)  Yes, I was there. (Interjections)  On moneylenders and – Who are the moneylenders? Are they not microfinance? Okay.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, another point of information from the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development?MS A VUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Pakwach, I heartily congratulate you upon adding twins to our family. Congratulations to you and Ssalongo . I met the people of Pakwach Town Council and in the three villages I visited, I got information that I thought I would share at the committee level, but now that it has come on the Floor, allow me to share it with the Members of Parliament. We have a moneylender called  Hobro  operating  in Pakwach. They do not take ATM cards, but they instead take National Identity cards from the borrowers. They do not stop at that; if you borrow Shs 1 million, they give you Shs 980,000 and retain Shs 20,000 without a clear – transaction cost – The best practice dictates that you need to disclose to the borrower all the nitty-gritty costs. After taking the loan, you must start repaying it the following day. You can see the difficulties that our people are going through. This is not only limited to Pakwach District. We need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come out. Much as the minister says it is a relationship between the borrower and the lender, our role is to protect people when something is going wrong. This must be addressed. We have an authority called the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority (UMRA) that should come in quickly and help our people. Madam Speaker, about your communication, I thank Hon. Bahati for spelling out the different areas - and the President for skilling our people. However, we need to study the environment: It should be on a case-by-case basis and we need to know the needs of the youth. Not everybody may be talented in tailoring. When I met the youths in Pakwach, they said that they have a polytechnic school there and some of the courses are not of interest to them. [Mr Okot]10961THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023When it comes to practical courses, somebody must have interest and the ability to do it. They are interested in doing mechanics and driving. We need to include this as part of skills to complement what the minister said about services of people to work in restaurants and hotels. They can also have work in the transport sector. Much as we thank the President, they should go further to look at the interests, needs and proven skills of some of these youth for them to absorb these courses. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the issues of protection of the clients, in terms of manipulation and putting hidden costs; whether that is provided for in the law. There should be full disclosure when you are giving out money, on what goes as interest, commission and whichever. 2.40MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I shared with my deputy chairperson over the matter she has just submitted. When I was in the constituency, I also got information in relation to such organisations. I also got information from the intelligence officers that some of the organisations are not licensed by UMRA. I have discussed this with the honourable minister and we are going to engage UMRA, try to do a general scan of the environment for the licensed ones and how they operate. We shall encourage UMRA to sensitise the population. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the Public Gallery, we have teachers and students of Trinity High School from Gomba District. They are represented by Hon. Robina Rwakoojo and Hon. Sylvia Nayebale. You are most welcome. Yes, honourable minister? 2.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, in regard to the issue, which His Excellency the President, brought to the attention of the caucus and which we keep getting from the public about some of the moneylenders who overcharge their clients; there is a provision we put in the law. The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority Act, section 90, provides that the minister may, in consultation with the authority by notice in the Gazette, prescribe a minimum interest rate, which a moneylender shall charge. Pursuant to this provision, as the finance ministry, we are working out an instrument. We do recognise that capping of interest is not good economics, but we also know that under this provision, we can come up with an instrument, which clearly lays down conditions under which the moneylenders must operate. When we do this, we shall be able to address all the concerns people have had in regard to moneylenders cheating –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, is having exorbitant interest rates good economics? Reducing the interest rate is not good economics. Remember, these people are charging interest rates to a tune of 10 to 15 per cent, and even 30 per cent. If you have powers as the minister to ensure that you support the society in ensuring that you have a relatively good interest rate – I do not want a situation where Hon. Goli says it is demand and supply; it is the poverty in society.  (Laughter) MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, the issue of demand and supply is not applicable here. What we are looking at is how the sector can be regulated better. We know that some moneylenders charge interest more than 100 per cent of the loan. Without pre-empting what we are discussing, one of the conditions we want to put is that you should not charge interest for more than six months. If six months elapse, the interest terminates. 10962COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: How much interest? MR MUSASIZI: The interest shall also be looked into. Madam Speaker, we shall lay this instrument in the House for Members to get more information. I assure the House that – (Interjections) -  I wish Hon. Okot-Ogong would listen to me. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, get the information from there because you need to help the public. MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, in a nutshell, we are working out an instrument, which will address the concerns that the population has in regard to overcharges, extortion and other things the moneylenders have been doing.THE SPEAKER: When will the instrument be ready? MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, we have moved a great mile. I just need to check with the technical team whom I gave instructions. They should be ready in one or two weeks. THE SPEAKER: We also need to carry out financial literacy for people to know whether they must borrow or not. If so, what are they borrowing for, for how long and from whom? Is it from a moneylender, a loan shark or a commercial bank? People should first make a financial analysis to understand whether they must borrow. Much as we are also complaining, it is not just a matter of you – because you feel you want to borrow and you have- like some of these men here, they go and borrow money to marry- these ones -(Laughter)-  Honourable members, I have moved away from my communication. Yes, the Kyabazinga  man? Let us first give the Kyabazinga  man opportunity. 2.47MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just a quick one to my colleague the minister - I call him my colleague because we were classmates. On the issue of the ATMs, it is basically a matter of understanding. Colleagues, I am also aware of what is happening in my district; civil servants go to moneylenders when they have critical issues. As you put the document together on the guidelines that will guide moneylending, you must also factor in how best our people can be helped. Madam Speaker, on the issue of – THE SPEAKER: As leaders, you also need to educate our people. Where you can, encourage them to have savings schemes and savings associations, where they can borrow internally. I have always referred to one of my voters- I have a voter here - You, tell us what is happening in your constituency with the savings scheme. You do not need to go to those moneylenders, but instead, borrow internally, where you do inter-guaranteeing and the interest is very small. At the end of the day, after getting that interest, the group shares that money. There is a procedural matter from Imat. Imat , we thank you, as an Opposition Member for being in the House. Atat, Imat  Lango. MS OGWAL CECILIA: And “ min rudi” . Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter regarding borrowing. It is important that Parliament takes the lead in equipping our community. There was an idea that was initiated by you, Madam Speaker. You encouraged many Members of Parliament to link up with the training directorate of Parliament so that we can take these people to our districts to train our leaders. You can see what Hon. Okot has done; it is quite expensive, because he had to transport all those people here, have them trained and maintained here. Whereas if we could have a team of skilled trainers coming from Parliament to equip our people, it would be cheaper and then 10963THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023the knowledge would impact many people, more leaders - we should involve all our local councillors and the technical people. Madam Speaker, can you take the lead again? Can you remind your team again so that some of us who are ready to receive them, can start equipping our people with knowledge, so that we can stop all this evil going around? THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have regional trainings by Parliament under our Department of Corporate Planning and Strategy. MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On your communication, I thank you for loving Busoga and supporting Busoga and most importantly, being a nationalist.THE SPEAKER: I do not just love Busoga; I am a Musoga . (Laughter)  MR MUZAALE:  Madam Speaker, to the country at large, I think they are aware that you are part of Busoga now and we are happy being with you. We thank you for the gift of the children that you have given us. Allow me to thank colleagues for supporting Busoga and those outside here who have supported the Busoga royal wedding. Madam Speaker, it is now not a Busoga issue, but a national issue. We thank everyone who has supported us. Most importantly,  implore the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to use this as a marketing tool in the tourism industry. I have seen people go to England to tour the palace. Honourable Minister, we are inviting you officially on Saturday, the 18th of November, to come and attend the royal wedding, such that you have something to sell outside this country and even within Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, thank you very much. Just to conclude on the other topic of borrowing by civil servants; I also want them to know that under the standing orders, bankruptcy – because these people can make you bankrupt- is not permissible. When you become bankrupt, you can lose your job.2.53MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers’ Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice once again to congratulate you. I thank Hon. Bahati because he brought up the issue of mechanisation and modernisation of agriculture. It is a very sensitive one and it touches all of us, but we fail to look at what is contained in that. It is not only tractors - there are issues of fertilisers, availability of land and pesticides. I am a farmer. The pesticides and fertilisers we are getting are fake. In fact, they are even spoiling our soil and our products. I do not know what the minister is commenting about that. THE SPEAKER: It is actually not pesticides alone, but even medicine for treating cows. How do they call that? Honourable member, that can be handled. We have made a law to that effect and we will make sure that we will always have genuine pesticides. 2.55MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, from the communication of the Speaker, I would like to appreciate her. Apart from her job as the Speaker, she is also doing an oversight function by visiting the prisons. Thank you very much and we love you for that. (Applause)Secondly, I appeal to Members that we have a duty to do in this country. Even prisoners are part of our voters and part of our people. We need to ensure their environment in prisons is proper. What is happening in our prisons is what has been happening even before, since the 1950s. People still defecate and urinate in buckets. You enter to sleep  at 5.00 p.m. and you are not allowed to get out. We need to look at the environment in the prisons.10964COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRSecondly, Parliament passed the Community Service Act to decongest the prisons. There are certain crimes whose sentences can be served outside prison; you are not taken to prison, you stay at home and complete your sentence by doing community service.Madam Speaker, about the youth - I was the minister for youth for five years and I was rated as the best youth minister by everyone. (Laughter)We came up with policies that would empower our youth. As a minister, I came up with 52 cheap enterprises; like making chapattis  and others, that do not require a lot of money, but one earns a lot from it.We proposed that from those 52 enterprises, we should create a youth bank in the country because our youth do not have collateral to go to the banks and get loans. They are the majority, but they are not empowered. It was called the Youth Transformation for Economic Empowerment. That is what we did - (Interjection) during Okot Ogongo’ s - he is a beneficiary, as well as many others here. Madam Speaker, you are right, we need to focus on our youth. As Members of Parliament, we need to provide more resources to the youth ministry because we have a ministry without resources. Yesterday, we were talking about children. The entire department for children was only given Shs 200 million for the financial year. Is that only for fuel? We are not thinking about our children who are being harassed by elders, by society; who are being raped and married off at an early age. We need to empower the ministry for children so that they look after our children. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Mateke?2.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating you. I will also come to tap those blessings.Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague who has raised that issue, especially on the children. It is very true, we get Shs 200 million per year. This is something we raised and I hope the finance ministry will do something through your guidance.THE SPEAKER:  And the youth?MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, the youth get money through the National Youth Council. They were getting Shs 800 million per year. In the last session, the Deputy Speaker requested the finance ministry to bring back the money, which had been cut; the Shs 3.2 billion and the finance ministry promised that they would give us that money. We are still waiting.THE SPEAKER: The youth get Shs 800 million -MS MATEKE: They got Shs 800 million this financial year.THE SPEAKER:  What is the percentage of youth in the country? MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, 78 per cent of our population are people below the age of 30 years. Out of that, the youth are only 16 per cent. The rest are children who are getting Shs 200 million per year.However, I would like to comment on the issue that he has talked about; the bank and the money for the youth.THE SPEAKER:  But you cannot talk about the bank before we resolve the money issue. Honourable members, let us see how to support the children and the youth. The issue of the bank is a very good idea, but let us first make sure that we budget for the youth and the children. Next item.[Mr Okot Ogong]10965THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, I was just giving information that much as the bank was not started, the Government of Uganda and Centenary Bank put money together for the youth; the Youth Venture Capital Fund, which the youth can access. The only problem is that Centenary Bank is not in every district. However, the money is there and this is money that one can access as an individual -THE SPEAKER:  How much was put on that account? MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  How much was put on that account?MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, they put around Shs 25 billion, but of course, this is five years ago.THE SPEAKER:  What are the terms and conditions of accessing that money?MS MATEKE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no need for security, but you need recommendations from chairpersons; LC1, LC111 and of course, the Chairperson of the Youths at the village level. Also, one’s National Identity Card. That is all.THE SPEAKER:  How much of that money has been taken by the youth and how much is still on the account? MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, if you can allow me, I will bring a report on that. Thank you very much.THER SPEAKER:  Hon. Linda, is it on the same thing?3.03MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to congratulate you and welcome you to our club, because I am also a Nnalongo . (Laughter)Madam Speaker, on the issue of youth loans in Centenary Bank, I have tried to mobilise many youth to benefit from that loan, more especially the boda boda riders who want to procure boda bodas. The challenge is that they are required to first deposit Shs 1 million for them to access that money, yet most of them cannot afford this. It is a big challenge, which the ministry needs to sort because it is very difficult for the youth to raise Shs 1 million and deposit on their accounts to access this loan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we get a statement on that fund? Can we know the conditions for one to get that money? How much money was put, where was it put and for which youth? There is a tendency of putting money on accounts and you only put it in Kampala and the youth in Kasese cannot access it.MS MATEKE:  Madam Speaker, allow me to bring a report and show you all the details; how many youth have got money so far and from which districts. I think it is important and from there, we can know what will follow. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Next item? There is something on tourism.3.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and I also congratulate you.I thank Hon. Muzaale for raising the matter and congratulate the Kyabazinga  and the people of Busoga upon the royal wedding over the weekend. My colleague, Hon. Muzaale, asked what we will do to expose Busoga as a tourism destination. We have written to some members of Parliament that from 13-17 December, 2023, we will be running a campaign called, “Explore Busoga ”.10966COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMadam Speaker, one of the activities we are going to do, for example, in Buyende, is the Kagulu Rock Climbing Challenge and our chief climber is going to be Ssalongo . (Applause)  I would like to invite Members because some of the activities that are done on that rock are actually – THE SPEAKER:  By the way, Kagulu Rock is in my compound. (Applause)MR MUGARRA:  That is very true. Some of the activities that happen there – especially for you, members of Parliament, I encourage you to come and climb. You never know, you could also become Ssalongos because the blessings are there. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, we have documents that are just going to be laid. After that, you have unlimited time for matters of national importance. Let the documents be laid. I am happy to see the Minister of Local Government. Minister, thank you for coming. We would like to remind you that the LCs’ term is ending very soon. We would like to hear from you in the next sitting concerning this. Honourable members, on a special note, it is very rare to have the Front Bench full like it is now. I would like to thank you for coming. (Applause)3.07THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Madam Speaker, allow me to most humbly and respectfully congratulate you upon the title of Nnalongo.  (Applause)  It is our pride. I know that at the local government level, we have more voters and councillors coming up. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  No, more Speakers. (Laughter)MR MAGYEZI:  Yes, more Speakers and Mayors. We shall answer the question you have raised at an opportune time. Thank you and congratulations. LAYING OF PAPERSI: REPORT OF A DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOV ATION ON THE 1ST GLOBAL CONFERENCE ON NEW AND EMERGING GENETIC BIOCONTROL TECHNOLOGIES IN NAIROBI, KENYATHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, we shall receive the report of the delegation of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. It is going to be presented by the chairperson. Are you the chairperson, Hon. Alex? Congratulations. 3.09MR ALEX NIYONSABA (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am representing the chairperson. THE SPEAKER: Please, present it. MR NIYONSABA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, let me also add my voice to congratulate you on the birth of your beautiful twins. God has blessed you and your husband with this double joy and good things usually come in pairs. Get ready for the double love and the double noise. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Double noise – (Laughter)MR NIYONSABA:  Madam Speaker, I am here to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the first Global Conference on new and Emerging Genetic Biocontrol Technologies in Nairobi, Kenya. I hereby lay the report.THE SPEAKER:  Please, give us a brief summary of your findings. MR NIYONSABA:  Madam Speaker, allow me to give a brief background. For a long time, a lot of investment has been made in supporting Ugandan innovators and scientists, but there has not been a [Mr Mugarra] LAYING OF PAPERS10967THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023commensurate return in form of products on the market. This has been due to an incomplete understanding of how ideas result into products and enterprises. Consequently, there are a lot of prototypes lying idle in our universities and research institutes, yet they have potential, if only they could be linked to industry and markets. This is something I wanted Members to first comprehend so as to understand why we are doing all this. I will, straight away, go to the recommendations of the committee from this visit to Nairobi. The committee observed that:1. Uganda has joined alliances involved in the development of GMOs, especially gene drive, which is meant to curb malaria. The committee is, however, concerned about the level of coordination between Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) and other research institutions such as  National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). The coordination and collaboration needs to be streamlined.2. Uganda does not have laws on GMOs, despite the fact that the country is carrying out research on GMOs. This means that the country cannot ably regulate GMO development, importation, distribution and consumption within the country. Given the porous borders that Uganda shares with the neighbouring countries, this puts Ugandans at a risk of having GMO products distributed in the country without proper regulations. 3. Most of the countries that have embraced GMOs have 1egal frameworks to govern the development, import and export of GMOs. The laws are geared towards safe development, distribution, labelling of the products and protection of human health and the environment. The laws are also geared towards regulating who and where to sell the products (license). Nigeria, in particular, has laws on GMOs even when they are not developing them. 4. GMOs are necessary. However, these should be reduced to non-consumable crops such as cotton. You can agree with me that this is where – If the GMOs are for producing cotton, we are sure of the health of humans because it is used out of the human body. The research on gene drive could be an ideal technology to fight malaria. 5. Kenya has an apex authority called the National Biosafety Authority, which is mandated to consider and make decisions on all activities involving GMOs. In Uganda, the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST), which is mandated to regulate science research, is the one doing this. By implication, GMO is inclusive. The outstanding challenge in Uganda is that the institutions involved in improving a variety of crops and science research do not report to the same sector. For example, NARO reports to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, UVRI reports to the Ministry of Health, and Uganda Industrial Research Institute reports to the Ministry of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives. This has left a missing link that hinders the thriving of technology and innovation. Honourable members, the committee recommends that:1. Government should expedite the process of enacting the law on biosafety to regulate its development, importation, distribution, labelling and consumption. Better still, Uganda should borrow a leaf from Nigeria that has enacted GMO laws without development of GMOs;2. Government should put in place stringent measures to protect indigenous seeds;3. There is need to embark on institution configuration to explore whether it is workable within the existing legislations;4. Uganda should make comprehensive analysis of all the risk factors involving 10968COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRGMO development before it can fully embrace the development of GMOs;5. Government should ensure that institutions dealing with scientific research have the right technology to enable safety of the people and the environment;6. Government should ensure that there is appropriate and effective collaboration among the different stakeholders that are dealing with scientific research and protection of the environment. This is to ascertain that the negative effects of scientific research do not wreck the country, both socially and economically;7. In a bid to strengthen collaboration, there is a need to make use of the existing scientists in the country in a more organised way. This requires facilitation, guidelines and regulations in place.Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this report will be deposited in the Parliamentary Library for your reference. I would like to remind Hon. Alex Niyonsaba that much as you are saying that GMOs should be for cotton, cotton is used for making cotton seed oil, as well as cotton seed cakes, which are eaten by animals.When the animals eat this cotton seed cake, the oil automatically goes into your body. Therefore, the recommendation of having GMOs on cotton, assuming that cotton is not eaten, may not be the best. Next report. II. REPORT OF A DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOV ATION ON THE BENCHMARK OF BEST PRACTICES IN SCIENCE INNOV ATION AND TECHNOLOGY IN ETHIOPIATHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the previous report was tabled, still pursuant to Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The chairperson will still proceed on that, but this time, it should be more summarised. Chairperson, please, go ahead. 3.19MR ALEX NIYONSABA (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of your concern. I now take the opportunity to also lay the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the benchmark of the best practices in science, innovation and technology in Ethiopia. I will not go into everything.THE SPEAKER: For that one, simply lay it on the Table. That is enough.MR NIYONSABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Executive Captions that is hosting Mr Ken Erics Ugo, an accomplished Nigerian film actor who is in Uganda for a theoretic drama under the theme, “Domestic Violence”. This will take place on 18 November at Serena Hotel. They are inviting all of you so that we try to avoid domestic violence. You can go for the royal wedding first then come for this one. You are most welcome, please, have a seat. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Honourable members, thank you very much. Matters of national importance. I will start with Hon. Abeja. 3.21MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also congratulate you. I am also “ Min rudi” ; thank you for joining the association. I am rising on a matter of national importance caused by “shopping out” good civil servants from vulnerable districts like Otuke. I stand here to regret and mourn the “shopping out” of two very good past Chief Administrative [Mr Niyonsaba] LAYING OF PAPERS10969THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023Officers (CAOs) from Otuke, one who is now serving in Wakiso District. Right now, the Ministry of Local Government has given us a CAO –THE SPEAKER: Shopping?MS ABEJA: “ Shopping out” good civil servants from vulnerable – (Interjections) - Okay, transferring them, but that is shopping them out.THE SPEAKER: When you talk about shopping, we know there is always a market where there is a sale. The movement of a civil servant from one working station to the other one is called a “transfer”. The selling of cows in a market by a seller to the buyer is what we call “shopping”. When you go to a supermarket, you do shopping. This time, we are saying the CAOs are being transferred and under the Public Service Standing Orders, it is allowed. Please, continue. MS ABEJA: Madam Speaker, allow me to apologise, but I am talking out of anger. You can see how I am holding my cheek. Right now, the CAO we have is serving only one leader in our district. This CAO is a drunkard who does not stand by his word –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be parliamentary in our language. In this House, we do not use those words. We can say something more polite and then you can –MS ABEJA: It means a lot, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Listen. There is what we call “parliamentary language”. When you get out with Hon. Magyezi, give him all that information, even if the CAO walks naked. For now, let us be parliamentary enough and say that the CAO who is there is undeserving. MS ABEJA: I can now hold my temper. Madam Speaker, there are issues in our district right now that are caused by this good CAO of ours, but we are praying that he is transferred.On the issue of the Uganda Road Fund, this is the very same CAO who wrote to us a letter and invited us for a meeting. When we went for the meeting, it flopped because the other member of Parliament was not in the district. THE SPEAKER:  Who is the other Member of Parliament? MS ABEJA:  Hon. Omara Paul. They studied in the same school; Makerere University – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want us to be kind to ourselves and to each other. Hon. Opolot here will say the CAO is only serving me, but they are supposed to serve the district; the people of that area. I want to request the Minister of Local Government - I see all of them here; Hon. Abwooli  and Hon. Magyezi are here. Please, get the information from Hon. Abeja because she is a little emotional. Where the CAO has a problem, carry out an investigation. If he has a problem, as is being said, do not “shop” the way she has said it and do not transfer. Let us not rotate around with these problems. Today, you are removing someone from Otuke; another day, Kole or Bukedea. Don’t we have educated people? Just fire that person. (Applause)I want a response on that issue, but not on the Floor. 3.28THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERN -MENT  (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take the matter that the Member has raised as very important. We shall get in touch so that we get a full re -port. We shall investigate this CAO and disci -plinary action shall be taken accordingly.THE SPEAKER:  Can I have a report in my office on that CAO on Tuesday? (Applause)MR MAGYEZI:  Madam Speaker, I hope she will give us the report tomorrow so that we investigate quickly. 10970COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: She is going to give you the particulars and everything today before you leave this House. MR MAGYEZI:  Thank you very much.3.28MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO  (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Out of what my honourable colleague has presented - I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). There is something, which is happening and I want the Minister of Local Government to take note. We have problems because many accounting officers in the districts are not spending more than one year in a locality. You have accounting officers who have been there for two or three months and then, they are transferred. They are not responsible for any accounting issues over a period of time. We know that when accounting officers are transferred to a new locality, they take responsibility of everything. Somebody can comfortably explain something because the person has been there and understands how a transaction has happened. I would like the Minister of Local Governments to take this as a concern. Why is it that accounting officers do not take long in localities? It is something, which is disturbing us in Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). THE SPEAKER:  Minister of Local Government, have you heard what Hon. Ongiertho is saying? Can you take the issue being raised on your CAOs seriously?MR MAGYEZI:  Madam Speaker, I thank the Member for the question. Transfer of staff in Public Service is a normal practice. We now need to table before the House our policy on deployment of our CAOs and town clerks and we shall do that. However, I want Members to take heart that in case you have a problem with your administrative officer, those under our control in terms of the district CAOs, the deputiies, the municipal and city town clerks, do not sit and keep quiet. As advised by the Speaker, it is not a question of transfers. We investigate. Of course, we give them the benefit of being heard and then, we take the necessary action. We shall always take action.THE SPEAKER:  Do not report the CAOs because they have refused to give you a contract.  I know what happens. 3.31MR SOLOMON ALINGA  (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the COVID-19 period, the Government identified some schools across the country to expand their infrastructure because they realised that some of our children were very congested in the schools. They had a programme called the “Rehabilitation Fund.”In Bukwo District, a school called St Peter’s Kapkware Primary School was identified. Shs 218 million was given to the district to do some works that they had agreed upon. The ministry instructed the district to identify a contractor, which was done. Unfortunately, this was done towards the end of the financial year. As such, as soon as the contractors started mobilising to do the work, the money was swept back to the Centre. Since that time, we have been following up on that money and we have not received it. Our children are still struggling under trees. The contractor is taking the district to the courts of law very soon. We have failed to understand where this money went yet other districts received theirs. My question to the minister is, when will St Peter’s Kapkware Primary School receive this service? It is overdue and the district is in panic because very soon, the contractor will take the district to court. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, where did our money go?10971THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 20233.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will restrict myself to the money. Regarding the school, the mandate is with the Ministry of Education and Sports. Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act provides for expiry of appropriations on 30 June. Once this happens, unless the money is re-voted or budgeted for again, it ceases to be there. What I need to know from the honourable colleague is whether this money was committed. In a situation where money is committed, we carry it forward. Where you have not committed and you do not process for re-voting, this money expires and forms part and parcel of the Consolidated Fund.  Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  From what he says, the money was committed. He says the contractors now want to take the district to court.  MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, if the money was committed then the accounting officer can follow it up with us. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Aogon rose_) Is it the same issue? MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, this is my brother and I have got to stand and support him. I saw Parliament re-vote money of that nature and send it to other local governments and they have benefitted. How come this particular school was left out? I do not think it is about commitment of funds. What is happening? Where is the money? We want to see this school get the money. THE SPEAKER: That is what the minister is saying. Listen, if you have a lazy accounting officer, do not put the blame on others. The minister is saying, let the accounting officer make a follow up. If we do not get it, we shall bring it up again. It is just common sense.  3.36MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you and I have two matters of national importance to raise. First, on 9 November, fire gutted one of my islands; Lyabaana Town Council in Luwero Island. It destroyed 600 houses and we also lost one life. This is the last island bordering Tanzania and Uganda. This island has never received any senior government official since 1986 - THE SPEAKER: Apart from you? MR MIGADDE: Yes, apart from me. Our prayer is that the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees), responds to the plight of these people in the form of relief items like iron sheets, blankets and food. We normally get many fire disasters on the islands, but unlike the mainland where the fire brigade can respond, there has never been any single time when police has responded to a fire on an island. At one point, we shall request the minister responsible to inform us on how we should contact them and how we should respond in the case of such an emergency. The second issue is that yesterday at 8.00 p.m., an activity involving piracy on the lake happened where one person was killed, still neighbouring the border with Tanzania, and four were hacked, though not to death. This has been a common practice and many of our people have lost their lives. Some of these pirates simply pick fish from one boat to the other, take all the boat engines, and they normally take the direction of Tanzania. Unfortunately, there is no police deployed on the waters. Therefore, our prayer is that we be informed because on the mainland you call 999 and a patrol may respond. Which network should we use in the islands? The police should provide 10972COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRimmediate response when we have such incidences because this is when our people will feel the presence of the Government. I know it is –THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  Government?  First respond to the disaster and then on security. 3.40THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES)  (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity, standing and having it on record, to congratulate you on enlarging our clan of the “ Itekok .” THE SPEAKER: She is the aunt of the  balongo . (Laughter) MS ANYAKUN: I am privileged. Madam Speaker, I have already received the report from the CAO, Buvuma Island through the Member of Parliament. This morning, the Prime Minister delegated me to chair a meeting of the El-Nino to discuss with our partners how we will be able to respond to most of these disasters. We want to, in a special way, say that Buvuma has been taken as one of the first responding districts and we have also instructed our partners, especially the Red Cross, to be in position to go and do rapid response. This is not the only disaster they are facing. A month ago, they had a very bad hailstorm, during which many people were disorganised and most houses were uprooted by the strong winds. Therefore, this is the second disaster and we shall see how to respond, as the Office of the Prime Minister, as soon as possible. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. He had two issues. 3.42THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concerns. I request him to come and we work together to involve the concerned; that is the Minister of Internal Affairs so that we can see how to handle it. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Achayo -   3.42MS JULIET ACHAYO (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you and welcome you to the table of Nnalongos . On 11 November 2023, in Katengeto Village, one life was lost and two people were critically injured due to a conflict arising from the fishing community of Koidike and Gogonyo; that is in Ngora and Pallisa districts. Madam Speaker, in 2019, a similar incident happened and lives were lost. I am worried that if no action is taken by the Government, this may result in retaliatory attacks and I fear the situation may spiral out of control. My prayers are that:1. This House directs the Minister, Office of the President (Security) and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to go on the ground and meet with the leaders from the two antagonistic parties and get a permanent cure to avert further loss of lives.2. The Government supports the families that lost their loved ones with finances, just like it has been done in other parts of the country. (Ms Namukuta rose_) -  Information allowed.  (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Now, Hon. Achayo has become the Speaker of the House; congratulations to you. Yes, Hon. Brenda Namukuta? [Mr Migadde]10973THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023MS NAMUKUTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and thank you, Hon. Achayo, for allowing me to give you information.Allow me to use this opportunity, on behalf of the people of Kaliro District and the Balamogi of Uganda, to congratulate you upon the double blessing. Congratulations upon becoming a Nnalongo . It is very special in our society and we cannot take it for granted. We thank God for the double blessing. I would like to give information because I am from a neighbouring district to Pallisa and Ngora. We share Lake Kyoga and we are always facing similar challenges. In Kaliro, it is now three years consecutively that we have faced a similar challenge where fishermen kill each other. As leaders, it is a big problem for us in such societies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. “Fishers”, had you finished? MS ACHAYO:  Yes, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit. (Mr Peter Okeyoh rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okeyoh, what is your issue? 3.46MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my honourable colleagues in congratulating you. The issue of the fishing community is unique. Like my colleague, Hon. Migadde has stated, the problem on the waters is always not handled with the urgency it deserves. Sometimes, even in places where we have the Marine Police, they do not have fuel. They are allocated 100 litres of fuel for six months. With these big engines, they consume all the 100 litres within a week. Even if there is an accident on the waters, they find it a problem because they cannot rescue people and that is why we lose a number of our people. They can be told that the pirates are just a short distance away, but they will tell you that they are not facilitated and they are not able to respond. Our people are saying that they pay many taxes. Why are they not protected? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what are you doing to help our people have security of their property and this activity that earns a lot of money for this country?THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Pacuto, are you also from the fishing community? MS PACUTO:  Yes, very much so, Madam Speaker. I would like to add something about the fishing communities of Pakwach District. The Albert Nile borders Murchison Falls National Park and it has never been clear to the people of Pakwach where the boundary is. When they are fishing on the water, and move a certain distance to the other side of the national park, the UWA officials arrest them saying that they are ferrying people who are going to poach. However, because of the fisheries operation being carried out on the Albert Nile and Lake Albert, when they see the UPDF on the water, some of our young boys, out of fear, jump in the water and their boats are taken and burnt.We passed the Fisheries and Aquaculture Act in this Parliament over eight months ago. It is now a law because the President signed it and this Parliament has been waiting for the regulations to come back here and we debate them so that we know the right fishing gears for each water body. For instance, Pakwach District has two water bodies; Lake Albert and Albert Nile. Our people are already preparing themselves, but up to now, they do not know the right boat to be used on which water body. Madam Speaker, we need the fishing regulations on this Floor so that our people can be brought out of poverty. Many of our students dropped 10974COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRout this term. Many of the women cannot pay their loans because of the fisheries operation. I thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I see the problem involves a number of honourable colleagues. I request that you allow me to cause a meeting involving the honourable Members of Parliament from the fishing communities with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security and Defence. I promise that next week, we shall have this done. THE SPEAKER:  I also request that you resolve this from there. MS NABBANJA:  We shall resolve this and where possible, I will come and report. 3.51MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you did double, congratulating you nabalongo  would not be wrong. I rise on a matter of national economic importance. About 50 districts in Uganda are engaged in tea growing, tea processing and tea selling. The tea industry has more than 680,000 bona fide farmers and it employs more than two million people who are Ugandans. Tea earns Uganda more than $ 185 million a year. The current trend in the tea industry is very worrying. For example - I am making two comparisons - in 2022, in the auction market at Mombasa, Rwanda got $ 2.94 per kilogramme of tea, Kenya got $ 2.48 per kilogramme of tea, but Uganda got a miserable $ 1.16 per kilogramme. This year, Rwanda has so far got $ 3.15 per kilogramme and Kenya is getting $ 2.22 per kilogramme. Unfortunately, Uganda is getting $ 0.71 per kilogramme. The situation in Uganda, where people are murmuring why, is as a result of lack of a tea policy and regulation in the industry. In our local language, we call it kabetemere ; where everybody does what he wants or wishes. The result is garbage in, garbage out. Currently, some farmers are uprooting their tea because of the low prices of tea against the background that recently, the Government sunk billions of shillings in the supply of tea seedlings. My prayers are:(i) The Ministry of Agriculture should expedite the formulation of the tea policy and present it to this House for adoption because they have been sitting on it for a long time. (ii) Government should immediately pay attention to the plight of tea farmers with regard to the price cuts because prices have dropped from Shs 600 to Shs 200 currently and in some cases Shs 150. (iii) Government should work out a formula to help tea farmers with regard to fertilisers and other inputs in this aspect. If there is information, I receive it. 3.54MS ANNET KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bushenyi, I take this opportunity to congratulate you and your beloved Ssalongo . We pray to the Almighty that He gives the twins good health so that they can become responsible citizens of this country. I would like to add my voice to the honourable colleagues’ submission. I hail from a district where tea is grown on a large scale, employing very many people directly and indirectly. Due to continued outcry from the tea industry, as members of Parliament, together with the area local leadership, we had a meeting with the processors and tea growers. We did not stop there, we went ahead and visited factories that are processing tea to ascertain the magnitude of the problem, which is tea price cuts. Madam Speaker, the problem is very big. People are frustrated. The kilogramme that was at Shs 560 has now dropped to Shs 200. We are aware that the Government is processing [Ms Pacuto]10975THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023the tea policy, but as Government, we need to come up with immediate action to help the farmers in the following ways; One is to subsidise the fertilisers to lower the cost of production. Madam Speaker, there are fake fertilisers on the market. How best can Government mitigate that? People are now not applying fertilisers and they are compromising quality. The second one is to temporarily lower the tariff of electricity to the tea processing factories because of the prevailing circumstances.Lastly and very importantly, Governments should cause negotiations between the tea growers, the processors and the commercial banks so that there is a holiday for them to service their loans. People are no longer sleeping in their homes. They are on the verge of being arrested and also losing their mortgaged property. Madam Speaker, I thank you and we look up to you. Through your office, our members should be helped with immediate effect. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter )THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members – Sheema, are you on the same thing that we want on coffee? However, on issues of commercial banks, it is unfortunate that you have a fiduciary relationship between the bank and the borrower. Yes, ma’am.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker and colleagues, the President directed me in one of the Cabinet meetings three weeks ago, after these tea growers and industrialists had approached him with the same complaint. What the members are talking about is true, that the cost of tea from Uganda is as low as $0.75, and yet the one of Rwanda goes at above $3 per kilo, and that of Kenya goes to about $2.6 or $2.5. The reason is that in Uganda, we have not added fertilisers and so the quality of tea has gone down. I have held four meetings so far, even today, we had a meeting organising a Cabinet Paper so that the Government can come up with a rescue policy or plan. We have to change the way we do things. We need to do things differently because I am told those exporters of tea from Mombasa use our tea to blend the one of Rwanda, just for blending. So, they have to buy the other one first and then they use ours to blend. So, we have come up with some options; Short-term, medium-term and long-term. In the short-term, we have prepared a Cabinet Paper, which we are presenting on Monday. Hon. Magyezi, was the chair of the meeting today because I had another function. I think he has the current and I request that you allow him to give us the current. Then, in the medium term, we want to see how Government can come in, with a subsidy for fertilisers, so that these farmers can apply fertilizers for the quality of our tea to go up, and the type of tea our people grow here.  I am told it is that ancient type. We need to change. Lastly, for those having issues with the banks, I do not know how we can come in as you said. However, let me request Hon. Magyezi to give us the current. THE SPEAKER:  Maybe finally, before he comes, they are also talking about the tea policies and regulations to be brought.MS NABBANJA:  Yes, the tea policy is going to be tabled on Monday in Cabinet, because the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has come up with a tea policy.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon Magyezi? 4.01THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERN -MENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I thank the honourable members who have raised this matter; Hon. Biraaro and Hon. Mugisha. This is a serious matter for us the communities from the tea growing areas. 10976COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMadam Speaker, what I can inform the House in addition to what the Prime Minister has said and what you heard from the Members is that it is true, the price of tea has gone drastically down. What Hon. Biraaro did not point out, when he said the price has gone down from Shs 600 to Shs 200 shillings per kilo, we need to point out to Parliament and Government and the rest of everybody listening is that Shs 200 shillings paid to a farmer per kilo is shared between the farmer and the plucker. The plucker takes Shs 150 shillings per kilo. So, the farmer is left with only Shs 50 shillings. This cannot meet the cost of fertilisers, pesticides and everything else. Indeed, as the Prime Minister has pointed out, His Excellency the President has directed us and we are ready. In the morning, we talked to the Vice President and she confirmed that we are on the Order Paper for Monday. We have developed a comprehensive paper addressing the issues of the farmers, processors, factories, and all the stakeholders like the transporters and so on.The measures we are prescribing address the issues of all these stakeholders. The issue of fertiliser is for the farmer. Why is it important? It is important because when you do not apply fertiliser, it compromises the quality of the leaf and the quality of the leaf affects the price of the tea. Why the processors, it is because of the type of machinery used by the processors and the factories, also explains the reason why in the same market, Rwanda gets $3 and Uganda gets less than $1. The type of machinery we are using has to be improved. And on that, we have prescribed the measures. I beg to request through you, Rt Hon. Speaker that you allow us as a Government to come back to the House and explain the measures that we shall prescribe after the Cabinet meeting on Monday. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. Hon. Feta, Hon. Mutembuli and then Hon. Okot Ogong.4.03MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to use this opportunity to congratulate you on behalf of the people of Ayivu East upon the prestigious title of Nnalongo . I look forward to receiving blessings from you because I am still in the league. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER:  I can give you practical guidance. (Laughter)MR FETA:  Mama, I will wait for further guidance; a  proper one. Thank you. Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. We have been complaining about the high-handedness of the enforcement team of the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) in enforcing tax collections in West Nile. As we speak, a 73-year-old lady, Ondoru Margaret, the body has been in Arua Regional Referral Hospital Mortuary since Tuesday.  Chandiru Beatrice, 43 and Patrick Biliya, 27 years were injured as a result of being knocked down in the unfortunate incident as the enforcement team were subduing smugglers. Four days ago, on 11 November 2023, in Koboko, a 22-year-old boy was shot dead after the enforcement team asked him for Shs 600,000. He gave them Shs 400,000, but they wanted the motorcycle too and, in the scuffle, they shot him. Last year, in Arivu Subcounty, Arua District, a shopkeeper was shot by an enforcement officer. THE SPEAKER:  You are mixing several things.MR FETA:  I am giving the history – THE SPEAKER:  No, limit yourself to what you presented to my office, which was about an accident where a woman died. MR FETA:  I was giving the background of what has been happening, but thank you for your wise ruling. [Mr Magyezi]10977THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023I wish to submit that these incidents have been quite many; incidents of shooting, knocking, and those that are purely accidents as a result of the enforcement. One example is that of two young men, aged 13 and 14. This matter has led to several issues in the community, but we have tried to calm them down. We raise this matter so that the Government can address it once and for all because it has been a repeated occurrence. Our prayers: One, the culprits in the high-handed brutal enforcement should be tried in courts within West Nile and the court proceedings opened to the public.  Two, the enforcement within West Nile should be suspended unconditionally so that we can engage with the leadership because this enforcement is inside and not along the border.Three, all the victims of the high-handedness should be fairly compensated according to the gravity of the matter. That is to say; the deceased and the injured in that order. The Commissioner-General of the URA and the Commissioners in charge of Customs should come to West Nile and engage with the leadership so that we discuss the way forward on how to deal with the matter, which has been re-occurring several times. As the leadership, we agree that tax payment is a civil obligation and, therefore, we support tax payment. However, we appeal that tax collection should be done in a civil manner that this Parliament has enabled through the enactment of laws that help the URA to collect the taxes. I beg to submit.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Feta. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I got a report from Arua on this same matter. When I got this complaint, I asked my team to make a follow-up which revealed that there was an accident. I have a video to that effect, where a young man carrying two other people, knocked one of the pickups of URA and a lady died instantly; it was an accident. According to the report I got, URA took over the burial expenses. However, it was due to reckless riding by the boda boda.  If you want, I can give you the video and you look at it. I would like to say that we cannot suspend enforcement of the collection of taxes because that is where we get our money from. We will continue collecting taxes. When a person dies, we shall bury them first and then continue collecting the taxes.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for ably answering the Member. Nonetheless, we shall continue to engage.THE SPEAKER:  We need to continue the investigations into the shootings he is talking about. If it is true, we should bring the culprits to book. It is not correct. 4.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, first of all, we extend our sincere condolences to the family who lost their loved ones in the accident that happened in Arua involving our URA vehicle. The Member raises a number of issues, including the shooting. It is true the shooting occurred between a smuggler and our URA enforcement team. When this happened, we instituted an investigation and the soldiers involved were arrested. We await the outcome of the investigations and we shall take action. As you have said, I would like to appeal to our colleagues from Arua that we, as the Government, cannot compromise on smuggling and we shall continue with our enforcement. What I would like to undertake is that since this matter has come to Parliament, I will find 10978COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRtime to meet with the communities around Arua together with the URA team so that we do stakeholder management and ensure that we work together to collect the necessary taxes.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Counsel.4.12MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two to five days ago, God blessed us with rain in Bunyole East Constituency in Butaleja, but it has become harmful to us to the extent that we are now experiencing floods. As we speak, I have not less than two people at my home because they cannot find where to sleep. Their houses and everything have been washed away and they can only find peace in my home. This has a lot of consequences, including buying posho and beans every day, and my house is not enough to accommodate all of the people. My prayers are:(i) The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my Jjaja,  intervenes immediately so that she gives relief to my people to enable them leave my home and go back to their work. Much as I am a Member of Parliament, I get inconvenienced because I do not have that kind of money to look after all my people.(ii) We have Namajji and Lelesi Bridges, which were washed away along Namutumba-Busolwe-Nabumali Road. Since 1996, the Government has promised to tarmac the road, but up to now, nothing has happened and as we speak, people cannot use it. Maybe the Prime Minister can tell us when we expect this road to be tarmacked. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Any other? Yes, Hon. Musila.MR MUSILA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to add is that the water he is complaining about is from River Manafwa and upstream Mount Elgon, Namisindwa District as well as other districts around Mount Elgon. Madam Speaker, I was grappling with calls this morning. In Lwanda Parish, Bumbo Town Council, just a few metres away from my home, the cracks have widened. This is to sound a call to the Government that there is a looming disaster of a landslide or a mudslide. I appeal to the Prime Minister to put up measures, especially evacuation camps - I know Bugisu - Mount Elgon, in general, is cracked, but what I am talking about is salient. I do not want to come here with obituaries, Madam Speaker. I wish that Government puts in place response mechanisms to save people. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Floods? Yes, there is something again about floods. 4.16MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We live with the goodness of God and His mercy never fails us. On behalf of the people of Kibanda North, I congratulate you and your husband, Eng. Magogo, upon the beautiful twins that He has blessed you with. We praise His mercy for that. We are talking about rainwater and floods. Our people have planted crops and most of them are rotting in gardens. I implore the Prime Minister’s Office to also take note that if our crops fail, we shall have a lot of famine in future. So, she needs to plan for that. Thank you. 4.17MR PETER WERIKHE (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I also congratulate you on the twins. When you talk of floods –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for sports, we have a sports issue, so, do not go.[Mr Musasizi]10979THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023MR WERIKHE: Manafwa-Bukiika Circular Road is more or less impassable. As I talk right now, I cannot reach home. The roads, from Bubiita-Bukalasi to Bulucheke-Bufumbo, are cut off and the bridges have been washed away. We are trying to find ways of reaching markets and schools. The circular road in Bududa District has caused concern because in 2016, the President gave a directive for it to be worked on, but to-date, there is no action. We are getting impatient and I think now is the time that we are told the truth about what is going to happen to this road. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I get surprised when the tourism minister says he is going for Kagulu Hill climbing because he will not reach; the road is cut off at Nabirumba Bridge. Yes, Hon. Faith Magolo? 4.18MR JOHN FAITH MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations upon being a Nnalongo . Last year, on the 31st of July, the floods from Mount Elgon, Bungokho North and Wanale caused a lot of destruction in Mbale City and across. I thank the Prime Minister for responding by coming to the ground and for all the interventions. Among the interventions, there was a pertinent promise of the provision of Shs 200 billion to construct resilient infrastructure in the face of those climate challenges. At the moment, what was destroyed then has deteriorated further. Now that the Prime Minister is in the House and the solutions are here, I believe the people of Mbale will be happy to get an update on how far the Government has gone to redeem the situation. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 4.20MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maama , lemuruzi lelendro ri’I –(Laughter)-  that is in Madi - Oti leju . Madam Speaker, two of my subcounties have been submerged. In Laropi Subcounty, the whole of Gimara Parish has been submerged by the water from River Nile. In Dufile Subcounty, the floods swept animals – chickens, goats - and everything. So, minister for disaster, we will be very happy if you come and help the people. Thank you. 4.21MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you upon becoming my official mother – my mother is also a Nnalongo . (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, as we talk about floods, we have the able Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I request you, Madam, to send your team to Nakasongola, that is, my constituency of Budyebo, specifically to Kayikanga and Kafu villages in Nakitoma Subcounty. The water swept all those villages and people are in camps at Nakitoma Subcounty. I know we are going to be relieved in terms of iron sheets, food – I know. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it seems the whole House is rising on issues of floods. Tomorrow being a Friday, why don’t you get the minister for disaster, meet these Members and take note of these areas? Giving answers here will not help us, because we need to get to the depth of the whole issue. I do not know what you think. Let me first, hear from the Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I like the way you have handled this because a number of Members are truly suffering with their people - Butaleja, Manafwa, Kibanda, Bududa, Bungokho, Laropi and Nakasongola. 10980COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMadam Speaker, you are right. Let me give them time – let us meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. THE SPEAKER: Actually, include Bukedea. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Bukedea! (Laughter)  Let me request Members that we meet in the Conference Hall of the Office of the Prime Minister so that we can handle the issue. I will mobilise other stakeholders. I wish that you come with written submissions so that we can have a record for follow-up. I will mobilise the ministers concerned; works ministry is here, we even have energy ministry- because some poles of energy -THE SPEAKER:  Have fallen down -MS NABBANJA:  Poles of electricity were pushed down. I request that all those Members who have issues, let us meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.THE SPEAKER:  I want you to put your issues down - constituency, district -  for instance, for me, the floods have cut off all the bridges, the poles are down, people are staying in honourable’s home, all those kinds of things - put them down and go for that meeting and agree on how we can handle most of these things. Of course, the issue will always be money, but I am also aware that you can use the little you have. Thank you.4.25MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, some time ago, I think around 1987/1988, Dokolo Technical School lost a lorry during that time of insurgency. They have been making frantic efforts for the Government to give them another lorry and when the President visited the school in 2013, the President promised to give them a lorry, but this time, we have gone beyond a lorry; it should now be a school bus. On behalf of Dokolo Technical School and the district, we appeal to the Prime Minister to help implement and fulfil the pledge of the President to Dokolo Technical School.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues,  I have taken note of your issue and I will definitely inform the President, but I request for something written.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, Imat?MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Prime Minister and she agreed that this Dokolo Technical School, if you rate it with all the technical schools in Uganda, it has been performing consistently as the best. Although it is in the north, it is a technical school that deserves to be assisted. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to use your office to urge the Prime Minister to also be mindful of the fact that Dokolo Technical is performing as the best-rated nationally. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Pius?4.28MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating you upon being Nyin’abalongo,  in our language.My concern is about adult learners and repeaters of the Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE). In 2021, the Government introduced a new curriculum whereby learners are being assessed right away from senior one. So, my concern is about the fate of adult learners and the repeaters who are going to sit for UCE exams next year. That is my concern.THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Hon. Ogwang?4.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCA -TION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, can I beg for your indulgence that my colleague comes to the Ministry of Education and Sports tomorrow so that I follow up on the matter with him. I thank you. [Ms Nabbanja]10981THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ogwang, most of the Members have issues on education and unless you are telling us you can arrange for a meeting with all Members who have issues with seed schools and the curriculum. Give us the time or when you can meet the Members.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, because of the urgency of the matters these honourable members have regarding the issues of education in their respective constituencies, I would appeal to them that we hold a meeting on Monday. I know it is a Cabinet Day, but I request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to permit me to specifically have a meeting with them on Monday and I discuss with them issues regarding our sector. For those who need the Prime Minister’s attention, I can be able to communicate with her. Those that need – the time I will give you is 10.00 O’clock at the Ministry of Education and Sports boardroom here in Development House. I thank you. I will also be able to invite my technical team and the commissioners from various departments to be there so that we can discuss those things in a holistic manner. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ariko?4.31MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti City):  Thank you. Madam Speaker, the people of Soroti City-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang and Hon. Pius, can you listen?MR ARIKO:  The people of Soroti City and the greater part of Teso congratulate you and Amuran  upon your becoming Toto Oduwe  and Papa Oduwe . They are the same as you saying Nnalongo a nd Ssalongo .Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of AFCON. A short while ago, we were all up in euphoria, very happy and excited having won the right to do the Pamoja hosting of AFCON. However, there have been concerns being raised in different areas of the country, and different sub-regions, as far as the criteria and methodology of choosing the places that will provide stadia to host some of the games.Madam Speaker, the question that arises is that it is apparent that we need to see a schedule of activities in preparation to host this important tournament; a schedule that will help us to know when each activity is going to happen, what criteria will be used and the timelines in as far as preparations are concerned. Today, it might appear as though 2027 is very far, but sooner than later, we will find that the time is nigh and we do not have that much time to prepare. Madam Speaker, I, therefore, request that the Government provides this House with a detailed schedule of activities and a briefing on what steps are being taken as of now to ensure that we do not embarrass the international community when we host AFCON. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not know who is responding to that. Your little brother- Honourable minister Ogwang. Honourable minister, yesterday, we had a hot issue here  -  when you presented a report last time, you said it is going to be either or; Hoima or Akii-Bua and I am happy Dr Acuti is here and something of the sort - it is going to be Akii-Bua and – 4.34THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, on that day, when the Minister of State for Education and Sports in charge of Sports read that statement signed by the senior minister, it stated clearly that the Government will construct Akii-Bua Stadium, and either Buhinga or another stadium in Hoima. Implying Akii-Bua, plus one; either Buhinga or Hoima – that is to the best of my recollection. Thank you. (Applause)10982COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. As I said yesterday, AFCON and presidential pledges are two different issues. I want to request the Prime Minister - as I said yesterday, the Deputy Speaker and I were personally involved in these AFCON issues. I want to ask the Prime Minister to lay on the Table the East Africa Pamoja Bid that made us win the bid, which indicates the checklist before you bring in the presidential pledges. We are going to deposit it in the Library and all of you will be able to read it. 4.36THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah  Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the East Africa Pamoja Africa Cup of Nations Bid, AFCON 2027. I beg to lay. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  What is on that document is what made us win the bid. I want us to differentiate the local games that we have in Uganda; in Bukedea, Soroti with the international games. Honourable minister, can you respond? MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have correctly said, I read the statement on behalf of my senior minister and I correctly quoted the specific words. I would like to report as follows:I would be very happy, Madam Speaker, if you permitted me to bring a statement to highlight where we came from, where we are today, where we will be tomorrow and the need for the support of the honourable Members of Parliament to back up this  Pamoja  bid, which gave us the hosting rights of the AFCON 2027. Madam Speaker, you have correctly stated - and I would like to put it on record that the Ministry of Education and Sports has a plan to construct regional stadia. The Ministry of Education and Sports is aware of the presidential commitments according to the pledges of constructing stadia in Akii-Bua and Buhinga. I also would like to say that this AFCON is a project. I would be very happy if Parliament supported the ministry’s plan to get resources to have this project implemented to the letter. That helps us as a country to improve the infrastructural development of sports in Uganda.I would like to call upon you, honourable colleagues, that nobody from Government is refusing to have the construction of stadia in the areas that I read here on behalf of my senior minister. All that is lacking are the specific conditions in this bid, which we are meeting as a country, called Uganda, jointly with Kenya and Tanzania. We cannot, at this particular time, attempt to get out of these conditions because we risk losing the hosting rights as a country. My question to you, honourable colleagues, is -the plan to construct regional stadia where we all come from - I come from Teso. For God’s sake, I need Oligoi to be constructed, but I do not have money. I have been to Bushenyi, Kasese and Buhinga; I have been everywhere where there is a need for this infrastructure to be invested. The challenge is that this bid as of now does not permit us to have this done at the same time. Unless you want to tell me that the Government should take away some projects and we specifically concentrate on this. Madam Speaker, as I conclude- I have just come out of a meeting for one project. We are going to construct a state-of-the-art indoor arena in Lugogo. The contractor has just submitted a design project and a structural plan for that state-of-the-art indoor arena in Lugogo. I have just met them. They will be coming back next week in line with what we have agreed with them. As a Government, I need your support for that specific project for the purpose of developing sports infrastructure in the country. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the honourable minister says he is coming with a statement. We shall ask him all the questions when he comes up with a statement. Honourable minister, when are you bringing the statement? 10983THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2023MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I will be happy if you give me up to – because on Tuesday, I will be looking at what is in this bid for the purpose of training grounds in Kampala. On Monday, I will be in Hoima to look at what is in this bid. That is it - (Interjections)-   no, on Monday, I will have a meeting with MPs. On Tuesday, I will be in Kampala. On Wednesday, I will be in Hoima. I thank you for specifically addressing areas that are in that bid. I request, Madam Speaker, that I bring the statement on Thursday. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  I would like to request that as you look at the issues of training areas in Kampala, stop disorganising our schools. There are these youths who want to have games. Get areas, which are not in schools. How can you say you are taking training into a primary or secondary school? Pupils are studying - you cannot manage AFCON as if you are managing your local games of Katakwi. MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I thank you for the guidance given, but permit me to say the following. This AFCON is also going to help us improve infrastructure in some of the schools. Let me give an example - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the unemployment we have in this country - I do not think that you are going to have kids from Nakasero Primary School play in the national team. Why don’t you use Kira Road? There is a place there, so, why don’t you put them in such a place where you can have these locals; the youth go and train - public places?MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I have got your guidance, but I would like to give an example, as I conclude on the subject matter – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I have given the guidance and that is that. You people should stop playing with AFCON. It is an advantage for this country to get AFCON. If you are going to start playing around with it, we are going to lose it.Honourable members, on a good note, my school is also hosting the East African Community games. (Applause)  Honourable members, the Prime Minister wants to - there is a procedural matter. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, I stand on a procedural matter. I have listened to the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports) on the issue of infrastructure improvement. I am touched by the comments you have made about training taking place in schools in preparation for the big game. The Government cannot come on the Floor of Parliament and talk of “Akii-Bua and one other” and then it goes to change its statement. Government cannot make that statement when the bid actually talks differently. Madam Speaker, I just want clarification and I am doing it in good spirit. I think it would be unfortunate if Lango, as a tribe and region, would jeopardise what is good for the country; we will not. What we are saying is, can we stick to the statement that the Government made, making mention of “Akii-Bua and one other?” What was the basis of making that statement, “Akii-Bua and one other?” I thought for the first time, people remember that a Lango boy called, “Akii-Bua” gave Uganda a historic golden medal. I thought that was the first time. Secondly, I thought Ugandans are probably beginning to recognise that Lango is one tribe that has demonstrated a passion for football. It is known world over. Therefore, for anybody to stand here and say to Parliament, “Akii-Bua and one other” and then, you go back to change it – you are actually watering down the image of this institution. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, one thing leads to the other. What is important in this whole discussion is the bid. When I am seated in this chair, I would have loved this game to even go to my compound. However, because my compound is not in that bid, the bid takes priority. The issue of the presidential pledge must be fulfilled. A presidential pledge will be fulfilled, but what must be done first is 10984COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRwhat is in the bid. We will go by the bid if we want to take up this AFCON. I am adjourning the House to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 November 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)[The Speaker]