Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 27 November 2019

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to inform you that we have in the country the Speaker of Ethiopia, Mr Tegarse. He is here under what they called public diplomacy. He has come with 60 people. They include artists, musicians, singers, academicians and bureaucrats. I think for them now, the people must be visible in their diplomacy.

He was here this morning and is making the rounds within Uganda. We have agreed to strengthen our collaboration. We already have a Memorandum of Understanding, since 2012 but we are going to set up an Ethiopia-Uganda Friendship Group. Thank you.

Honourable members, there are two matters of national concern. Where is hon. Nambeshe and hon. Komakech? If they are not here, let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF UGANDA’S PROPERTIES IN NAIROBI, MOMBASA AND KISUMU

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, this is a statement in regard to the status of the properties in Kenya, under the management of Uganda Property Holdings. It has been uploaded on our system and it is a short statement. I will go straight to reading it.

The purpose of this statement is to give Members information regarding ownership and the status of the properties in Kenya, under the management of Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL), Uganda’s Embassy in Nairobi, Uganda Railway Corporation and also to shed light on the Kenya Land Amendment Act, 2016. 

Uganda Government owns properties in Kenya under three categories. The said properties are managed by Uganda Property Holdings limited (UPHL), Uganda Embassy in Nairobi and Uganda Railways Corporation.

The following is the status of the Government properties in Kenya. Under the Uganda Property Holdings in Kenya, we own 23 properties in Kenya, mainly in Mombasa. Being foreign based, the properties are owned on leasehold terms and currently, all the properties have running leases. Of the above mentioned 23 properties, 11 are warehouses; one is a car port, two office blocks, three commercial blocks, four residential houses and two yards.

All the properties in Mombasa are developed, have running leases and are also being rented out at competitive rates in Mombasa. All the properties are titled and Uganda Property Holdings is in custody of the Certificates of Title. The schedule of the assets in Mombasa, under the management of UPHL, is in appendix A attached, which I wish to lay on Table after I have read the statement. 

The second category of properties is under the management of Uganda Railways Corporation (URC). Uganda Railways Corporation owns three residential properties in Kenya; that is in Mombasa, Nairobi and Kisumu.

In 2018, URC engaged UPHL to professionally manage its three properties in Kenya. URC has since handed over two of the properties; one in Mombasa and another in Nairobi. URC is in custody of the ownership documents pertaining to the properties. The schedule of the properties under URC is also attached under Annex B.

The properties under Uganda’s Embassy in Nairobi

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this House that there are three properties, which are managed by the Uganda Embassy in Nairobi. These are official residence of our Ambassador, the Chancery (Land and Buildings) and a commercial property. The schedule of the assets in Mombasa under Uganda Embassy in Nairobi is also attached under Annex C.

I wish to make a comment on the amendment that was made by the Government of Kenya on the Kenya Land Amendment Law, 2016 and how it is likely to affect our properties. Kenya Government, in 2016, enacted a new law, The Land Law (Amendment) Act, 2016, which amended the Kenya Land Act, 2002. The said law was assented to on 3l August 2016 and commenced on the 2l September 2016. 

An opinion was sought from the Attorney-General on this law and its effect on our properties in Kenya. The Attorney-General advised that the law, as is, does not affect our properties in Kenya. The opinion of the Attorney-General is also attached under Annex D.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, all the Government of Uganda properties have running leases and the Land Law Amendment, 2016 of the Government of Kenya does not affect the current ownership of the properties directly. 

For the properties whose leases are about to expire, we shall work with the relevant authorities in Kenya, to ensure that these leases are renewed. A list of the 23 properties, which are managed by UPHL and those managed by the embassy and URC is attached here. I beg to lay.
I would like to assure the House that our properties are in safe hands. They are safe in Kenya and are generating income, except two properties, which are not in good shape but which we are trying to renovate.

I beg to move and also lay the annexes. Thank you.

2.35
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for assuring the nation that our properties in Mombasa are safe. 

I would like to ask the minister to let the country know how much, in terms of revenue, the properties in Mombasa fetch and how much the UPHL remits to the Consolidated Fund. 

In 2016, it occurred that Shs 2 billion was collected from the properties. When we had an interface with the managers, we went a step further to know how much was remitted to the Consolidated Fund. It occurred to us that only Shs 50 million out of the Shs 2 billion collection found its way into the Consolidated Fund.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am asking you to direct the ministry to provide the aggregated revenue collected from the properties for about 15 years and also show how much the Consolidated Fund has received from the same properties. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Onyango, honourable minister, I was wondering whether the opinion of the Attorney-General of Uganda interpretation of the law of Kenya is sufficient. I do not know why you did not get an opinion from the Attorney-General of Kenya.

2.38
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving this House assurance about the status of our properties in Kenya. However, much as it is true that our properties are there, the state of these properties is worrying. They are getting dilapidated and need renovation.

The minister needs to give us a clear programme and way forward on how these properties are going to stay for more years because some of them are in a worrying state, especially the ones in Mombasa. 


2.39
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister just read a statement without details. In Nairobi, we have a commercial building, which is owned by the Uganda Mission. You have not told us that our Mission went to court concerning that property because certain shopkeepers have refused to move out of the building so that we carry out repairs. The building is in a terrible state. 

Secondly, the ministry provided more than Shs 10 billion. Can you tell us the exact amount that you withdrew when the mission started repairing that building? Have you been to Nairobi to see the state of that building? It is in a terrible state. What is Government doing about that? 

The UPHL was created for people to get money. We told them that our missions have immunity over the properties that fall under them in London and the world over. As such, the company formed and put in charge of these properties has no rights and immunity over them. That was wasteful expenditure. 

The UPHL was created for people to get jobs whereas there are missions that could look after those properties. When you travel abroad, you would have to ask the missions where to get an electrician or a plumber. Therefore, those properties abroad should be under missions. 

Tell us about the property in Nairobi, which is in a terrible state and why you withdrew money for the repair of that building. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are now going into a general debate. The question, which hon. Onyango raised was whether our properties were safe. He said the lease was about to expire and as a result, the property would revert to the Government of Kenya. That was the question. We are not having a general debate on the situation. The question he wanted the minister to answer is, are our properties safe? That is why I am saying that the Attorney-General of Kenya should be the one to give you an opinion.

2.41
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, mine is as a result of the outcome of the safety of our Mission in Nairobi. As the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we were in Kenya from last week until this week and the most emerging issue is, while there was a clear consent agreement by the Governments of Uganda and Kenya, we had money that was banked. This money accumulated an interest of Shs 1 billion, which was not taken to the Consolidated Fund. 

We would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us very clear information on the whereabouts of the Shs 1 billion because the High Commission in Nairobi is very interested to ensure that – They would even start the renovation with the Shs 1 billion that had accumulated as interest after banking the other Shs 10 billion. Therefore, honourable minister, where is this money?

2.43
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you honourable colleague for raising this issue. Madam Speaker, we know that we had litigation with tenants who are occupying Uganda House in Nairobi but there was a consent judgement, which was delivered here and the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs presented it to the Budget Committee.

The Budget Committee directed that the money that had been allocated and that has been recalled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - because it had not been utilised during the legal battle with the tenants - should be returned since the case has been disposed of.

As hon. Lyandro Komakech has said, it is true that when this money was put on a retention account, it accrued interest of Shs 1 billion and the Budget Committee advised that this money should be retained in Nairobi to kick start the process of renovation. The information I am giving is that as far as I know, this money was not retained there and the renovation has not started.

2.44
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue that I would like to put across regards the security of our properties. Out of the 23 properties we have in Kenya, we have got reliable information that the leases of these six properties are expiring within six years. 
The information we have is that the amended law that you alluded to, Madam Speaker, is stringent in as far as renewing leases is concerned. Whereas it is a little bit relaxed in acquiring properties, it is very stringent in as far as renewing the leases is concerned. 

Further information states that no Government official is bothered to try and see how negotiations between Uganda and Kenya can proceed in as far as having our properties secured and their leases renewed.

We still worry that as soon as these six years expire, we may most likely lose these properties and yet, we are part of the East African Community (EAC). In the interest of the EAC, why don’t the two Governments come together and see how exceptions can be made so that these six properties are saved? This information is direct from the UPHL that is keeping these properties in Nairobi but the minister is not giving us this information. Thank you very much.

2.46
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last month, as a Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government), we were in Nairobi and we paid a courtesy call on the High Commission. The information we got was that whereas some properties are safe, they are in a bad state. Uganda House in Nairobi is in a bad state and I think it is our responsibility to take care of it. It is on a prime land but not in good state. 

Madam Speaker, we also got informed that the embassy where high dignitaries sit does not even have a boardroom. I think we need to attend to some of these details. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we were informed that we lose money in the transactions we make. The money we appropriate for the embassy, when it is transferred to Nairobi and when our properties generate the money, they have to transfer the money here and for every transaction, we incur a cost. The team at the embassy was wondering whether it is not possible, like it is done in other countries, that they get the income there and see how they reconcile their records so that we do not have to lose money in all these transfers. They only transfer the difference from the income they generate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.47
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I highly doubt and I do not buy the opinion of the Attorney-General. To begin with, the statement of the minister itself clearly shows that our property in Mombasa whose lease is about to expire is not safe. 

Allow me quote what the Minister's statement reads, “Section 49 (13) of the new law of Kenya prohibits non Kenyan citizens or governments other than Kenya to apply for a renewal of lease.” This is a statement from the minister himself saying that the law does not permit foreign governments, including Uganda.

What I expected the Attorney-General to tell us is whether by virtue of being partner states in the EAC we qualified as foreign governments or we are considered as part of East Africa? These are the things we wanted to hear. 

But for the Authority-General to come and say, after even giving us this information - Even then, the other thing is, the law also bars foreigners, including governments, from owning property within 25 radius from the shores and our property - the prime property are within these watershed areas. 

Therefore, it means that much as we know that the law may not apply retrospectively, it is very clear that once the lease expires - it is even listed here - there are six properties whose lease is about to expire and once they expire, it will be very difficult for us given that there is a new legislation in Kenya, which says that you cannot renew. The minister has even stated it. This is the opinion of the Attorney-General. 

I do not know why the minister conveniently decided not to read that portion of the statement.  What makes me get worried is because when we visited as the Budget Committee, the information we got was that there had been an attempt to dispose of this property by the Attorney-General's Chambers on two occasions -

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General of Uganda?

MR OTHIENO:  Yes, of Uganda. Madam Speaker, with that kind of information in the background and given the kind of the legal opinion the Attorney-General is giving - just the surface bit that our property is safe, when he is very well aware that the property is not safe - he is not telling us the modalities and what actions they are taking to safeguard it once the lease expires. 

Madam Speaker, that makes me wonder whether there is no underhanded method going on. They want to keep us in lull, the lease expires and then, the property is disposed and that is what they are basically after. 

THE SPEAKER: Then, they will buy it? 

MR OTHIENO: They want to buy it for themselves using Kenyan agents. They have agents the other side; those agents will pose as Kenyan citizens to qualify to buy this property. Take them up and then, of course as Ugandans, we shall have lost but as individuals, they will have gained. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I call upon this House not to accept the statement of the minister and not to be made comfortable to think that our property is safe.

Let me add more information. They had succeeded in selling off the property in Jinja.  What saved us is that they used a fictitious company to buy it. That is how it survived but they had sold it.
 
The one in London, they even arrested the person who was going to attend the court proceedings. The man was arrested here and yet, they had to sign a letter of no objection. They had consented to the other man to take over the property and sell it.

They were selling off this property at a cost less than what they could probably generate in one month. That is the irony and the danger we are facing.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as far as this House is concerned, we should reject the statement of the minister.  The Attorney-General should come here and assure the country that the property is safe.

THE SPEAKER:  And I want him to come with assurance from the Kenyan Government – from the Attorney-General of Kenya. As I invite hon. Walyomu, join me in welcoming guests from Zanzibar House of Representatives, who are in the gallery. They are members of the Parliamentary Service Commission.

    1. Mr Idrissa Juma - Chairman of the Service Commission 
    2. Ms Hamida Khamis - member 
    3. Ms Jokha Khamis Makame - Member
    4. Mr Khamis Haji Juma - Member
    5. Mr Ussi Jecha Simai - Member
    6. Mr Haidar Haji Abdulla - Member
    7. Mr Ali Ali Haji - Secretary of the Service Commission
    8. Mr Khamis Silima - officer of the Service Commission
    9. Mr Omar Ameir - Head of Human Resource Division

You are very welcome.

2.53
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Madame Speaker, I think this is not the first time we are getting an opinion from the Attorney-General.

This Parliament has got several opinions and at the end of the day, we lose out basing on his opinion. Therefore, we cannot base on the opinion of the Attorney-General to say that our properties in Kenya are safe. As you have guided, we need to get some confirmation from the Kenyan Government. Otherwise, as of now, we need to know that our properties in Kenya are at stake. 

We have grabbers who are grabbing even our farms here; what about the land in a foreign country -(Interruption)

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Walyomu for taking the information. The reason I wanted to submit when my colleague was on the floor is because I had the chance of being on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and hon. Katuramu is our Chairperson. 

It happened that there was infighting between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. It is true, the plot where we are we are housed in Nairobi is on prime land. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs wanted to sell the land under the guise that it was in a dilapidated state and so, they wanted to demolish everything and sell.

However, even the lawyer who was acting on behalf of Uganda had no practicing certificate when they reached court. So, our case collapsed like that. Now, the tenants are occupying the house for the last one year and half without remitting.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the house?

MR MUGEMA: It is in Nairobi.

THE SPEAKER: Which street?

MR MUGEMA: Just because I was in a rush, I wanted to give information but I will bring it.

Lastly, when Uganda Airline was collapsing, we had a house in Montreal - hon. Bahati take this. By then I was a student. It is on record that by then, the Executive Director of Civil Aviation Authority and the current one together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs connived and sold our house in Montreal. Parliament should get interested in that because we had a big mansion there. Our ambassador who was by then a delegate in the Civil Aviation Authority and at International Civil Aviation Authority Organisation connived and sold it.

Madam Speaker, let Parliament interest itself in this and we will come out with very good conclusive results on how they sold our property. The one in Nairobi is going in the same line. You cannot say that it is being occupied by tenants but it is in a dilapidated state. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs wants to sell it and they do not want UPHL to get hold of it.

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. Madam Speaker, I think this is the House the honourable member was referring to.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the one on Moi Avenue?

MR WALYOMU: Yes, Madam Speaker. These are properties of Ugandans and we need to protect them. We should not base on the statement of the minister and the opinion of the Attorney-General. I am happy with the statement but by you concluding and assuring us basing on the opinion of the Attorney-General, this is not the first time for the Attorney-General to mislead this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am sorry, I am not satisfied with your answer.

MR BAHATI: Let me say something, Madam Speaker. I did not read through the schedule of our properties but if you look at the statement on our intranet, out of the 23 properties we have, they are only five properties that have a lease of six years and below. The rest have between 25 to 92 years. Therefore, the lease is still running.

Secondly, on the issue regarding the collection of resources from these properties and how they are managed, all Government money is managed under the Public Finance Management Act. Therefore, we collect, put on the Consolidated Fund and then, we budget. Also, we have an officer of this House, the Auditor-General who reports to us every financial year on how this money is collected and used. It is important for Members to know that there is that system because we cannot debate transaction by transaction when we have an officer who handles it –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is that whereas properties managed by UPHL are by and large out of danger and generate revenue to Government, the biggest problem is with commercial properties under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Like the property in Nairobi under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which has not generated revenue for the last two years – although the Government of Uganda claims that those properties have diplomatic immunity, it is not true. That particular property is dilapidated. The ministry wanted to evict the tenants to renovate it but the tenants went to court and obtained an injunction.

For the last two years, they are seated on the property without generating any revenue. The other property was in Brussels, which was dilapidated. It was condemned and subsequently demolished because Ministry of Foreign Affairs could not renovate it. If this House is to take a decision, it should invest all our commercial properties into that arm of Government that manages properties commercially. However, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is totally doing nothing. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, last night, I took some time to read through this statement. I would beg that you probably say that you are not satisfied with maybe the opinion of the Attorney-General. However, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have really prepared a good statement. For you to say that you are not satisfied with it, would be discouraging on our side.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for the quick work you did. You did a good job but I am not satisfied that the Attorney-General of Uganda can casually interpret the laws in Kenya. We want to have an assurance from the Attorney-General of Kenya on this issue. It is the law in Kenya and not in Uganda.

3.03
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like you have said, the law in Kenya is also very clear on this matter. However, we can continue to own land as Ugandans on lease. The question is why they wait for such a long time for leases to run out and no one follows.

Secondly, let the certificates of title be presented to this august House. You may never know some properties may even be having encumbrances.

Thirdly, the law of leases is that someone should follow the conditions, like hon. Niwagaba has clearly stated, when you run down the properties then city authorities do re-entries because the properties are not habitable and developed. The reason is that people fear accountability. 

The Auditor-General in his report recently claimed and stated that UPHL and its board are not fully functioning or performing their duties and it is intentional. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we welcome your indulgence in this matter for the purposes of saving Ugandans from losing these properties. I would like to tell you that this is intentional to fraudulently change the conditions of the leases and after that, properties will be taken by Ugandans in a given cicle. Thank you.

3.05
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am speaking here as the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) I am standing in for the Leader of the Opposition because she is engaged somewhere. 

First, the issue of public property in Kenya and secondly, the general principle of the protection of public properties in Uganda -

Thirdly, I would like to tell you that there is a detailed report coming. One of our committees chaired by the Opposition went there; the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation was in Kenya and their report will be presented and you will see the details. 

Overall, there is poor management of public properties as attested to by Members here that the state of our property in Kenya, particularly in Mombasa is not in good shape. The question we should ask is, how did this property deteriorate day by day, month by month and year by year to the state in which they are when they are people using them?

What is the policy of Government for protection of public property? Are individuals held responsible? Is there some kind of checklist when somebody is leaving office? You are leaving but what did you find here when you entered? How did you use it and can this person be held responsible for damages during the time of occupancy and use?

I associate with the dissatisfaction of Members about this report. As the Opposition, we want to ask, where is the asset register of the Republic of Uganda where all the assets of Uganda must be documented? In addition, are these assets on that register?

We demand that in addition to the minister coming here with better information – closing the gaps, which are in this presentation – we would like the Government to bring the asset register of the Republic of Uganda. What do we have and where are they? This problem of connivance of Government officials to grab public property is widespread. We have heard about this in Kenya and in Uganda and we have seen it with farms and buildings. 

This Parliament should wake up and secure the public property of the Republic of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is important that the fears of the people of Uganda are allayed by you tabling here a letter from the Attorney-General of Kenya, confirming that that law will not apply to our properties. How long should we give you? This is urgent.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to inform the acting Leader of the Opposition that every financial year, the Auditor-General audits the books of accounts of the Government of Uganda and he actually tells us, through the asset register, the assets of the country. We can also lay it on Table so that the Leader of the Opposition gets familiar with the operations of Government.

On the second issue, Madam Speaker, we request for two weeks since we have to reach out to Kenya. We would also like to thank you for the advice that you have given us. We thought that the Attorney-General of Uganda was sufficient. Since this applies to the law of Kenya, we accept the advice you have given us and we shall come back to the House in two weeks. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, the Committee on Foreign Affairs should take an interest in this report. They should continue reviewing it to establish what the minister has said. However, honourable minister, check whether the property of Transocean in Mombasa has not been sold. Was it sold?
	
3.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Hood Katuramu): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance on this matter but I would like to make a short comment. First, I would like to assure this House that the properties in Mombasa are properties of the Government of Uganda with 100 per cent share capital by the Government of Uganda and an appointed board of directors. Therefore, I assure this House that no person can come and buy that property from the Government.

Secondly, what I was not aware of is the expiry of the leases of some of the properties. This is very important and it should be investigated so that we have our property leases renewed as soon as possible because that is when we shall have the assurance that the properties will remain ours. We will undertake this and report back to Parliament.

3.11
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 215(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. On Wednesday, 20 November, I made a request to extend the time within which we should present our report as the Committee on Education and Sports concerning the resolution directing the committee to investigate allegations of sexual abuse of the students by security personnel and allegations of mismanagement and abdication of duty by Makerere University management.

After making this request, there were some issues that were raised by some Members. The reason we made that request was, after holding a series of meetings, we found that the matter had a wide scope. In particular, we failed to find the students that were allegedly sexually abused because they did not show up. 

We have made contacts and are trying to follow up the matter. However, as of now, we have made a final schedule of our meetings and we hope that by 5 December 2019, we shall have concluded the investigations and we will be ready to report by 10 December.

With these justifications, I beg that the House allows us to extend our reporting time to not later than 10 December. Thank you.

3.13
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, since the matter the chairperson is talking about is very sensitive and we also need to go and consult our constituents further, I agree with him that we extend the time. Indeed, we have to consult our voters on this issue because it is complex.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we asked the committee to handle that matter because we needed information to guide us on the way forward. Therefore, let us give them the extra time they need. They will report on 10 December 2019.

Honourable members, I had forgotten to inform you that the Chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission, hon. Beatrice Byenkya, lost her husband, Dr Noah Byenkya this morning. Burial will take place tomorrow in Hoima. She was a member of this House. Let us stand up for one minute in honour of Dr Byenkya.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ON 3 DECEMBER, 2019 IN IGANGA DISTRICT

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, I rise to brief Parliament about the forthcoming commemoration of the International Day for Persons with Disabilities scheduled to take on 3 December, 2019 at Iganga Municipal Council Primary School, Iganga Municipality in Iganga District. 

The purpose of this statement is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year's International Day for Persons with Disabilities, scheduled to take place on 3 December 2019 at Iganga Primary School. This day was proclaimed in 1992 by the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 47/3 to create awareness on the rights and needs of persons with disabilities.

The International Day for Persons with Disabilities provides a platform for Government and its stakeholders to take stock of the achievements made in serving persons with disabilities, identify the challenges encountered and come up with resolutions on how to serve them better.

The celebrations are also in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), which Uganda ratified in 2008, whose Article 8 on Awareness-raising, obliges state parties to ensure awareness on the rights of Persons with Disabilities.

The International Day for Persons with Disabilities has been celebrated in Uganda since 1993. However, the day has not yet been gazetted. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development every year works in collaboration with other stakeholders to ensure that the day is a success.

The theme for this year is “Promoting Disability Inclusive Programming for an Accessible Future”. This theme means that there should be disability mainstreaming in all programmes to ensure that everybody has the same opportunities to participate in every aspect of life to the best of their abilities and desires. Therefore, Government and all its stakeholders should work together towards a future, where barriers that stand in the way of Persons with Disabilities no longer exist.

As is always the practice, a number of activities have been lined to form part of the celebration. These will include assessment of the various forms of disabilities. This will be done a week before the actual day. Distribution of assistive devices - we will have radio talk-shows to promote understanding of disability issues and mobilise for the dignity, rights and well-being of Persons with Disabilities. We shall also have health camp and a disability dialogue that will take place on the eve of the event.

As part of the activities on the International Day for Persons with Disabilities, the Chief Guest will launch the Guidelines on the Special Grant for Persons with Disabilities. The Special Grant Programme for Persons with Disabilities is an initiative by Government to address their livelihoods and income by providing an opportunity to enhance financial inclusion, promote entrepreneurship and effective participation in economic development of the country.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for increasing this fund, which was earlier in the budget stated at Shs 2.9 billion. However, Parliament was able to raise it to Shs 5 billion this financial year. I thank Parliament for that increase. 

I would like to also take this opportunity to invite colleagues to the celebrations scheduled to take place in Iganga District Local Government on Tuesday, 3 December 2019 and request you to support the celebrations in any way possible.

The purpose of this statement is, therefore, to inform colleagues and request you to appreciate the importance of promoting an understanding of the disabilities issues and mobilise support for the dignity, rights and well-being of Persons with Disabilities to ensure their inclusion and full participation in the development agenda.

I also wish to request that you take note that the theme for this year's International Day for Persons with Disabilities is “Promoting Disability Inclusive Programming for an Accessible Future” and the national venue is Iganga District.

Honourable members, also take note that the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda will officiate at the national celebrations of the International day for Persons with Disabilities on 3 December 2019.

Please, honourable members, accept my invitation to the national celebrations at Iganga Municipal Primary School, Iganga Municipal Council on 3 December 2019 beginning at 9.30 a.m. I appeal for your usual support in your districts and constituencies to participate in the celebrations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Let me invite hon. Karungi.

3.22
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to also thank the minister for this wonderful statement and the Government for what has been done as far as Persons with Disabilities are concerned.

Government has tried. We now have leaders and there is also the special grant for Persons with Disabilities. However, the people of Kanungu have been asking me the whereabouts of this money. They hear there is a fund for Persons with Disabilities but in Kanungu, we do not know where it is. I believe there are colleagues who do not know how this money has been distributed. We hope that it will not be like Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE).

My people would be happy, if the minister gave us light on how this money was distributed. Otherwise, my neighbours in Rukungiri and Kabale have not seen anything. Madam Speaker, I also want our people to benefit.

In my district, we do not have schools for Persons with Disabilities. This is a great challenge and I believe that in other districts, it could be the same. Yet, we have many children who have disabilities. I do not know why the Ministry of Education and Sports does not interest itself in giving every constituency a school to cater for these children. Otherwise, they are many.

Madam Speaker, we have not encouraged parents to bring out these children. They are many at home and they are not respected. Their rights are not well catered for. Therefore, I would like to pray that we look at the issue of schools for Persons with Disabilities in each constituency.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the fund for Persons with Disabilities be equally distributed. I also need a clear explanation on how this money benefited the people of Kanungu. Thank you very much.

3.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report.

Honourable minister, as we commemorate the day for Persons with Disabilities, you should note the following and I will start with where hon. Karungi ended. The only school for Persons with Disabilities in Northern Uganda is Gulu High School but the school is almost dead now. Government needs to come up with a way of supporting schools for Persons with disabilities. Honourable minister, you need to take this very seriously. Gulu High School should rise up again.

Secondly, the way Persons with Disabilities are living in our districts is pathetic. Many of them are rejected by their families and many look at them as useless people. I would like to, therefore, find out whether Government has got a plan to help Person with Disabilities. For example, let People with Disabilities be given decent accommodation.

Government could distribute say, 10 iron sheets to help People with Disabilities in the villages. Let them have somewhere to live. Many of them live in very bad structures, their situation is very bad and people normally under-look them. Madam Speaker, we need to take this very serious.

Thirdly, there are Persons with Disabilities who require wheel chairs. I do not know the policy of providing them but many in my district cannot afford wheel chairs. Some of the disabled are 30 and 40 years.

Can Government come up with some fund to procure wheelchairs for our people living with disabilities? Let them visit churches, go to schools but many of them are ever confined within the family. We need to look at that properly.

Finally, as my colleague put it, for a long time, we have been hearing that Government has allocated funds for people with disabilities but in Amuru, we have never seen that money and they are ever asking us. Thank you very much and I pray that what I mentioned should be catered for by the Government.

3.27
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and for the invitation to the event. That is not very different from the other many events that we are invited to.

My concern, like my colleagues have alluded to, is about the funds. Back home in Kyotera, I have never seen that fund anywhere. Even when we discuss at the local council, they do not mention anything to do with the fund for People with Disabilities.

Unfortunately, when Operation Wealth Creation is going around and giving things out, they are told that as People with Disabilities, they have a fund and yet, they do not benefit from it.

It is critical that the minister comes out transparently to let us know which districts are supposed to benefit and how much money there is. If all of us are supposed to benefit, we must know so that when our people contact us, we are able to direct them where to go and to know how much they should get.

The other issue is about wheelchairs. People keep calling us to donate to them with wheel chairs and when they go to the health centres, they do not have user friendly facilities. Honourable minister, you also need to consider that so that People with Disabilities can access services as much as others.

Lastly, I would like to know what you meant when you requested us as members of Parliament to help you make sure that People with Disabilities are represented at Iganga.

Have you set out transport and selected who is coming from the districts to Iganga? Do you expect honourable members of Parliament to go and mobilise and bring people to Iganga?
 
They have to be represented but do not expect us members of Parliament to do that responsibility because we have a lot of other duties to handle. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister very much for the statement and for organising the programme. 

Definitely, all members of Parliament support the plight of People with Disabilities and it is manifested in the fact that each time this House debates matters under education and other sectors, they usually debate urging Government to make sure that all Government facilities have disability friendly facilities.

Therefore, the theme for this year’s celebration is timely and spot on. After the celebration, I urge the minister to sit down with the technical people in the ministry, do proper planning and come up with something that will convince this Parliament to ensure that in the next financial year, we have a special programme to take care of people with disabilities.

It is very alarming; when you go to certain schools, you hardly see facilities that aid proper learning of children with disabilities. For instance, simple things like ramps to access a classroom for those who are not able to walk are not there.

In the toilet facilities, there no facilities that are friendly to children with disabilities. As the ministry plans for this, make sure that you incorporate the need for all schools in this country to have teachers that have the knowledge to handle children with disabilities.

When I was young, there used to be teacher training institutes to train some teachers who were interested in special needs. My late mother was a teacher of special needs. 

I would like to urge the ministry to plan for this and make sure that each and every school in this country has teachers of special needs, to take care of children who are not able to access education because of the disadvantages that they have. This way we shall be able to move on properly.

Finally, the special grant for people with disabilities is little known. One time in Lapono sub county in Agago District, as I was addressing other matters and informing my communities of what Parliament has been doing, I was shocked by a Person with Disability who told me; “I want you to go and ask the ministry in charge of our affairs when they will start bringing down celebrations commemorating the day of People with Disabilities here in our district. We would like to know whether funds are also allocated in our districts such that even if the celebrations are elsewhere, every district also commemorates this the way Women’s Day and Youth Day are celebrated.”

They asked me such questions and where they can access funds called special grants. It is good that the minister today spoke about it. 

We would like to get clarity so that we are able to let them know about how to access these grants. With this, I thank you very much for the opportunity.

3.34
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I associate with the well-reasoned submission of my colleagues.

Before Parliament, is an amendment Bill on matters of the disabled and I would like to invite colleagues to closely monitor this Bill that is trying to particularise some of the issues Members are discussing. 

We need to closely monitor the content so that we can properly mainstream this subject matter. Two issues for me are pertinent on this subject. One is education. I am yet to appreciate how the ministry particularises disability because learning disabilities for the disabled are multifaceted. We have the blind, dumb and physically disabled. Like the honourable member submitted, we do not have schools specialised for these learning challenges and it is a problem. For example, in greater Masaka, the only school there is owned by the Daughters of Mary Sisters, Bwanda and it is very expensive to access. You cannot blame them because there are hardly teachers or facilities provided by Government.

Therefore, I would like to invite the minister and Government to think through this. Apart from celebrations and sloganeering, we need to particularise the needs of the disabled and education is one of the key issues that this Parliament can help the minister resolve.

For example, why would a PWD suffer to look for school fees? One of the reasons we have a Government is to take care of these specific human challenges, including disability. I would like to imagine that when the Bill comes before this House, we would particularly discuss the role of Government and compel it to legislate to fully take care of the needs of the disabled. They are our people and we really need to own up these challenges through legislation and appropriation so that some of their living challenges are met.

Lastly, I would like to ask the minister and Government to particularise basic facilities like wheelchairs, like the honourable member submitted. I am very sure that at a particular stage, a community can tell that this person is physically impaired. For example, can we, at a particular stage, require a local Government, at any one level, to make a provision annually to take care of people who have been declared disabled at a particular stage and it is known that they are under obligation to provide? This would bring this haggling and gambling about their facilities to an end once and for all. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether it is not time to ask the Auditor-General to audit that sector to see whether we are compliant with the conventions in the schools and hospitals.

3.38
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. I also congratulate the country for having ratified the statute. The issue of People with Disabilities is a reality and I would like to remind Members that all of us are candidates of disability.

There is the issue of funding to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development where we have very many important sections. We have the disabled persons, children, youth, workers, women and the elderly. I do not know what informed Government to bundle these very critical groups under one ministry.

As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for Children, in the motion for which I sought permission yesterday, we are moving to have a ministry for children, youth, sports and culture as a stand-alone ministry because there are many issues in there. We know that Uganda has the youngest population in the world and we cannot leave this big chunk of the population unattended to in terms of resources and personnel.

Madam Speaker, as we go to Iganga to commemorate the International Day for Persons with Disabilities, we need to realise that we have always had challenges when this particular day is being celebrated. We get requests to transport the people with disabilities from Arua to whichever location these celebrations are taking place. That must be reflected in how much money we allocate to this ministry.

One of the representatives for persons with disabilities, who is also the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, was telling me that they also need a ministry. This means that there are issues that need to be given attention by Government. If you go to other countries, people with disabilities are given resources and attention in terms of the structural establishment. 

I have a brother in Arua who took Government to court to provide access to all the buildings in the country. Must we go to the extremes to guarantee the rights and welfare of People with Disabilities in this country?

As we go to Iganga, these are some of the key issues that we need to bring to light and reflect upon so that we provide ample facilities for our People with Disabilities to enjoy themselves in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.41
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the clear statement. I would like to mention a few things as we plan to go to Iganga. 

Madam Speaker, funding for schools in this country is a big challenge. In Ngora specifically, we have Ngora School for the Deaf and only deaf people study there. They have specific challenges that Government needs to address. 

At Madera in Soroti, we have a school for the blind. When it comes to the equipment they are supposed to use, in most cases, they are not available and as a result, some of the students drop out of school.

The minister was telling us that there is going to be a grant. I wish such a grant could be given to such schools to support those areas. We should focus on such areas instead of giving to a specific group. At the end of the day, those who are supposed to benefit will not.

Secondly, this is one of the very important public days. On 19th November 2018, we commemorated World Toilet Day at Hotel Africana and nobody made a statement about toilets in this country yet about 20 per cent of Ugandans do not use pit latrines. 

Today, the minister has made a statement about disability. I do not know why they are afraid to talk about toilets. This is a serious matter that can give rise to many problems. That is why I would like Government to know that in the same way we have attached importance to other areas, we must attach importance to toilets. In the whole world, 4.2 billion people do not have adequate toilets. 

In addition to that, I would like to request the ministry to operationalise the policy on disability when it comes to construction of buildings. If you go around all our buildings in the city and in the countryside, you realise that they do not provide ramps. Movement of People with Disabilities is a big problem.

As we go to Iganga, I would like the ministry to tell me why they are not enforcing such a policy in Uganda because it is very serious. I would also like them to tell me how many buildings or houses they have stopped from being completed because they have not followed this law. This is something very serious.

I would also like to say that the teachers of children with disability normally have specific challenges. Some of them, like those who have retired in Ngora have not been paid their gratuity and pension. 

Finally, in some areas like Ngora, the disabled old men and women are not benefitting from SAGE at all. I am happy that it is the minister who brought that statement here. I want her to tell me why they are discriminating against the elderly people with disabilities in Ngora. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, talking about toilets, on Saturday, I was in Bugiri and I went to Kapyanga sub-county. They have a big declaration in that sub-county of no open defecation. They said everybody has a toilet. I found that very exciting that in the whole of Kapyanga sub-county, everybody has a toilet. If you do not have a toilet, the citizens themselves deal with you. 

3.46
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for giving us the statement. First of all, I would like to appreciate you because you have been trying, in your way, to support the People with Disabilities especially the people with albinism. During the week, you visited a family of 68 people who are blind and needy. You were able to go to that bush to see them. Maybe, we need to extend to the other Government agencies too.

When the House is debating, there is not so much information about disabilities in this Parliament. I would like to pray that at a later stage, we bring a detailed paper to give people information about disability issues. For example, in the Government of Uganda, we have a quota given under the Students’ Affirmative Action to get to the universities. We have 60 slots but how they get there is another issue.

Sometimes, you find that when it comes to the course allocation, the Joint Admission Board decides the courses for the students with disability. Whereas we appreciate what theygive them affirmative action, it is disappointing that they choose courses for the students.
I also would like to say that we have 45,000 leaders of People with Disabilities, right from the village up to Parliament. However, this structure is redundant and nobody uses it. We are 12.5 per cent of the population of Uganda.

Whenever Government is doing programmes, they consider the policy of Disability Inclusive Development for accessible future. I normally tell people that we do not need special programmes. We need to be included. We are part of the programming. However, when people are doing their work, they forget about the disabled people. No wonder, we are not sure of what is happening.

I would like to throw some little light on the special grant. I was whispering to hon. Syda Bbumba. She was the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development when the special grant was put in place. Government used to give us Shs 3 billion. This money is little but it goes to all the local governments and it is managed by the office of the Community Development Officer (CDO).

That grant is decided by a small committee and given to PWDs in groups. The district councillors are aware of this money. Unfortunately, in my committee, I realised when we moved around asking about this grant that even Members of Parliament who are on my committee were not aware of the grant. They were asking, “Chair, is this money there?” I would ask the District CDO, “Can I see how many groups you have supported?” The Members were shocked. We need to draw a paper and give people a lot of this information.

On the issue of wheelchairs, People with Disabilities have been left to other funders and wheelchairs are given without assessment. It is the role of the Ministry of Health to do assessment because some wheelchairs can add you a disability. Some assistive devices can add you a disability but because you have no choice, you just go picking anything that comes from different people who can give help.

So, Government has not taken keen interest. Our orthopaedic workshops are not funded to the level of supporting people with disabilities.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is attitude. There is a big negative attitude among implementers. It is there even among our own parents. That is why we keep going to special schools and having special programmes because under the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) and the Youth Livelihood Programme, the policy is very clear: include People with Disabilities. However, when it comes to inclusion, they say, “How do we include that one? I think that person cannot work.” Why do you judge us by the structure of our bodies? Judge me by my capacity. You find somebody saying, “How do you move? How do you do this when you are blind?” 

I would like to appreciate some of the institutions that have taken disabled people. There is a young man at Standard Chartered Bank who manages a whole department and yet, he is blind. He knows everything in the department. Whereas the other members are looking for information, he would be having the information already. We need to appreciate that some disabled people are on top of their games. 

I would like to add my voice to welcome people to Iganga District. Iganga is my constituency for Eastern Region. Come and see how the disabled people will demonstrate. Some of you look at the disabled persons and see the very poor ones but we have Persons with Disabilities who are really on top of their games. We can dance. We can match and we can do everything. I would like to –(Interjections)– producing children is not an issue. We do that too. 

So, I would like to thank you –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, hon. Ecweru Musa is harassing me. I do not know what he was asking as my brother but he knows that I have children. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, there are some laws, which have come to Parliament and I thank Parliament for that. For example, the Building Control Act. We brought issues of accessibility. It is only that it is not yet implemented. For example, you have given us a special parking space in this Parliament but you find an honourable Member of Parliament who looks very healthy parking in the slots, which have the sign of wheelchairs.  He tells the security personnel, “I do not care. I can also be disabled.” (Laughter)

Honestly, that is the reason I am saying we need a lot of awareness in this Parliament. We always come and find our parking space full. There is a reason we were given that parking space. Honourable members, in some countries, you can be taken to court for parking where you are not supposed to – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that there is another form of disability, which is the intellectual disability. When you see an able person parking in your space, it is maybe that he or she is suffering from intellectual disability. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS ASAMO: I would like to thank you for that information. I think nobody in this House has registered as a person suffering from the intellectual disability. (Laughter) Our parking slots are properly marked, saying Eastern Region, Western Region and others but you still come and park there. 

Madam Speaker, I also would like to say that as we move to celebrate this day, let it not be a celebration. I would like to add my voice that we need an audit. Since the Government of Uganda started supporting the people with disabilities, I would like to recognise that it is the NRM Government that has brought us on board. Can we crosscheck and see whether People with Disabilities are moving forward or there are some gaps to be filled.

I appreciate that something has been done and I can testify to that. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish everybody a safe travel to Iganga.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Syda Bbumba, I would like to urge the members of Parliament to be disciplined. If you find a sign in the parking space saying it is reserved for PWDs, do not park there. 

Honourable members, in the present Disability Act, there is a provision that if a company employs people with disabilities, they get a tax incentive. I do not how many companies have actually employed Persons with Disabilities and applied for incentives. It is there in the law.

3.55
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the minister for that statement. 

I will start with the Fund. It was created in 2009 and this was in an effort to help the people who are physically challenged to access funding for their small projects. That followed an abuse of the policy, which Government had put in place for the employers to give incentives to those who were employing people with physical challenges.

What they were doing was getting that tax facility and in exchange, they were giving very low level jobs. In fact, at that time, most of the telephone booths were full of people with disabilities. This is what these people were using to get that facility. When we realised that abuse, we said we needed to put up a fund so that they can also create their own jobs.

Madam Speaker, I am disappointed that this fund has not served the purpose; it is too small. It was created when the dollar rate was Shs 1,500 but now, the dollar rate is almost Shs 4000 meaning it has gone up and the fund does not match the level of inflation. We all know that people who are physically challenged, to do something, they require more funds than the able bodied person.

Madam Speaker, for that matter, for this fund to be useful and serve the purpose for which it was created, it must be increased to at least Shs 10 billion. It will still be a token but it will be a good starting point.

My other concern is on access, not only physical access - the building law is in place, the policy is in place but it is not being implemented and nobody cares to enforce this good policy. 

We see many new buildings in Kampala and all of them have full stairs without easy access to people with disability. Can we ask Government and the responsible ministry to ensure that these building requirements are complied with so that our children, brothers and sisters who have physical challenges can access these buildings?

There is also the denial –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Former Minister of Gender, one minute.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, access to services. In fact, in most of our courts, you do not find sign language interpreters. Even at elections, there are no special facilities. When you go to hospitals, there are no people to assist people with disability.

Madam Speaker, these people are human beings and sometimes they are also in conflict with the law. When it happens, they are locked up with people who are physically okay and they are seriously abused. These people need special facilities in case they are in conflict with the law so that those they find in prison do not abuse them.

Madam Speaker, there are very few disability centres in the country. I do not know how many people I have assisted in the constituency to take their children to Madera School for the Blind, which is so far away. I do not know - Government is creating very many schools; why don’t they increase on the disability centres especially those, which are multifunctional.

Madam Speaker, there is a young man in my constituency who has approached your office. In fact, one time, he even invited you when he was launching the programme to set up a multifunction disability centre in Kiwoko - my home area. They have offered land and done all the architectural drawings but they want some little money as a commitment from Government for donors to come in. The donors are asking them how much the Government in putting in so that they can put in their funds. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to pray that you assist this group to access the capital from Government so that they can attract donor funding. The young man is named Ronald Lukwago. I have seen the title and he is ready to go. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to wish the people who are physically challenged very good celebrations in Iganga. 

4.01
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement on the day of Persons with Disability. I would like to thank the ministry for supporting our day every year. Although they contribute small but at least there is always something on 3 December.

I would like to invite all the Members to see what disabled people can do and how many they are. Many of us think that we are very few and we are not doing anything. However, come that day, you will see what they can do.

Madam Speaker, the theme is: “Mainstreaming People with Disability in the Programmes.” You cannot be mainstreamed if you are not rehabilitated.

People with Disability lose some kind of abilities and those abilities must be rehabilitated. For example, I have lost sight but I must learn how to move before I can participate. A person who is physically handicapped must have a wheelchair or crutches before they can move.

However, when you talk of rehabilitation in Uganda, you are talking about the regional rehabilitation centres, which are only regional and very few. They take only the youth to give them skills but they forget that a person who has become disabled newly, needs to be counselled, rehabilitated and new skills before he can do.

Many disabled people commit suicide. For example, the accidents that are claiming lives of people, many people are left disabled. They are at home just worried and not counselled and not given rehabilitation.

I would like to urge the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to include counseling rehabilitation of newly disabled persons in these centres and establish more centres for rehabilitation.

For example, for blind people, once you become bind, you have nowhere to go and no one can help you. Therefore, we should have some rehabilitation for the blind, so that they can do something after disability.

Madam Speaker, these assistive devices are very expensive because they are manufactured elsewhere and imported here. If we could rehabilitate our workshop in Mulago where we used to produce our wheelchairs, it would save us a lot of hassle.

We had wheelchairs here and Government was subsidising. We were buying them at least Shs 200,000 but now, the cost is over Shs 600,000, which poor people cannot afford.

A mere white cane, which is very necessary for a blind person, we used to make them in Kyambogo but now the workshop is closed. Why doesn’t Government give us money so that we produce this equipment here, to assist us? Without equipment and rehabilitation, we cannot be mainstreamed.

Madam Speaker, many disabled people are now qualified but not employed because of the points now added in universities and other tertiary institutions. 

One time, a young man came to my office with a disability on his hands. He is a very good accountant, qualified but unemployed. There are blind students who have completed teachers’ courses but are unemployed, yet, it is not easy to educate persons with disability. Therefore, I would like affirmative action to be given in terms of employment. 

For the few who are employed - I am happy that Parliament has given me some guides and has given hon. Alex Ndeezi interpreters. However, civil servants are not given any guides at all. There is one in Koboko District who is employed but has no guide. I think it should be a policy that persons with disability are given guides who are paid by Government because local governments say that they do not have the money.

We need persons with disability to be rehabilitated. They should be able to access cheaper assistive devices and given guides when they get employed. Come to commemorate our day for persons with disability in Iganga. Thank you very much.

4.06
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for presenting that statement. 

I would also like to thank Government for the work they have done to uplift the standards of persons with disability. I would like to thank the honourable Members of Parliament because you always tell us that you are actually assisting persons with disability, especially in the area of mobility appliances. There is no Member of Parliament here who has not either donated a wheelchair or a crutch, among others. Thank you very much for that support. 

In a special way, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for working with us and for working even with the lowest groups of persons with disabilities and listening to their needs. Last Friday, we were with the Speaker visiting a very remote area in Mayuge District. Madam Speaker, when you left, people told us that when the blind people told them that you were going to officiate at their function, everybody laughed. They thought that the Speaker would not go to them. Thank you very much for embarrassing those who thought you would not attend the function.

The population of persons with disability, according to the State of the World Disability Report by World Health Organisation and the World Bank, is one in seven persons. In Uganda, where we have a population of 42 million people, one in seven people translates to six million people. Recently, there was an institution, which also did research and put our population at about five million, which is not a number that one can ignore. 

The group we are talking about is not a homogeneous group; it is quite diverse and it has diverse needs. These needs cut across all sectors of Government. I wonder why these sectors do not cater for the needs of persons with disability. 

As we go to celebrate this day, we should not make it a routine. When we celebrate these days like 3rd March, the international days for the children or for the young people, we listen to statements here and it becomes a culture. Madam Speaker, when you look at our laws, starting with the Public Finance Management Act, you realise that it gives Parliament a lot of powers. How I wish we would not pass any budget of any sector, which does not cater for the needs of persons with disability.

I would like to request that we resolve today that starting with the celebration of the Day for Persons with Disabilities, before we celebrate we should call all sectors to tell Parliament the kind of plans, programmes and budget they have for persons with disability. What are we celebrating on the 3rd when sectors cannot tell us what they have done? There is no sector, which can tell us that they have no issues to do with persons with disability to include in their plans and budgets.

Madam Speaker, we were very keen when Parliament innovated the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. What hurts me is to see sectors being certified and getting a pass mark when they only cater for gender issues and not disability issues. I again request that we should not pass those budgets, which are exclusive.

Madam Speaker, we cannot do everything at the same time but let us look at key needs like education, health and economic empowerment. People have been saying it like a joke when hon. Asamo said, “I produce children”. We are not asexual; we are sexually active and we produce very handsome boys and beautiful girls. (Laughter) However, when it comes to issues of sexual education, persons with disability are excluded. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I have given her one minute to conclude.

MS NALULE: Madam Speaker, lastly, I would like to talk about the disability grant. We have been getting Shs 3 billion and I have told you that our population is 6 million people. When you divide Shs 3 billion by 6 million people, each of us gets Shs 500. We therefore request that Government considers an increment to this grant. I thank you very much. 

4.13
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the NRM Government for the work well done in promoting and raising the profiles of persons with disability in this country from the grassroots level up to Parliament. We see their leadership and structures in place. 

However, as everyone has noted, there are huge gaps that need to be filled for us to attain our goal as a country. The biggest goal to be achieved is the right to education to every Ugandan. 

When you look at the education sector, you realise that accessing classrooms is still a problem. There are also no teachers that are trained to handle children with special needs. Even when they have access to classrooms and even when a parent can carry their child into the classroom, there is no one to teach them, which is very unfair.

Secondly, on education, I think there should be games or skills developed for these children with disabilities. When you watch international televisions, you see children with disabilities having their football games as well as music dance and drama events. Actually, last year, the person who won America’s Got Talent was someone who had autism. This means the person was well facilitated. We can have it here, and we have done many things as Uganda.

Madam Speaker, there is still cultural harassment faced by families that have children with disabilities. Children with disabilities are taken as kids who have curses. You find them scattered in our communities. The ministry should sensitise the masses about these disabilities. You have to let them know that these children are normal so that they can accept them in society. If we do not accept them, that stigma cannot allow them be what they want to be even if you put in a lot of efforts.

The other thing is about the special grants. First of all, the major challenge with the special grants is accessibility to the funds. Most people with disabilities actually use more than what they actually receive to access these funds. This is because they have to go to the subcounties and districts. The funds should be made more accessible to them, however little the money is. 

I am talking about the funds because everything is done depending on access to finance. Parliament has the power to increase this funding. If we do not empower them economically, we would be doing nothing. Let us rise and support the increment of this special needs fund. Thank you.

4.17
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Government and the ministry. We are what we are because of this Government. However, our prayer is that the Government should move an extra mile.

Madam Speaker, disability is permanent; it is not transitional. Lumping us with the youth and elderly will not help. A person with disability starts experiencing such a bad experience from childhood until he or she dies. Helping people with disabilities will help this country reduce the dependence syndrome. When you are a family and you have a child with disability, your burden is higher than that of any other family. As Government, if we do not help people with disabilities, we would be increasing the burden on this country. Therefore, I request that we prioritise support to people with disabilities.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I request that you support us to gazette this day, the 3rd of December. The Government should tell us why this day is not gazetted. Whenever we go to celebrate this day, we speak to ourselves. Many people do not join us because it is not gazetted. You are already converted. You know our experience. We want the able-bodied to join us so that when we speak, they can get converted and support their community. Support us to ensure that this day is gazetted.

Madam Speaker, this grant is very little and it cannot lift us up. For my family to go to school, they need a lot more compared to other people. Therefore, saying that for the youth we are giving this, women we are giving this, elderly we are giving this – comparing us with these categories - does not help us. We need to be highly supported compared to other special interest groups because our needs and demands are more expensive and they are multiple. In the area of education –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have taken more than an hour on this issue. Just because it is important, I allowed Members to contribute but I think we need to end it there. I encourage you to go to the celebrations. The Minister of Public Service is here and he has heard the plea from hon. Ababiku. I hope you can consider it and come back to us. Hon. Karubanga, why have you not yet gazetted the PWDs’ day? Please, come back to us with an answer.

Secondly, they have told you about a place where I went on Friday. When I was invited, I thought I was visiting an association but I was shocked to the core because the entire village is a village of blind people – blind men, women and their children. I was in shock.

I would like to encourage the minister in charge of gender to go to a village called Luvu, Bukatube Subcounty in Mayuge. The whole village is a camp of blind people. You can imagine meeting with all of them. In fact, I want to write to the President to see whether they can get money under the other grant. We need to do something about it.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Kalaki District. They are represented by hon. Ajilo and hon. Ongalo. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SCHEDULE OF PRIORITY FOR THE UTILISATION OF THE AVAILABLE SHS 20 BILLION FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO DISASTER SITUATIONS IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Where is the minister in charge of for disaster preparedness? He has been here.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister of State for Health can help the minister of state in charge of disaster. Oh! He is coming.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): I apologise, Madam Speaker. I was responding to some emergency. (Laughter)

Madan Speaker, Parliament on Tuesday, 26 November 2019, directed the Office of the Prime Minister to present to the House lifesaving relief response plans for victims of the current flooding and destructive winds and hailstorms. 

Whereas massive damage has been done to roads, bridges, plantations, school buildings, etc., our immediate focus now is on saving lives by- 

    1. Providing shelter to those whose houses have been either washed away or collapsed;
    2. Providing tarpaulins on which to dry household items and for people to put their beddings, particularly where water is oozing from underground;
    3. Providing blankets to shield them from the cold that threatens to give them diseases such as pneumonia;
    4. Providing clean water containers. Yesterday, I indicated that in some areas it has been confirmed that borehole water has unfortunately mixed with fecal matter and therefore, there is need for clean vessels.
    5. Providing relief food;
    6. Providing treated mosquito nets;
    7. Providing culverts to rescue populations that are cut off from accessing vital services such as medical service units.

The immediate relief food and non-food requirements are presented in the table. Colleagues, you can look at them. I will give an example; we need 20,000 tarpaulins from the money that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development committed yesterday. We also need 12,000 blankets and some jerricans to prevent people from getting cholera. We need iron sheets. Initially, we had not looked at iron sheets but during the meeting that took place last evening after here, it turned out that there are some communities that have lost houses to storms and they may not fall under what we call Government support in form of rehabilitating a health centre or a school. Therefore, the communities might need help like we did in Buyende. Relief food items have also been indicated in the table. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about something that I had gone to consult about. In the discussions with the technical teams yesterday, we thought that we would allocate the Ministry of Health Shs 3.7 billion so that they can quickly procure treated misquote nets. However, after consultations, I am happy to report to this House that Ministry of Health has decided to frontload the support they are getting from the Global Fund and get the nets in the country within a few weeks. This means that the Shs 3.7 billion that we had wanted for misquote nets will be taken to reinforce the Ministry of Works and Transport; they were originally supposed to get Shs 7 billion but they will now get Shs 10 billion.

What guided us was that the Ministry of Works and Transport might not fix the roads to the level we want. What we want them to do is to commit to make the roads navigable so that communities can continue to communicate during this phase of flooding. Therefore, the money that was meant for health will not be transferred to the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Madam Speaker, we shall do what it takes to make sure that if a place is flooded and Ministry of Works and Transport cannot do a bridge - we have even proposed that they get inflatable boats to transport mothers in labour so that they can access medical support.

It also occurred to us during the consultation that the meteorology department, which is supposed to keep us abreast with unfolding developments and weather conditions, suffered loss of some of their equipment to storms. It has, therefore, been decided that about Shs 150 million be given to the meteorology department to help them fix what they need critically, so that they can keep us updated.

Madam Speaker, this is the Shs 20 billion that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accepted to commit and get from the Contingencies Fund. They will provide it to these three ministries for the first phase of the emergency support.

Madam Speaker, the meteorology department, working with its partners from South Africa, have indicated that even if we receive some bit of a dry spell, we might get floods early next year, which might be more devastating than what we are witnessing now. Against that background, we would like to ask that we should not be doing this emergency response. We must do preparedness and prevention, particularly the desilting of dams, and we asked this House yesterday to facilitate the local governments to do this. Dams must be given priority so that they can minimise the impact of flooding in areas where there are plains. 

In brief, that is the summary of the how the ministries intend to use this resource. I would like to assure you that the treated mosquito nets will be given to the entire country. This is because the breeding of misquotes has been exacerbated by the level of water that is gushing from all corners of the country today.

We will be doing the bridges and we shall do whatever it takes to do this. We are aware that there are some new developments. As we talk, between Iganga and Luuka, people cannot cross. Many parts of Mount Elgon, including Mable Municipality - a city to be – are in trouble. We shall continue to do whatever it takes to address that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a very lengthy debate on this matter yesterday. We just asked the minister that since we have Shs 20 billion, he should show us how it will be used. I think let us accept his paper. What the minister has submitted is for information and not for debate. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we were almost concluding debate. I would like to invite hon. Lanyero. She wanted to speak on that Bill yesterday. I also invite hon. Itungo. You have three minutes.

4.31
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues. I would like to also thank the mover of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I am one of the beneficiaries of this institute. Last week, I was in my constituency. My district benefited from the Institute of Parliamentary Studies (IPS) training.

Madam Speaker, knowledge is power. It is very good for Members to be trained so that they are able to deliberate on issues. When we stand as new Members on the Floor of Parliament, it is usually very difficult for us to deliberate. That is why when we come to Parliament, we are inducted so that we understand the different roles of a Member of Parliament. However, this induction does not cover everything. This is why it is important for us to support this Bill in order to build our capacity.

Going out to the community is one of the ways Parliament is giving back to the community. It helps the community know the roles of Members of Parliament and how to relate with Members of Parliament at the district level. Sometimes we get challenges when we are relating with local governments. If training is done and their capacity is built and they know that Members should be involved in the district councils, it helps us bring the issues to the Floor of Parliament. This is really a bonus.

Regarding the name of the institute, I would like to add my voice to what the other Members said, that we should name it the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga institute. Members, we need to give credit where it is due. Madam Speaker has championed many things in this Parliament like the breast feeding center for children. It is, therefore, important that this institute should be called the Rebecca Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies. We should give credit where it is due.

Honourable members, we have an opportunity to have a woman as the Speaker of Parliament. We do not know when we are going to have this opportunity again. Now that we have a female as the Speaker, I would like to urge Members to back her on this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Itungo is not here. Let us have hon. Alyek and hon. Arinda who wanted to speak yesterday. The ones who were here between 7.00 and 8.00 p.m. are the ones who will speak today.

4.35
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Barbara Ogwal for bringing this Bill on the Floor of Parliament.

Yesterday we understood the object of the Bill very clearly; it is meant to build the capacity of Members of Parliament, local government leaders and staff of Parliament. This Bill that has been brought to this august House is Parliament-driven, which means that we have a sense of ownership. If it is approved by this Parliament, we shall own it because the origin is deeply rooted in the Members of Parliament.

When we came to Parliament as first timers, we learnt in a very hard way and up to now, we are still learning as learning is a continuous process. When it came to making maiden speeches, it was a disaster for some of us. When it came to raising points of order, points of information or clarification, sometimes we would not know what we were talking about. It was a very big challenge and I would like to say that this will build our confidence and capacity and we shall move forward. This Bill has come at an appropriate time.

As we deliberate on this Bill, I would like to propose the following: one, that we should have a board in place instead of a management committee. When we have a board in place, we should have Members of Parliament in the top positions of the board. I propose that we have four Members of Parliament on the board, staff representatives - our Clerk to Parliament can be the staff representative in this case. In addition, since one of the objects of the Bill is to train local government leaders - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, I was saying that since one of the objects of the Bill is to train our local government leaders, we should have a representative on the board from among the local government leaders. One other important area that I would like us to include on the board is a representative from the academia since they are going to train all of us. 

Above all, this is going to be a very big training institute, so I am proposing that we should have a substantially appointed executive director to manage this institute. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to end here. I fully support this Bill as it has come at the right time and if it is implemented, we shall move a long way in improving our - (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, colleague, for allowing my information. I would like to add to what you were saying as far as the name is concerned. We had discussed this sometime back in this Parliament; we said that we should call this institute the Kadaga institute as she has championed a lot of things in this country.

For us who were in the Ninth Parliament, for example, it was the first time that we saw a gym here. We started practicing in the gym and we stopped sleeping. She has championed sports. On Saturday, we shall be in Kanungu for netball. We have been moving around all the districts and associating with the local leaders.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to support the proposal that we take up that name because our babies are okay; we sit in this House and when we feel like going to breastfeed, we just get out, breastfeed and come back here. Ladies, I am so happy. This shows who a woman can be; she is the only one. I thank you so much.

MS ALYEK: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to conclude.

THE SPEAKER: I had given you one minute and you also gave it away. Okay.

MS ALYEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the proposal to name the institute the Rebecca Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies. I strongly support this because of the legacy that you have in this Parliament. 

Honourable members, I would like us to support this proposal because when we came here, it was very hard for us. Madam Speaker, you are our mentor and without you, we would not be very strong on the Floor of Parliament; so, it must be in your name. Thank you so much.

4.42
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for moving this as a private Member’s Bill on the Floor of Parliament. This institute is so important, not only for this Parliament but for the entire East African region. This is a wonderful idea. 

Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we have only one induction training and that is basically when we are entering Parliament. Probably, we could have yearly or mid-term training programmes but we need such an institute in order to have them. 

I believe this institute will give us support in terms of improving our legislative drafting skills. For many of us, our drafting skills may not be the best but I believe that having this institute will go a long way in aiding attainment of such skills.

The other issue is on backstopping local Governments. Local governments have a very big problem. I was a clerk to the council in Bushenyi District in 2003 and the International Law Institute took us through legislative drafting skills. When I went back to Bushenyi, I handled a Bill called, “the Bushenyi District Mairungi Consumption Control Bill” and within one year, we were able to have an ordinance - The Bushenyi District Mairungi Consumption Control Ordinance. This was as a result of the skills that I got from the International Law Institute. Therefore, I believe that if this institute works like the International Law Institute, we shall be able to have capacity built within our local governments.

Madam Speaker, if you go to the local governments and ask how many of them have come up with ordinances or bylaws in the last 10 years, you may find that it is one or two that have done so - maybe Kampala City Council and a few other municipalities. The rest are just passing policies but not actually enacting ordinances and bylaws. I know they are very few because I was a clerk to council.

I, therefore, believe that this institute will help and support most of our local governments, especially in the area of legislative drafting. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.45
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start first with the issue of the status of the institute we would like to create. The moment we say it is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, it means the institute no longer falls within the ambit of Parliament because it will be on its own. It can therefore sue and be sued. If we do that, it then means the institute will have its own board, which will be determining its affairs. 

If you want to compare this with the one of the Judiciary, the one of the Judiciary is part of a department and it does not award certificates. It can award certificates of attendance but it is not recognised as a training institute.

Therefore, we must determine what we want. If we are going to take this route, then it becomes a training institute, which must be accredited by the National Council of Higher Education so that it can award certificates or degrees for the future.

Madam Speaker, if that is the position, then again submission of their reports will not be made to the Parliamentary Commission alone. They must also be submitted to Parliament because the audited accounts, according to this, will be submitted to Parliament. You cannot only look at audited accounts but you can also be the ones to approve the budget of the entity.

It is true we should train Members of Parliament. However, if we are saying it must raise money and you are talking about Members of Parliament being trained, which MP will pay money to be inducted? Nobody! Which local government, knowing this is a Government institution, will do so?

If you want to raise money, then it means it must be open to the public so that they pay to learn maybe how Parliament operates. However, if this is what you want to achieve, even the resources you are talking about that should be raised will not be raised. If –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If we decide on the status now, then – and I would like to agree with what hon. Magyezi said yesterday – we need to allow the institute to develop its own curriculum. The curriculum must be approved by the National Council for Higher Education. If it becomes a training institution, then it will fall under the Ministry of Education and Sports because all Government training institutions fall under this ministry. 

If we want to have it serve our interests, which I would like to turn to, we do not need a law to create a legal entity to operate on its own. It can be semi-autonomous within the ambit of Parliament, for basically parliamentary studies. However, the moment you go this way, then you leave it to go.

Madam Speaker, for the name, I cannot talk about it because the first thing we must sort out is what this entity is. You can baptise it with any name you want, but let us sort what this institution is. Since we all legally want it to train those who are newcomers or continuing MPs, there is no problem with us developing a policy to be able to have a training institution here. 

We can copy the one of the Judiciary. In fact, if you look at the amendments to the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, under clause 19 they are trying to establish a department, more or less like a training institute. It is there because it has no legal status of its own.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we must first resolve what we want. When we do that, then everything will fall in line. However, the moment you agree to make it legal, I promise you, for those who are saying you are waiting for it, it will no longer be your baby; it will go away. I thank you.

4.51
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the Bill. 

The Bill is a great one but I have reservations with specific ingredients in the Bill. It is basically something to do with degrees. Parliaments worldwide or globally are supposed to play a facilitating role. Places and institutions that support or award degrees are gazetted and well known. I would rather that we focus and condense the institute to a competence centre to strengthen competences rather than really going into awarding degrees. 

The moment you go into awarding degrees, you will be confronted with whether you will need a council, a senate, a faculty or school or a tenure system. Who will take us through the training? Are we going to look at them as tutorial assistants, teaching assistants, assistant lectures, lecturers, senior lecturers, associate professors, professors, distinguished professors or research professors, just like we have them in the academia?

I would like to believe with everybody in the House that the Bill is great. However, we should allow the universities to continue doing their job. Let us not overwhelm ourselves with the burdens that belong to other people.

If we are going to look at this as a degree awarding institute, if that was or is our focus, nothing really stops us from asking Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Kyambogo University, Gulu University or any Government university to have an institute specifically - After all, let us face it; it is universities that are –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KATUSABE: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, we can have this institute based at a university like Makerere University, for instance. 

Madam Speaker, you know how much I honour and treasure you. Your accomplishments globally speak for themselves. However, I am asking colleagues that we should not introduce something new. The Speaker is our Speaker. We cannot have an institute named after her when she is still the head of this institution. It has never happened anywhere. 

We cannot be sure – Some of us believe that you have done a great job and you still have more work to do. What if we say you are coming back as Speaker? Naming the institute “the Rebecca Kadaga Institute” can only happen when the Speaker has exited this Parliament and has gone up there as Vice-President or President –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I rarely raise points of order but I am compelled to do so. I believe my colleague has considered the provisions of rule 219. The naming of this institute was a decision taken by a motion in this House and he is trying to reconsider the decision contrary to the provisions of rule 219. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to contravene the provisions of rule 219?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if someone wants to review a decision of the House, it is by a motion and it involves voting. So, you are out of order. 

MR KATUSABE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will think about that. However, this is my world; I come from the academia and I was –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I rise on a motion under rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure. From the general debate, save for one or two individuals, we all seem to agree. If Members could agree with my motion, I move that we only allow the mover of the motion, hon. Cecilia Atim, to justify particular issues raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi as to why we have decided to incorporate the institute as a legal entity as opposed to the Judicial Service Commission, then we can move to the committee stage.

My motion, therefore, is moved under rule 80 that debate stops to allow the mover of the Bill to clarify a few issues raised by the Members. 

4.58
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I was waiting for instructions. I would like to clarify very few critical areas. 

First of all, the name of the Bill is not changing but the name of the institute is the one we have already decided to change. Those are two different things. The name of the institute will change in compliance with the resolution, which was passed by this House on the 29th of May this year. That is the first clarification I would like to give.

The second one is that the reason why we have to give a legal status to the IPS is to give it a wider mandate and to allow it to not only deal with internal issues but also external ones. Indeed, I would like to appreciate the proposal given by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that once we make it a body corporate, then we need to drive it as a semi-autonomous body, which is accountable for its expenditure. It will have a fully-fledged board and it must be run in accordance with corporate governance principles. This will be acceptable. I will accept any proposal in that area because it will make this institute to be run professionally. That will help us to really make it accountable and responsible.

I would also like to comment on the proposals given by a couple of Members in their contributions. A Member proposed having Members of Parliament and a representative of the local government on the board. Indeed, the experience from all institutes of parliamentary studies that we have read about and visited is that they are owned by their respective parliaments. By owning it as Parliament, it means we must make it relevant to our needs. If we are to make it relevant to our needs, it means there is no way you can leave Parliament out of the governing body.

In Nigeria, the majority of the members of the board are Members of the Senate and Members of the National Assembly. There are six Members of the Senate and six Members of the National Assembly. The President of the Senate is the chairperson of the board. I do not think, however, that we want to go to that length. I think the proposals given that the board shall comprise of some Members of Parliament, a representative of the local government and a member of the academia to help us – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE:  Madam Speaker, I am very passionate about the Bill and that is the reason I supported it in the first place. I am just struggling intellectually. Nigeria has been sighted. I am wondering, apart from Nigeria, whether we have something we can learn from Malaysia, Europe or the United States of America that have functioning democracies. It is because principles of natural growth dictate that we learn from those that have made progress. Could we procedurally – [MR NIWAGABA: “Have you read the committee’s report?”] - Do not heckle me, hon. Niwagaba. I am making a point and I am addressing it to hon. Cecilia Atim.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding in the right direction? Are we getting all the citations from countries that we would want to learn from, apart from Nigeria? I really support the move but just for awareness, I would appreciate if you could give more.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, the report was elaborate on their benchmarking. Also, I do not think that if you are in Africa, you are not good enough. It cannot be that only the things in Europe are the best. They benchmarked from the African continent. So, there is no procedural issue there. Please, conclude hon. Cecilia Atim.

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, his concern justifies the importance of IPS. I think as Members, we must read widely and read the subject that is coming on the Floor of Parliament. The report of the committee is very elaborate and we had also submitted the report of the benchmarking team on the various experiences in other countries. 

I was just saying that whatever has been proposed on the Floor of Parliament is very relevant to the core values and functionalities of the Institute of Parliamentary Studies. Therefore, if these come in the amendments, I do not think that the committee and the movers of the motion will have any problem with that. 

I would wish to plead with Members that going for semi-autonomy means we are being cautious. Right now, all the funding of IPS comes from the Parliamentary Commission. We were given a certificate of no financial implications on the understanding that the funding of IPS will continue to come from the Parliamentary Commission. Therefore, for us to go fully open and autonomous would make it difficult. 

First of all, Parliament wants to own IPS and make it relevant for its functions. Therefore, we believe that giving the IPS semi-autonomy, as a first phase, will be the way to go. As we build more capacity for it, we can maybe move on to have a fully-fledged autonomous body. However, for now, I totally agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s view that we go for a board and that we will report to Parliament via the commission because the commission is the one that funds IPS. 

Therefore, the commission will have to look at the financial performance of IPS and finally, the report will come to Parliament as we do for the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. This scheme is also semi-autonomous and it reports to the commission and regularly reports to Parliament. That is the kind of semi-autonomy that we would like to have.

More importantly, Members, we must have the IPS relevant for our unique needs. We are not about to let it run and be independent and start telling Parliament, “We are too busy”. We want it to be relevant for our functions as Members and staff of Parliament. That is the core function of the IPS. These are the clarifications I would like to give, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The two remaining Members will be given an opportunity to speak during the committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL, 2019

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

MS BICHETERO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 2 - establishment of the institute. There is an addendum. I propose that we replace subclause (1) with the following: “There is established an institute to be known as “the Institute of Parliamentary Studies.”

There is an addendum. We replace the subclause with the following: “There is established an institute to be known as, “the Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies.” 

The justification is:

    (i) For clarity and better drafting;
    (ii) To adopt the resolution passed by Parliament on 29 May 2019 wherein it was resolved that the Institute of Parliamentary Studies be changed to the Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under clause 2, we are talking about the establishment of the institute. However, subclause (3) says, “The institute shall be an agency of Government and shall be under the general supervision of the Parliamentary Commission.”

Madam Chairperson, this does not look nice. I wanted it to read, “The institute shall be an agency of Government and shall be under the supervision and control of the Parliamentary Commission.”

The justification is what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said, so that you remain in charge of the institute.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want powers - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am saying, “The institute shall be an agency of Government and shall be under the supervision and control of the Parliamentary Commission.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as variously proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS BICHETERO: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 - the functions of the institute. I propose the following:

To insert immediately after paragraph (b) the following and re-number accordingly: 
“(c) to conduct training for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament on the procedures and practices of regional Parliaments and regional Assemblies;

(d) 	to conduct training for public officers employed in ministries, departments, agencies of Government and local governments on parliamentary procedures and processes;

(e) 	to organise and conduct orientation programmes, lectures and seminars for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament;

(f) 	to organise or coordinate international trainings, attachments, study visits or study tours for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament;

(g) 	to conduct training and seminars for accredited media personnel and any other person accredited by Parliament;

(h) 	to arrange and conduct seminars, conferences, workshops and symposiums for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament on the efficient discharge of Parliament’s functions;

(i) 	to determine syllabus for research, training, studies and for any such subject in respect of research and training provided by the institute under this Act;

(j) 	to award certificates and other qualifications to Members of Parliament, staff of Parliament and other persons trained by the institute.”

Madam Chairperson, in paragraph (c), we propose to insert the following words immediately after the word “Parliament”: “National assemblies or regional assemblies.” 

We propose to replace paragraph (d) with the following: “(d) to offer in-house courses for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament.”

In paragraph (f), replace the word “business” with the word “function”. 

The justification:
1. 	For clarity and better drafting.
2. 	For completeness, to enumerate the functions of the institute as performed by similar training institutes in Kenya, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I did not get very well what hon. Bichetero has suggested. I think it is in bullet (e) where she has suggested that we should include ministries and agencies. When you look at ministries, it is like they have a provision of training within their mandate. I think we are making it extremely wide, as if we shall be training every ministry and agency. I know that we give them money for training their staff. I would like to suggest that we remove the ministries and agencies from this provision.

We can say that these agencies can collaborate with the institute to train their members on what they do because I am sure that these ministries and agencies know what Parliament is about. It is the Members who do not know what these ministries do and what they provide. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is not a general training and there is only one Parliament in the country. Therefore, we are the ones who have the best knowledge on parliamentary procedures. It is not about training them on their work, but it is about parliamentary procedures.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chair, in relation to the issue being raised, if we are train these people not for their work, I would like to get more clarification on paragraph (j) - the award of certificates and other qualifications. What would be the equivalent of these certificates that we are going to award and these other qualifications? 

If they were to get recognition at the national level, are these going to be certified by the National Council of Higher Education for it to have recognition? So, if someone from outside comes and attends this institute, can they use that certificate to contest for Member of Parliament because it can be equated to senior six certificate or an equivalent? I need clarification on that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is what I also wanted to begin with. The moment you say that you are going to award qualifications, it means that you are getting an additional qualification. Awarding a certificate of attendance is okay. However, the moment you say that the institute is going to award qualifications to Members of Parliament and staff - Which qualification is that? If you are saying that this should be done internally, we would like to propose to the chair that at least you leave the word “certificates” and remove the word “qualifications”.

In-house training, of course, is good. It is good for other ministries to come and learn our procedures, and that is how we are going to raise money. However, I wanted to find out something before I make a judgement. Are we going to recruit lecturers? Who will the trainers in this institution be? We would like to know so that we can understand what will happen. I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee who the teachers or trainers of this institution are going to be.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before the chair comes up, let me answer the question that hon. Balyeku raised yesterday. We have established that both the Judiciary and Uganda Revenue Authority do not issue academic qualifications. They issue certificates of participation and that is what we are going to do. We are not going to issue anything equivalent to a diploma or anything. However, the committee chairperson can clarify.

MS BICHETERO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the people who raised issues about the kind of certificates or other qualifications we will award. Yesterday, during the debate, we agreed that the functions of the institute be expanded. This is one of those that we added as a principle for the institute to come up with a certificate. In this case, I think we are talking about certificates of attendance as other institutions are doing. As we move on, we will improve our own institution. As we establish this, I would like us to look at the holistic picture of the institute. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MS KISEMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Given the explanation from the chair, can I propose then that paragraph (j) be amended and we remove the word “qualifications”. So, I propose that it reads, “to award certificates of attendance to Members of Parliament and staff including other persons trained by the institute.”

MS BICHETERO: Madam Chairperson, I would agree to remove “other qualifications” but I would not want at this stage to qualify the award of a certificate and call it a certificate of attendance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us just leave it as certificate. 

MR ITUNGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In paragraph (i) where they are talking about the syllabus, in my experience in education, I think that this word was misplaced. 

A syllabus is an academic document that communicates information about a specific course unit and has expectations and responsibilities. Therefore, when you say “syllabus”, it indicates that the certificates that they will award to the trainees are academic documents, which need recognition by the National Council for Higher Education. As a result, I would like to propose that they use “training guidelines” and not syllabus. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be added as proposed by the chairperson; and that the original paragraph (d) be deleted and paragraphs (i) and (j) be adjusted respectively by removal of the word “qualifications” and substituting the word “syllabus” with the word “curriculum”.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the Member who has made that proposal. However, I was also looking at what we said - “to offer in-bound courses for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament”. If we do not define “inbound courses” –(Interjection)- If it is “in-house”, we still have to define it so that people know exactly the in-house courses that we are talking about. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: We have already talked about the training manual and this is an institute of parliamentary studies. Therefore, there is nothing else other than parliamentary studies. Let us not look beyond that. Do not even go and define “in-house”. Parliamentary studies are ordinarily what you do in Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS BICHETERO: Madam Chairperson, this is a clause where we had to do a lot of harmonization. We had to sit with the mover of the Bill ad harmonise. I propose that we replace clause 5 as follows: We propose to insert the word “Parliamentary” between the words “the” and “Commission” in clause 5(1) and the clause should now read as follows:

“5. Management of the Institute

(1) 	The Parliamentary Commission shall be the overall policy body of the institute and shall be responsible for the strategic direction of the institute. 
(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1), there is established a Management Board…” – we are substituting the word “Committee” with the word “Board” – “…which shall be responsible for the management and administration of the institute. 
(3) 	The Management Board shall be designated by the Parliamentary Commission and shall consist of-
(a) 	four Members of Parliament.
(b) 	the Clerk to Parliament, who shall be the secretary…” – We have substituted the word “chairperson” with “secretary”.

We further propose to delete the old paragraphs (b) and (c) and go ahead with paragraph (d), to read as follows:
“(d) 	a lecturer at a recognised university who is at the level of senior lecturer or above and who possesses knowledge and experience in capacity building, training or research in parliamentary functions…” The numbering will change, I am sorry.

“(e) 	representative from the Ministry of Local Government not below the rank of Commissioner.” 

In paragraph (f), we propose to insert the word “Executive” before the word “Director”, and it will read: “(f) The Executive Director, who shall be ex officio”. 

Under clause 5(4), we propose a new paragraph (a) and (b) to read as follows:

“(4) 	The member of the Management Board referred to above– 
(a) 	shall be appointed by the Parliamentary Commission.” 
(b) 	paragraph (e) shall be nominated by the Minister responsible for local government” That is when we talk about the appointment from the Ministry of Local Government.

We propose to delete subclause (5) and amend the rest of the clause to read as follows: 

“(6) Save for members referred to in subsections (3) (a), (b), (c) and (f), the other members of the Management Board shall serve for a term of two and a half years, which may be renewed. 
		
(7) The members of the Management Board shall be paid such honoraria or allowances as determined by the Parliamentary Commission. 
(8) The Parliamentary Commission may, at any time, suspend or terminate the appointment of a member of the Management Board for-
(a) 	abuse of office; 
(b) 	corruption; 
(c) 	incompetence; 
(d) 	any physical or mental incapacity that renders a person incapable of performing the duties of that office; 
(e) 	failure to attend three consecutive Management Board meetings without reasonable grounds; or 
(f) 	being adjudged bankrupt by a court of law.

(9) 	Notwithstanding subsection (6), a member of the Management Board may, at any time- 
(a) 	resign from that office; or 
(b) 	be removed from that office if that member ceases- 
(i) 	to be a staff in the Parliamentary Service; 
(ii) 	to occupy the office in the Parliamentary Service, entitling the member for appointment on the Management Board; or 

(iii) 	to be a staff of the ministry nominating him or her for appointment to the Management Board. 

(10) 	Subject to the powers of the Parliamentary Commission and without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2), the committee shall have power to - 
(a) 	recommend for approval by the Parliamentary Commission programmes of the institute;
(b) 	administer the property and funds of the institute;
(c) 	receive, on behalf of the institute or Parliament, gifts, donations or grants meant for the institute; or
(d) 	exercise any other power that may be granted to the institute by the Parliamentary Commission.”

Madam Chairperson, you realise that we included four Members of Parliament. 

The justification is as follows:

1. 	To include members of the Management Board in recognition of the core role of the institute to build the capacity of Members of Parliament;

2. 	To include the Clerk to Parliament in the membership of the board in recognition of the Clerk’s role and centrality in the management of the Parliamentary Commission; 

3. 	To ensure the members of the board are designated by the Parliamentary Commission; 

4. 	To substitute the words “Steering Committee” with the words, “Management Board”;

5. 	To separate the tenure of members of the Management Board designated from outside Parliament from those occupying certain offices in Parliament whose tenure ends when they vacate the offices they occupy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the committee chair once more. To begin with, you have added Members of Parliament and you are saying that there will be competition. How can you compete and then be designated by the Parliamentary Commission? If competition has taken place, the competition designates that person to the board.

Secondly, a management board means there is already a board above. Therefore, wouldn’t it be better that we replace “management committee” with “board”?

The justification is that the board can decide to create a management team. The moment we make it a management board, such committees will miss out because a management committee is basically for the top management of an institution not the board. I would like to therefore suggest that we delete that. 

Madam Chairperson, the reason I stood up to raise a point of procedure was because I thought we would go step by step. The chair of the committee has read many things and if we make a mistake, we might have a problem with the law. I propose that she reads a small part and then we agree and move to the next. 

On the removal of a member from office, for example, she has not spoken about a Member of Parliament. A Member of Parliament is not in the Parliamentary Service. A person in the Parliamentary Service is a staff of Parliament. A Member of Parliament who is on the committee can be removed from office once he or she ceases to be a Member of Parliament. I beg to submit.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First, on the management committee, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is right; it is assuming that there is a board above. However, my understanding is that the commission is above that management board. The essence of the board is for the management and the administration of the institute. Policy matters are handled by the commission, which is above the management board. I would, therefore, maintain the management board.

Madam Chairperson, we do not need Members of Parliament on the management board. Members of Parliament are already on the Parliamentary Commission, which supervises and has overall management of the whole thing. When you put a Member of Parliament on the board and the Clerk is the chairperson of the board, I see a problem -(Interjection)- Was it changed? We then need to agree on who the chairperson will be and how the chairperson will be determined.

Subclause (3) says that the Management Board shall be designated by the Parliamentary Commission. Madam Chairperson, I think we should be specific right from the start that this board shall be appointed by the Parliamentary Commission. A member from the local government, for example, shall be appointed by the minister. I think here we are talking about how this is constituted and formed. It is not “designated” but “appointed” by the Parliamentary Commission.

Finally, the director who is the secretary - Have we also changed it? It is the Clerk. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I do not want an idea where we are saying Members of Parliament should not be part of this. I think we shall be kicked out. I think Members should be part of the board as that is the only way we shall be kept abreast of the day-to-day running of this institute. However, I would like to suggest that at least one Member should be a female. Otherwise, if we leave it open, there may be room for marginalisation.

Regarding appointments, I would like to propose that we borrow a leaf from the Parliamentary Commission so that some Members come from the Independents. Again, if we leave it the way it is, in the NRM we can decide and vote only NRM cadres and disadvantage the Independents, unless they cross to this side. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not want a scenario where what is happening in the commission comes here as Members will lose trust and confidence in this institute. My proposal, therefore, is, if there are four Members of Parliament, we should have two male and two female Members of Parliament. In addition, we should look at the issue of representation; otherwise, we might go to the caucus and lose out because some Members will say that the institute is like Kyankwanzi and they will not go for training yet we want to be together.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you make a proposal? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify this particular point. The practice all over - whether you go to Kenya, Nigeria, India, Pakistan and Pakistan. The Parliamentary Institute is owned by Parliament and they take responsibility in designing the policies and ensuring that the training programmes are relevant to their needs.

To have a Parliamentary Institute without members of Parliament being represented leaves the institute to be managed by -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who has made that amendment? There is no proposal to that. 

MS OGWAL: I thought that had come from someone.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, how about the issue of women?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make a proposal.

MR WALUSWAKA: I am proposing that out of the four Members, at least one should be female. Let us be clear and make it half since it is just a board to cater for two female and two male. 

Although you said that it would be competitive, you know there is some clandestine. We may get a bad Government not like NRM, which is good and the whole thing will be taken by the other Government. If we just leave others to take over, we will suffer. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that proposal is good. Maybe what we should add is that they should represent the different shades of opinion in the House so that Members are generally covered.

5(4) is a repetition of 5(3) because we have already said that the Commission would appoint that board. Therefore, this 9(4) is not necessary. 

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate that we need to harmonise 5 (3) and 5 (4) in light of what happened in clause 3. 

I would like to appreciate hon. Nandala-Mafabi when he talked about the structure. I had a little family tree and on top of it, was the Parliamentary Commission followed by the management board and then under them, I had the four Members of Parliament, the Clerk, academia, representative of local government and the Executive Director. I thought that is what is done on corporate governance.

I would like to consider, when does a Member of Parliament become a member or for how long? We proposed two and a half years and the thinking was splitting the five year term subject to renewal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We need to remove 5(9) and then take up the proposal by hon. Waluswaka on the composition of the board. There was a repetition in 5(4) (a) because we had already talked about the Commission appointing the board. We can delete 4 (a) because it is already here.

Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I think you have a new clause.

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, protect me from hon. Abala. I know we come from the same region but surely, we needed an institute badly. 

I have new clauses for insertion: immediately after clause 5, insert the following new clauses; 
“1. 	The management board shall determine its own procedure.

    2. Meetings of the management board shall be held at such a time and place as determined by the chairperson and it shall be presided over by the chairperson and in the absence of the chairperson, any other member as may be designated by the chairperson or agreed upon by the members.

    3. A quorum of the management board shall be one third.

    4. A member of the management board shall have one vote save for the chairperson who shall have a casting vote.

    5. The proceedings of the management board shall not be invalidated only because there is a vacancy in its membership or because of any fault in constituting its members.”

The justification is: 

(a)	to provide for meetings of the institute. 
(b) 	to protect the proceedings of the board from unnecessary invalidation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BAMUKWATSA: I wanted to ask whether we maintained the word “management board” or we inserted “board” only.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, wherever the word “management committee” occurs, it will be substituted by “the board”.

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, we proposed to replace sub clause 2 as follows:

“(2) Insert “Executive”, immediately after “then” and before “Director”. 

The Executive Director may participate in the meeting of the Board, except that the Executive Director shall not have a right to vote in decisions of the Board.”

The justification is for clarity and better drafting, considering that the Director is already designated in clause 5 as ex-officio and not secretary. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 6 be amended, as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are getting problems when there is only one person who is heading an institution. When or she goes away, there is a problem. I would like to move an amendment as follows:

“There shall be a public officer who will be:

    i.  The Executive Director and 
    ii. The Deputy who deputises the Executive Director.”

The justification is that in case one is not available to perform his or her duties, it is quite easy, other than going around looking for him or her. Today, I put this one and tomorrow, I put another person. It is not good for corporate governance.

Therefore, I would like to move an amendment that as we describe an Executive Director, we should also describe the Deputy Executive Director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you have occasion to discuss that? Do you have no objection?

MS ISALA: It is fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended, as variously proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, in sub clause (2), 
(a) 	Substitute for the word “Steering Committee” the words “Management Board” appearing in paragraph (a) and (j);
(b) 	In paragraph (c), replace the word “control” with the word “management” and
(c) 	In paragraph (g), replace the word “proposing” with the word “developing”.

The justification is for a consequential amendment, arising from the amendment of clause 5 of the Bill, wherein, the words “Steering Committee” have been substituted for the words “Management Board”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended, as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is no problem with this. We have done functions of the Executive Director. I would like to insert a sub-clause to include functions of the Deputy Executive Director –(Interjections)– Kindly, listen. If you listen, you will understand.

The reason I am bringing this is because we need to state that under the functions of the Deputy Executive Director, he or she shall report to the Executive Director –

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, have we now agreed that there shall be a designated Deputy Director? If yes, it is okay. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Madam Chairperson, the Deputy Executive Director shall perform duties assigned to him or her by the Executive Director.

In performance of his or her duties, he or she shall report – this is for drafting – to the Executive Director. The justification is to avoid creating power centres. The reporting line should be clear, disciplinary action should be taken and the roles are very clear. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Since the mover has no objection, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS ISALA: On clause 9, regarding funds and sources of revenue of the institute, we propose that we replace sub-clause (2) with the following;

“(2) The institute shall retain ten percent of the total non-tax revenue for purposes of defraying its expenses.” 

The justification is to allow the institute to retain a percentage of the non-tax revenue it generates for purposes of defraying its expenses. This will improve the financial standing of the institute. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have a problem with this?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, why can’t we allow the non-tax revenue collected under this institute to operate like any other non-tax revenue under the Public Finance Management Act?

THE SPEAKER: Do you want it to go to the Consolidated Fund?

MR BAHATI: Yes. Why should we legislate for one particular entity and leave out others?

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to slightly disagree with the honourable minister. I know he is well grounded on matters of finance and accounting. However, I would look at the ten per cent as very meagre. We are building capacity of the institute. We need 25 per cent for defraying expenses. That would offset the minister’s worry of everything going to –

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to concur with the minister. On several occasions, Parliament has been accused of doing things that favour us, different from what we do for others. Therefore, I think we should do what is already in practice with other departments. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me ask; are there any exceptions to the Public Finance Management Act?

MR NIWAGABA: There are provisions of section 29 (3) of the Public Finance Management Act which would allow any entity to retain any non- tax revenue but through appropriation by Parliament. Maybe, we could redraft this provision in accordance with the provisions of section 29 so that when we are appropriating, we can, at that stage, give a percentage.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree, for the first time, with my DP colleague, hon. Lyandro Komakech, that 10 per cent is really small. Honourable members, even if you want to wash yourselves clean now, you will not. As such, I do not agree with what the MP for the UPDF is saying. We are members of Parliament and we shall be here. Time will come and they will say, because this place has many people, it should not have lead cars. 

I would like to propose 25 per cent, the way hon. Niwagaba explained. We should appropriate when we have something. Otherwise, we shall be going to beg from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development every other time. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am aware that this is the only Parliament in the country that makes all the laws. I am sure that the Public Finance Management Act was made by this Parliament and I do not want us to abuse that law. We should not create scenarios that will make us appear as if we are not parliamentarians. 

Let us follow the law. If the law says we have to appropriate based on a law, then that is it. We should not create a scenario that is outside the law. If we do so, it might not be helpful to us. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The issue now is either 10 per cent or 25 per cent? How do you decide what to appropriate? Are you going to say, “this year, we are giving you 3 per cent and next year 20 per cent?”

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we do not need to mention the percentages because at the time of appropriation, we shall have known the projections of the institute and how much it is earning. If you say 10 per cent, what if we are collecting more and the institute actually needs more at the time of appropriation? 

I think it would be better to maintain - It is already catered for and it is within our means to appropriate whatever we collect. Creating an exception at this stage of 10 per cent is actually a disadvantage to the institute. I propose that we delete the amendment of the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we revert to the original position?

MR BAHATI: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a new insertion.

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, I propose the insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 9 on charging of fees. It states, “The institute may charge fees for the provision of services as may be determined by the Parliamentary Commission in consultation with the board.” 

The justification is as follows:

    1. To empower the institute to charge fees for services it provides;
    2. To empower the Parliamentary Commission to determine the fees charged by the institute in consultation with the Parliamentary Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to. 

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MS ISALA: Clause 12 is about estimates. In sub-clauses (1) and (2), we propose to substitute for the words, “steering board” whenever it appears in the provision, the words, “management board” which we had already considered. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  We already said that wherever it occurs, it will be converted to “board.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is okay. If you look at sub-clause (2), it states, “The estimates of income as recommended by the steering committee shall be caused for approval at the Parliamentary Commission.” We have just passed clause 9(1)(a), which says, “money appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of this institute…”. That means that these estimates must be brought to Parliament. 

As such, I wanted to move a provision that would be in line with clause 9(1)(a) to read, “The management board shall, within two months of receipt of the estimates, submit it to the Parliamentary Commission, which will forward it to Parliament for approval”. (Interjections) It is not automatic; you have said it is a law.

Madam Chairperson, it says “… cause to be submitted to the Parliamentary Commission for its approval”. The one who approves it is not the Parliamentary Commission. It is Parliament – (Interjections) – You are making noise because you do not have the draft law. For the law to be okay, it is Parliament to approve it. It is not the Parliamentary Commission to approve it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means we have to come here for appropriation? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 –

MS ISALA: Unless the mover has what I have, I have no objection. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the Parliamentary Commission cannot appropriate without this House; we have to come here. 

I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, clause 14 is on accounts and audits. In sub-clause (4), substitute for the words, “Public Finance Management Act, 2015” the words, “The National Audit Act, 2008”. 

The justification is that the submission of audited accounts to Parliament is prescribed in the National Audit Act, 2008. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, on annual and other reports, in sub-clauses (1) and (2), delete the word, “steering” whenever it appears in the provision. In sub-clause (2), delete the word, “also”.

The justification is as follows:

    1. It is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 1 of the Bill wherein the word committee” is defined. 
    2. To remove a redundant word.
    3. For consistency and better drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you have talked about annual and other reports. There is no way reports shall be brought to Parliament apart from the audited accounts. Therefore, I wanted to put sub clause (3) in clause 15 so that the Parliamentary Commission shall within 30 days submit the reports to Parliament.

The justification is that these reports might end in the Parliamentary Commission and yet, we appropriate for them. Therefore, when these reports are received, within 30 days, they should be submitted to Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you state the sentence, hon. Nandala, as you want it to appear?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am saying that the Parliamentary Commission shall within 30 days, submit the annual reports to Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSONS: Maybe you say, “…shall within 30 days of receipt of the report…”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “…shall within 30 days of receipt of the reports submit to Parliament.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sub-clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New sub-clause inserted.

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have an amendment on clause 17 (ii). It states that “all officers of the Commission earlier appointed in the service of the institute before coming into force of this Act shall be deemed to have transferred their services under this Act –“ this is dangerous. If we want, we can just have a temporary secondment but the board you have created should recruit people who are competent to run the institute. In this case, if you like this, then we are killing the institution on day one.

Madam Chairperson, I want to say that we delete 17(ii). In the provision, if you want a transition, the Clerk can for the time being nominate people to start the institute and after that, the recruitment exercise can start -(Interruption)

MR TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform you that in this Bill, we have not provided for the management board to appoint staff. Therefore, it is the Commission in charge of that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, I think what hon. Nandala is saying is that there should be no automatic moving into the new institute. What do you say about that honourable members? Honourable chairperson, do you stand by the Bill?

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, I would stand by the sub clause. The only other suggestion I would give is probably to delete it but not rephrase it. I do not know whether hon. Mafabi had an amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No.  These are transitional clauses. Therefore, what happens to the people who are there in the transition? Do they go to the street? Maybe let us ask the mover.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am not under obligation to amend my own Bill. But clause 17 is necessary for the transitional period. Therefore, I would plead with the committee if they would allow clause 17 to stand to provide for the transitional period.

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable members, I remember when we were passing the petroleum laws in the transitional provisions, we made a provision similar to this, that the staff in the particular ministry in that department would have deemed to have transferred their services to the respective authorities.

It is good for legislation and it is good for stability of institutions. After all, they will remain under the direct supervision of the Parliamentary Commission.

Therefore, at an appropriate time, if the Commission deems these particular staff not to fit for the purpose, it will do the needful. Let us maintain the provision because it causes no harm.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think it is important that we maintain this for transitional purposes because we have done it before. Even the National Population Council - actually, all laws that we have made, when there are some existing staff, we have allowed them to continue but that does not stop the new management if they want to make any changes, to make the changes. However, imagine even you hon. Nandala, even if you took power now, you cannot close the whole government and start afresh. There are some staff to continue with. (Laughter)

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Chairperson, under section 8, we have already committed ourselves to say it is the Commission to appoint other officers and staff of the institute. If we had transferred this mandate to the board, then maybe, we would say the board may want to recruit its own staff.

Therefore, for continuity and aware that it is the same appointing authority, let this provision remain. Certainly, if there is any staff that has to be laid off, they can do it later. I do not see any need to amend it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have defined the “Executive Director” and given term limits to board members but not the Executive Director. However, all the laws that we make, all Executive Directors serve four years, some three and renewable once.

Therefore, since we have brought that, I want to propose for drafting purposes that we insert a clause 18 to state that “the term of the Executive Director and the Deputy shall be five years renewable once.”

The justification is for it to be in harmony with other laws regarding Executive Directors and for other staff to grow and become Executive Directors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is okay but we did not state where we are going to get this person from. How do we get the Executive Director? Do we advertise, do we appoint from here?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to entirely agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal. It would be smarter if we inserted it immediately where we stated that there shall be a public officer designated – director of the institute appointed by the Parliamentary Commission and we say that the two will serve for a period of four years in clause 6 other than having clause 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Replacements can be done when they are finalising with the Bill.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where does the Executive Director come from?

MR ITUNGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 5, where we have the management of the institute, we have not provided for the appointment of the chairperson of the management board. 

Madam Chairperson, since we have provided for four honourable Members of Parliament to be on that board, I propose that the Commission appoints the chair among the four Members of Parliament. The reason is that giving the rank and the positions of the Members, it would be more prudent to appoint somebody, who is of high rank from the board to be the chair. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS BICHETERO: Madam Chairperson, you asked where the Executive Director would come from. I do not see it in the draft but we would like to propose that it should be either by secondment or through a search.

MR NIWAGABA: There shall be a public officer designated as the Director of the Institute and appointed by the Parliamentary Commission. The discretion is up to the Parliamentary Commission. If it looks at hon. Niwagaba and says that he can lose his seat and go there, I will go. 

It is really up to the Parliamentary Commission. You have that latitude and wisdom to appoint.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 – are there amendments in clause 1? 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I am wondering whether your worries have been addressed. You made a clear question; how are we going to source or outsource the executive director? I would like to ask. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are now in clause 1.

MS BICHETERO: He explained everything.
  
MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson asked a question that is already captured in the Hansard. Therefore, we do not want to act like we did not pay attention to what the chairperson was asking.

I would like to guide that the coming in to office of the Executive Director becomes an open competitive bid so that we do not act - Madam Chairperson, you have been generous to the entire country and the world knows. We should not act as if we were trying to ring-fence some of these jobs for our own. 

It should be a competitive bid in the newspapers and online, among others and get the best that we have in the country. Relatedly, when we talk about certificates, I was wondering whether at this point, we can commit ourselves to how long these certificates could be. 

I am wondering; somebody walks into the institute for two or three days and then he is awarded with certificate of participation. Time and value go hand-in-hand. I was wondering at this drafting stage whether it is not critical for us to commit ourselves. How long are these certificates going to be? Are they a one week, a one day or a month? (Interjections) – my friend, this is academics where you have no expertise -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, we are at committee stage where we are considering clause by clause. We are now on clause 1. Is it in order for the honourable member to raise issues that ordinarily should have been when we were on general debate of the Bill? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 1. I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title do stand part of Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.29
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019” and passed it with several amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30 
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I beg to move that the House adopts the report from the committee of the whole House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the House do adopt the report of the committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL 2019

6.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019,” do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Institute of the Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019,” be read for the read third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES ACT, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. I would like to congratulate hon. Cecilia Ogwal for this Bill. You can see that we really need it. Congratulations hon. Ogwal. I also thank the members for the work done.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 456,370,000 FROM THE EXIM BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE UPGRADE AND CONSTRUCTION OF NATIONAL OIL ROADS UNDER PACKAGE I AND PACKAGE II

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, when the Order Paper was uploaded on the iPads, I even sent a copy to my voters and what they are waiting for are the cities. I request that we handle the issue of cities and then go to the roads. Members are waiting for this. Cities are a national issue. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this motion was moved and the Chairperson – from what we discussed last week – was supposed to make a comment on the matter and we move forward. Needless to say, if we are to move to the next level of our economic status, there are three things that we need to work on: remove our oil from the ground, work on the steel and reduce the cost of transport. We have stated in this House that the Kampala-Jinja Expressway will be worked on and what is remaining are just processes. 

Colleagues, we need to move forward. We have been with this issue for a very long time. We need the oil to get out of the ground and this oil is for the whole country. Madam Speaker, I propose that given the situation we are in now, we move forward as we finalise the issue of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I reported to the House yesterday that I had established that the Inspector General Government was investigating the process surrounding the contract on the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway.

6.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am presenting the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $ 456,370,000 from the EXIM Bank of China to finance the upgrade and construction of national oil roads under package I (Masindi-Kasanja/Park Junction, Tangi (Pakwach) Junction-Paraa-Buliisa road) and Package II (Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko) and Package III (Buhimba-Bulamagi-Igayaza-Kakumiro road).

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that this loan request was presented to this Parliament in May and referred to the committee. We are now ready to report. However, before I proceed, I would like to thank colleagues with whom I worked on this request.

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the following documents, which we handled: 
i) 	The committee report
ii) 	The minutes of the meetings, which we held to discuss the report
iii) 	The brief to Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for approval of this loan
(iv) 	The Certificate of Finance Implications issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
(v) 	The letter from National Planning Authority recommending the loan
(vi)	The buyer credit loan agreement between the EXIM Bank of China and the Government of Uganda
(vii) 	The financing proposal relating to the design and build of those various roads
(viii) 	The financing proposal relating to those roads
(ix) 	Three contract agreements, one for each package of roads
(x) 	Feasibility study from UNRA for upgrading these roads
(xi) 	The project document from UNRA
(xii) 	Status report of the design and build of the related roads
(xiii) 	Status report for upgrading of Bulima-Kabwoya road as at 31 July 2019
(xiv) 	The pictorial of the Committee on National Economy on tour of the oil roads in the Albertine Graben.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay all of them.

Madam Speaker, in examining this loan request, the methodology used included the following desk meetings, visits to the project areas and review of 28 documents, which are provided in paragraph 2(2).

Madam Speaker, the committee undertook field visits to Hoima, Buliisa and Masindi districts to study and ascertain the state of the existing project roads and access the current status of the on-going road construction.

Background 

Oil was discovered in 2006 and progress has been made towards the commercialisation of these resources in line with the Uganda Oil and Gas Policy, 2008. What is lacking is the petroleum infrastructure development, like the refinery, to add value to the natural resource.

Madam Speaker, the overarching goal of the Government of Uganda is to develop transport infrastructure required to support oil development and other strategic priorities of the country. If large benefits are to be reaped from Uganda’s oil and gas resources, the development of Uganda’s transport infrastructure network is critical. 

In order to achieve key milestones leading to oil production in 2023, the following, among others, are the critical areas:

    (i) Infrastructure and logistics
    (ii) Land acquisition
    (iii) Environmental and social impact assessment
    (iv) Lake Albert water extraction 
    (v) Local content development
    (vi) Creating an enabling environment for unlocking the binding constraints to the primary growth sectors of agriculture, forestry, tourism, mining, oil and gas in the project areas of influence 
    (vii) Transport services and agricultural productivity in the project areas and support local economic activities by reducing vehicle operating costs, road maintenance costs and travel time in Bunyoro Region.

The project is aligned to Uganda’s Vision 2040, which points out key infrastructural developments for harnessing opportunities in the Oil and Gas Sector.

The project further envisages a number of critical oil and gas roads, which include those that are targeted in this project among others that will improve accessibility in the Albertine region. Therefore, the project is consistent with objective two of the National Development Plan (NDP).

In addition, the project falls within the Road Sector Development Programme. It is aligned to other planning frameworks. This project is particularly aligned to Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Goal 9 of building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialisation as well as fostering innovation. 

The performances of the previous projects implemented are given in paragraph six. As we normally do in our reporting, we commend the performance of the previous loans. 

Approved projects to the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) as at end of November stood at $2,089.89 million of which, $626 million has been disbursed. Average disbursement rate is 30 per cent. This includes the roads like upgrading of the Luweero-Butalangu Road, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road and Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road, which are yet to be financed. 

The delay in disbursement is due to delayed land acquisition, delayed procurement and administrative reviews, no objection delays by funders and delayed completion of designs.

Page 17 provides the objectives, which are covered under paragraph seven and I will not go into the details. Paragraph eight provides the breakdown in tables one to three. This provides general information for Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko Road project. 

It also provides information on Masindi Kasanja, which is termed as the second road. It further provides general information on Buhimba-Nalweyo-Bulamagi and Bulamagi-Igayaza-Kakumiro Road projects. 

The total estimated project cost of the three roads is $536,915,420 million. It is to be financed through borrowing from the China Exim Bank and Government of Uganda will provide $ 80,537,315 million, which is 15 per cent of the project cost. 

Table four provides the breakdown. The terms are provided under paragraph nine, table five. I have already mentioned the loan amount. The breakdown is as follows: 

    i. The maturity period is 15 years; 
    ii. Repayment period is 10 years;
    iii. Grace period is five years;
    iv. Interest charged  is six months liable plus three per cent;
    v. Management fee is 0.5 per cent calculated on the loan amount upfront;  
    vi. Commitment fee is 0.5 per cent, on loan committed and not disbursed. 

Madam Speaker, the conditions of the loans are the usual ones. It requires the following:

    a) Certified true copies of the approval of the Parliament of Uganda.
    b) Satisfactory evidence that the agreement has been validly executed. 
    c) A certified true copy of the Commercial Contracts duly executed by the Government of Uganda and the engineering and procurement contractors.
    d) A written undertaking issued by the Government expressing its consent to cooperate with the lender on the post evaluation for the project; and
    e) Certified true copies of the land expropriation and resettlement plan in relation to the land used for the construction of the Project.
  
Under implementation, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) will be responsible for the implementation of the projects. During the execution of the project, UNRA shall be responsible for the following:

    a) Project monitoring, reporting and evaluation
    b) Contractual relationships with the Contractors for the project; and
    c) Financial management and record keeping of the accounts 

Madam Speaker, those are the responsibilities of UNRA.

The Loan Current Debt Situation of the Country

This loan will increase the total borrowing to 42.7 per cent. The estimated nominal debt as percentage of the GDP at the end of June, when we first examined this loan was 42 per cent. This is relatively below the public debt management framework threshold of 50 per cent. 

Despite the increase in sovereign debt, it is still sustainable and Uganda is not under debt distress.

The challenges affecting the implementation of the project relate to lack of funds, environment, procurement and land related matters. They include, but are not limited to –

    i. Land acquisition;
    ii. Progress of works on the three packages; 
    iii. Most of the project roads traverse through very sensitive eco-system that requires wide consultations by National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) prior to approvals;
    iv. Land conflicts, arising out of absentee land lords.

Madam Speaker, having examined the loan in details, we made the following observations and we recommend that;
Government Agencies should desist from making commitments on behalf of Government before seeking approval of Parliament and in future, if any Government official commits Government without prior approval, they should be held liable in accordance with the Leadership code.

During the committee’s visits to Hoima, the committee noted that to-date the oil contractors and supervisors have been contracted to implement oil roads for packages 1, 2, 3 and 5;

The committee also observed that the remaining procurement was not at contract award stage. 

Funds were released by July 2019 and both Project Affected Persons (PAPS) and the contractors were paid accordingly. However, the un-paid interim certificates have been attracting interest since that time. 

UNRA targets to complete most of land compensation by December 2019 and any activities that will spill over will be concluded by December 2020. Therefore, the success of this projection depends entirely on the release of funds by Government.

The committee recommends that:

    i. Since land acquisition lies on the critical path for the implementation of oil roads, Government should ensure that funds are ring-fenced and always available before contracts are signed to make timely payments to the contractors and PAPs respectively so that project deliverables are not delayed.
    ii. Government should expedite putting up central utility corridors to avoid multiple compensations, whenever public infrastructure projects are being constructed.

Madam Speaker, we always make this recommendation to every infrastructure loan that we present here.

Local content

The committee observed that all civil works contracts have at least 30 per cent of local content and was included in the contracts which are being implemented. 

The committee recommends that Government should further assist local contractors to enhance capacity especially in acquisition of heavy moving equipment at affordable interest rates.

What we observed was quite impressive from the local contractors but it was clear that they could perform better if they had better equipment and in order to reduce on the high attrition rates of engineers Government should consider adjusting the remuneration of the local contractors to match their input.

We saw that our local engineers were doing a good job and if they were well remunerated, they could help us with time to get rid of the foreign engineers and contractors. 

Government should create a fund to support local contractors taking on infrastructure projects and foreign contractors should be compelled to work with the local contractors because this is where we have the highest benefit.

Apart from the GDP, which accrues from these constructions, the other permanent asset we acquire is creating capacity for our local people.

Local contractors should be sensitised about the tax options and benefits in place. We found out that many of them were not fully informed about the tax benefits, which they can tap into.

The work of local contractors should be ring-fenced at full score and the local content Bill should be expedited to make it into law. Madam Speaker, that Bill is taking a bit long and yet, we have a number of projects where we want to apply the law. 

The committee observed that much as oil roads are a critical infrastructure in aiding delivery of the first oil in 2023, the oversight role of the committee and the available information indicates that first oil cannot be achieved as anticipated by Government and if the status quo is maintained, Government will remain with a huge debt without producing the first oil.

We all know that technology is changing and the new innovations are being made. Some countries are proposing to ban fossil fuel within the next 10 to 15 years and so, it is urgent for our Government to sort this and we get the oil out of the ground. 

In conclusion, the committee having visited the oil region and seen the progress of work and the impact the finished roads will have on the economy, we observed that the overall projects were progressing well and the systems put in place have enhanced smooth implementation of the project.

There is strong commitment to ensure that the works are completed on time despite the challenges already highlighted. The expedited approval of the loan is critical because the pre-financing ended in July and for that matter the certificates, which were not settled by end of July have been attracting interest.

What we saw in this construction was very impressive work and I would like to invite other committees to go and see the work being done.  The first time you see the works, you cannot believe it is being done in Uganda.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the request for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $456,370,000 from the EXIM Bank of China to finance the upgrade and construction of the national oil roads under project I, II and III be approved subject to the recommendations herein.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you, very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the committee. We could just have a few comments. Let us have three people.   

6.57
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson Committee on National Economy for this detailed report and I stand to support the motion that a loan be borrowed from the EXIM Bank to fund the oil roads but I would name them; the Masindi-Kasanja-Pakwach Junction, Paraa-Biliisa road, Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko road and Kakumiro road.

This is going to be one of the main key roads within the greater Bunyoro Kingdom. I would like to thank the Government because since the colonial era, after the colonialists taking all our people, we have been “swallowing” dust and this road is going to serve as a circuit road for the entire region.

The Murchison National Park is one of the biggest national parks in this country and contributes greatly to the national economy through the tourists. If at all you stood by the road side especially on Friday or Saturday, you would count beyond 30 coaster buses full. That means 30 tourists everyday times the dollars they spend. You cannot ignore this area. We are going to extract oil and it will end but the national parks will remain and this is the resource, which will benefit Ugandans. I request you to support this loan.

This is going to be one of the roads, which will be linking Kampala-Bunyoro and the northern region and it is the shortest route because if you decided to take Masindi-Kampala-Kafu-Kigumba-Karuma-Pakwach, that is the longest route but this road will be from Kampala to Masindi-Paraa Park-Pakwach and you will already be in northern region -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, hon. Bintu for giving way. I was there two weeks ago and would like to confirm that the bridge is being done; it is an excellent piece of work taking place and for the first time, we in the north are happy that we can be crossing through Bunyoro.

It will give an opportunity for that ferry to be moved away and taken to other parts of eastern Uganda, where they need it because the bridge solves the problem once and for all.

MS BINTU: Thank you, hon. Otto. Madam Speaker, I have the chairperson talk about the environmental impact assessment report. We would like to know whether the climate component has been catered for in this report.

I remember in this Parliament, at one time, we said that all the new constructions and all the roads should have greenery and that being a region where there are extracting minerals, we need to have trees to safeguard both human beings and animals. I have heard about the report but I do not know whether they have catered for that. 

Secondly, these roads are passing through the national parks but up to date, we have not seen places of convenience along the roads. It is bad that you stop and people are going in the grass and trees along the roadside. I remember we directed that for any loan that we shall be taking on, we should incorporate the component of places of convenience along the road. These are prime roads and we need this component of places of convenience incorporated into the loan.

In addition, we would like to know the lifespan of these roads because they are going to carry heavy trucks. After the oil, the only thing that those of us within that region and Northern region will benefit from is the roads. We would like to know what the lifespan of these roads is so that even when the oil is over, we remain with the roads where people can pass. Otherwise, I agree with the members that the question be put that we borrow such a lump sum amount. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I just want confirmation from the chairperson. Does that loan include the places of convenience because it was our instruction that any new road must have them?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, we did not discuss that in the report but it is now Government policy that all highways must have places of convenience. Even greenery is now part of the policy, except in this case where some parts are tricky. Where the road passes through the game park, it may not be possible to put greenery. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, it cannot be policy. It must be clearly stated, honourable chairperson.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson was very smart to say that she is not aware. As Members said, Government must have already committed contractors to work on some of these roads. Even in the contracts that you have signed, the places of convenience are not there. In the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we put these people to order. We are just washing plates when people have already eaten.

What I would like to inform the House and country is that for these roads, which are being constructed now, the places of convenience are not there. The honourable minister urged Members to visit the roads and see how the work is done. Technically, we visit some of these places for which loans have been passed but there is nothing. An example is this bridge where there was nothing.

On paper, they may seem to have something but on the ground, it is not –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this House information in regard to the resolution that we passed here. I remember when we moved a motion on sanitation on World Toilet Day, we also passed a resolution that no loan for road construction in Uganda should be endorsed without a clear component on sanitation and hygiene, especially along highways. We also interfaced with the Ministry of Works and Transport and that was emphasised as a matter of policy.

The information that I would like to give to the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy is, whereas we are not against this loan – actually, it should pass – we want clarity on the issue of sanitation and hygiene on the highways and on any other road because that is what we resolved.
That should be very clear from the onset, not saying that, that will be handled administratively. It should be handled from the onset before we approve the loan. I would imagine that the chairperson should explain to the House, as part of this loan, where sanitation and hygiene places are catered for in this project. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Besides the places of convenience that should be provided along the highways, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has already come up with designed international stop-overs every 100 kilometres.

We are now designing one at Kafu where we are partnering with Masindi District. It is going to be one that we are going to fund as a ministry but we have also tendered and designated these places along all highways. We have identified land where to put international stop-overs with places of convenience as well as parking facilities. This is in the pipeline and one such place is under implementation now.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities handling the issue of sanitation?

MR KIWANDA: We are handling issues of international stop-overs, which also include places of convenience.

THE SPEAKER: We need a commitment. You cannot encourage Ugandans to defecate on the road in this century; to go to the bush? No.

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, indeed, we resolved that we should have sanitation facilities along the highway and I think it is now important that Government commits to having toilets along every highway.

Therefore, we would now require that we request the Minister of Works and transport to come and make a statement –(Interjections)– Not before. You cannot condition construction of the road on construction of a toilet along the road.

The Minister of Works and Transport should come and tell us the policy that they have now but as a condition for this loan, we are saying that facilities will be there and Parliament, through its oversight role, should see these facilities. Construction of a road compared to construction of a toilet along the highway is quite different. 

However, on this one, we have resolved as Parliament that the Ministry of Works and Transport should implement our policy.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the minister to come and confirm here that it will be done. I told you about a good one at a place called Mirembe near Nkozi. There is a private one there, very good with bathrooms and other amenities.

Honourable members, I put the question that the loan be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a high demand for cities. What do we do?

7.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that given the numbers in the House now –(Interjections)– Yes. Given the numbers in the House today –(Interjections)– If you read the law, you will find that you need almost two thirds majority of this House.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to commit that I am going to carry out mobilisation of the distinguished members of Parliament. On Tuesday next week, I will have mobilised the total required numbers to the House so that my motion does not fail. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to talk about the numbers. It is you Members who take us to court. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 November 2019 at 2 p.m.) 

