Tuesday, 10 November 2015

Parliament met at 3.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President and distinguished Members of the House, I welcome you to this sitting. 

I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Nairobi: Mr Ochieng Otieno, Mr Alphonse Ouma, Mr Musa Senator, Mr Farah Abdirizak Gabow and Mr Fredrick Macharia Mwangi. You are welcome. They are here on attachment to our Budget Office.

Honourable members, I would like to apologise for the late start of the proceedings. I was engaged with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on certain outstanding issues, which I am happy to report have been resolved. The outcome will be communicated through all your whips. The situation is under control, just do your work. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from the recess. I note that we have been busy deepening democracy so life is going on. 

You may recall that in April 2013, I received communication from the then Secretary General of the NRM/O to the effect that hon. Mohammed Nsereko, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and hon. Niwagaba had been dismissed from the party. The then Secretary General requested me to invoke my powers as Speaker to declare the seats vacant and direct the Clerk to Parliament to inform the Electoral Commission so that by-elections could be organised in those constituencies as per Article 81(2) of the Constitution.

We further recall that on 2 May 2013, I made a ruling on this matter, which I delivered to this House in which I explained at length why I was not able to act as requested by the then Secretary General and I advised that the matter could only be settled by the courts of law under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the other laws.

I still thought at that time that it required caution of all parties involved until court takes a decision for or against my ruling. There were people who were dissatisfied with my ruling namely the Attorney-General of Uganda, hon. Kamba Saleh, Miss Mary Agasha, Mr Joseph Kwesiga and the National Resistance Movement who filed petitions No.16, No.19, No.21 and No.25 of 2013, which were then consolidated on 21 February 2014.

By a majority of four to one, the Justices of the Constitutional Court granted petition No.16, No.19, No.21 and the constitutional petition No.25 of 2013. One of them was dismissed.

The affected members were not satisfied by the Constitutional Court’s decision. They appealed to the Supreme Court, which is the highest appellate court in the land. I am reliably informed and I have read the ruling of the court handed down on 30 October 2015 in what I would call a landmark decision that had decided the appeal and vindicated the decision of the Speaker.

It is abundantly clear that it is the High Court not the Constitutional Court, which has jurisdiction to hear and determine if any person being expelled from their political parties had to vacate their seats in Parliament. It was therefore wrong for the Constitutional Court to order the Members of Parliament to vacate their seats in Parliament on that ground. 

Third, the principle of separation of powers should be duly observed to avoid erosion of constitutional functions of the different arms of Government. (Applause) In the instant case, the effect of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General, who is a member of the Executive, relating to the manner in which the Speaker of Parliament, who is the head of the legislative arm of Government, should carry out his or her constitutional functions as binding violates the principle of separation of powers.

The legal opinion of the Attorney-General must be accorded the highest respect but can only be binding where it relates to a contract, agreements or other legal transactions to which Government or a public institution is a party or has an interest.

Therefore, the Constitutional Court had in holding that the opinion of the Attorney-General to the honourable Speaker of Parliament was binding on her. Clearly, it was not. 

Four, they ruled that the Speaker discharged her duty to guide Parliament on the issue. There was nothing unconstitutional about what she did and she did not need to give a hearing to the parties concerned.

A majority of those in the Constitutional Court erred in law when they held that the Speaker created a peculiar category of Members of Parliament when she said that the four members should remain in Parliament after their expulsion.

Honourable members, this is a landmark decision in our jurisprudence as a country and as a Parliament. It restates our independence us as a Legislature in the execution of our constitutional obligations, guarantees the freedom and security of tenure of Members of Parliament and indeed frees us from the handcuffs of the Attorney-General in the execution of our mandate, save in matters relating to contracts, agreements or other legal transactions to which Government is a party or has an interest.

I encourage everyone to read this decision and I would like to thank our legal team for ably representing us and to thank all those who supported us. I would like to probably hear an apology from those who spent time lambasting this Parliament. Thank you very much. 

3.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to congratulate you on the wise decision and guidance that you gave to the House.

Madam Speaker, three out of four Members who were affected have been welcomed back to the party, upon their request. Therefore, is it proper that they continue to sit in the places, which you dedicated to that category of people, which does not exist anymore? Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct and proper for the three who have even participated in the party primaries to cross over to their proper positions in this House? This is guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will allow them to think about it and let me know where they would like to sit so that I can ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to do the needful. Thank you very much.

3.41
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have read to us the import of the judgement of the Supreme Court delivered on 30th October this year. On behalf of the people of Lwemiyaga and my colleagues, we take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and the way you have guided this august House.

Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you and the legal team of Parliament, the director and all the members in the Legal Department and also Members of Parliament who stood by us in that very trying moment. Madam Speaker, we know that you were lambasted and called names but that is the price we usually pay when we assume these positions. It is so humbling to hear the current chief whip thanking you for the way you steered this Parliament.

This is not to say that we have won or they have lost but in a way, I think it is to promote the jurisprudence of this country and also to promote the separation of powers, which is a cornerstone in the democracy of any civilised country. 

Madam Speaker, this House and the annals of this country shall be written and etched with this historic and fundamental decision made. It will be a matter to consider and I think it should not be a point where one side has won and the other has lost but I think it should be a building block. 

Uganda is a young democracy but we are proud that we still have institutions. We have the Judiciary that at this critical point in time has risen to the occasion and we would like to urge the Judiciary to continue with that spirit. The upcoming challenges are too heavy but we trust that the Judiciary can still rise up and uphold the constitutional governance of this country.

Lastly, I would like to thank all members, Government and members of public who allowed this due process to take place. We are happy that we have enjoyed this sanctuary in the middle. I would like to tell you that it is so sweet and at an appropriate time, we shall be moving. However, I would like the entire Parliament to be the winners not just the four members. Parliament, Government and the people of Uganda are winners. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.49
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here on matters of national importance but I would like to congratulate the Parliament as an institution and you, Madam Speaker, for standing in defence of the rights of Members of Parliament. I think this is a commendable job and we need each other. 

I also congratulate the members of the NRM party who went through fiery primary elections. They used to say that PAC was a torture chamber but I am now wondering how to describe the NRM primaries because women have been the major casualties and I am very concerned about it.

Madam Speaker, the new Budget process has already started, as you are aware, as provided for by the Public Finance Management Act of 2015. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the documents that should have already been presented to Parliament by now. 

Section 61(1) (a) stipulates that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall table before Parliament the estimated petroleum revenue for the financial year by 30th September. Section 61(2) stipulates that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall cause to be published the report on the Petroleum Fund in newspapers of wide circulation and make the report available on the website of the ministry, and that of the related accounting officers by 30th September.

Section 19 stipulates that publication of the pre-election economic and physical reports by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be undertaken not earlier than four months before the polling day meaning within the four months to the polling day for a general election.

Section 9(5) stipulates that the National Budget Framework Paper should be tabled by 31st December of the financial year preceding the financial year to which the Budget Framework Paper relates.

Madam Speaker, members are aware that we had a big battle to fight on the floor of Parliament because of lack of documents being presented to Parliament and I believe that all this is being done, not in ignorance of the law but being done to blackmail the institution of Parliament. That is why I decided that since the Budget process has started, it is important that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be made aware of the legal facts. The law I have quoted is the law that was proposed by the ministry. Parliament only scrutinised the law and passed it and we must make sure that we implement that law.

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we comply with the time limits prescribed by the law. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Magyezi had something to say.

3.52
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the death of five of our pupils in Bushenyi. 

Madam Speaker, last week on Wednesday, 4 November at about 2.00 p.m., one of our schools in my constituency called Nyakabingo Primary School was struck by lightning. Five pupils died and several others were hospitalised with burns, shock and paralysis.

The five pupils who died were very young: Benson Ahimbisibwe in P.2; Bettina Owomugisha in P.2; Vitas Asasira in P.1; Orphorus Mutahunga in P.6 and Anxious Tusiimirwe in P.1. 

Madam Speaker, this is not an isolated incident because a few months back at Buramba Primary School located in hon. Odo Tayebwa’s constituency – just within the same area - eight pupils were killed by lightning. Again about two months ago, two people were killed at Ibaale Sub County, which is in hon. Mawanda’s constituency. Two weeks ago at St Andrew’s Primary School, six pupils were hit by lightning but luckily, they survived with shock and paralysis. 

The death of these Ugandans, especially our children in these schools, is a call to order for us to examine our policy in terms of reaction and preparedness to this kind of situation. I would therefore like to ask Parliament and specifically the honourable Minister for Disaster Preparedness to immediately send relief to the affected families. Up to now, nothing has been done, not even a statement of concern. The minister should also ensure that lightning arresters are immediately installed at Nyakabingo Primary School.

Secondly, I do recall that sometime back as Parliament we resolved, and I think it was a resolution of this House, that Government should ensure that there are lightning arresters installed at every school. I would like to seek clarification or an explanation from the Minister of Education as to why the ministry has failed to implement this resolution. Can we have a report on the state of preparedness of our schools to face this kind of situation?

Finally, Madam Speaker, my experience in this case and other similar incidences shows that as a Member of Parliament, all eyes are on us during this kind of situation. The district has no money, the sub county council is crying and the Member of Parliament is expected to reach into his or her pocket to ensure that there are coffins, transport and other things. 

For me, this raises the question of whether Government can consider reintroducing the Constituency Development Fund so that MPs –(Interjections)- At a bigger scale and not the other one that we had so that there is a facility for MPs to address critical challenges in our constituency. If that fails, at least to ensure that there is a budget at the local government level or district level to ensure disaster preparedness. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Lucy Ajok had issues that they wanted to raise. Yes, hon. Katoto.
  
MR KATOTO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a point of procedure. Last time we discussed this matter thoroughly and the minister stood up and said that every school was going to be provided with lightning arresters. Therefore, I am asking whether we are proceeding well when we hear that there are schools without lightning arresters.

Before we go further, isn’t it procedurally right to first task the minister to tell us how far she has reached on this and why those schools do not have lightning arresters. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I expect the Prime Minister to respond to these issues. 

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Magyezi for revealing that tragedy to us and to convey our deep sympathies and condolences from Government, Parliament and the county on that tragedy.

It is true that this House and Cabinet agreed that Government institutions, especially education institutions, should have lightning arresters. It is now a question of implementation and I propose that the specific minister responsible comes and brings an up-to-date report on implementation of this decision by Government to install lighting arresters. I believe that before the end of the month, the minister should be able to come and report to this House on that situation. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can I ask the Budget Committee to take an interest in whether those items have actually been budgeted for when you are scrutinising the Budget? Have they actually been budgeted for? We may just be speaking and nothing has happened. 

3.59
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance in regard to the national ID. I have visited Apac several times and received complaints from citizens who are unable to pick their IDs because everything was taken back to the headquarters. 

There is a lot of confusion and there were only two temporary staff who were working under very difficult conditions. The crowds were also very stressed because many of them stood under the rain to check for their IDs. Some people have gone up to three times but have been unable to pick their cards. 

I am reliably informed and I did check with other districts in Lango and it is the same situation. It came to my notice yesterday that these young people who are working under very difficult conditions have not been paid since June. These are young people without jobs who are working under very stressful conditions but have not been paid. The entire support staff for the ID project in Lango sub region has not been paid since June. I would like to know when these young people will be paid because life is very hard for them.

The Government programme is also being disrupted and not fully implemented because most people do not have ID cards and yet it is very essential that all these people get their ID cards. There are some who are not even registered. I thank you.

4.01
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very urgent national importance. All over the world, when a country deploys its troops for war abroad, whenever they return home, they are screened and isolated for some time and counselled before finally deploying them either back to their barracks or into the community.

Recently, the Government of Uganda withdrew troops from South Sudan and I am sorry to report that these troops have been dumped in my constituency where there is no barracks or control. The troops are on rampage with married women and young girls in a place called Palaro. 

I do not know whether the presence of these troops is by design because I believe that our UPDF are professional enough. These soldiers have money and they have been put in an area that is extremely impoverished and they are dishing out money to these young girls and women and the soldiers end up spoiling people’s marriages.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request Government to re-deploy these troops away from Palaro to Gulu barracks and the 4th Division Headquarters, which is big enough to accommodate them other than leaving them in an open area where they go on rampage to commit all these things that they are doing. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.02
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a point of national importance regarding an extraordinary occurrence in Rubaga South.

About three weeks ago, a group of soldiers armed and with police escorts from Wankulukuku invaded one of my distinguished industries called Romi Industries at gun point. When they reached that place, they ordered management to surrender all the money they had in the safe. The poor man surrendered over UShs 30 million to the soldiers.

The soldiers said that they were sent by Brig. Kayanja to arrest the management and -

THE SPEAKER: I hope that is not hearsay.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: No, it is not hearsay. On allegations that the company called Romi was assisting the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I got concerned and made inquiries and it was established that the money was taken by the military. 

Under the Constitution of Uganda, which is supreme with reference to Article 2, the army is not supposed to do that. If there was any query in terms of assistance extended to the politicians, the Police should have been used so that they approach court to arrest these people and produce them in court.

That embarrassment is so huge for me to keep quiet as the representative of the company in Parliament. I therefore demand with humility and as a matter of urgency that the money extorted from Romi Industries be returned forthwith with an apology from Government of Uganda because pursuant to Articles 208 and 209, the army is not supposed to do that. 

That is a big embarrassment, which gives an impression that we are in a military state. We are not in a military state. Therefore, I need an explanation as soon as possible or else action should be taken now that elections are about to come.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the Minister of Internal Affairs will look into that.

Honourable members, we have been busy but I would like to appeal to the House to quickly work on the Lotteries and Gaming Bill because in my recent interactions in trading centres in Kamuli, I received a complaint about machines, which are installed in almost every shop. They look like Jukeboxes and you use only Shs 500 to gamble. People have gambled their properties away and I have been told that it is all over Uganda.

These machines are owned by Chinese. Every evening they go and collect the money and go away. They do not pay any taxes, it is just a bonanza and people are really tempted to gamble. Therefore, I appeal to our committee to work quickly but also the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Attorney-General should take an interest. This is free money being taken out of the homes of Ugandans, including the children because Shs 500 is easy to get. You put it in the Jukebox and it goes. It is quite serious and people are calling to ask when we are stopping this!

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with your complaint and I think everybody is affected. However, the information I have is that we have debated the Bill, it is here as the report was laid on the floor. What remains is for us to go to the committee stage and pass the law. It includes that provision that allows gambling to go on everywhere without being confined to certain areas. We have debated that Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Should we put it on the Order Paper tomorrow because it is urgent?

4.08
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The current law has no serious gap. If the Gaming and Lottery Board was serious -

THE SPEAKER: But is the board there?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Manzi Tumubweinee is the chairperson. The current law stipulates that you cannot operate a casino, gaming place or lottery without a license or clearance. It even has a provision of time. The current law allows them to come up with regulations and guidelines but the board is totally incapacitated and inadequate and they are not operating yet they are being funded by Government.

Therefore, even before we enact a new law, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General and Ministry of Internal Affairs should reign on these fellows who are in every village.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The last time when we debated the Bill, we asked Government to put to a halt and ban those activities until we passed the law. It is even on the Hansard. Therefore, we want to get a response from the Prime Minister.

4.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I think the local councils and the Police in those areas are not doing their work because those machines should first be licensed to be there. If you see a machine in your village, you can report – In fact, if anybody is about to commit a crime, you can arrest them and take them to the Police. This is under the law.

Therefore, any village, which has a gambling machine, should know that it is there illegally. As such, it should be picked up immediately and be taken to the Police.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that somehow, the Uganda Police are being doubted on the way they handle crime. Last month, a lady working with Centenary Bank called Betty was moved from her house and brought to CPS by the Police but the Police surrendered her into the hands of hooligans who beat her to death.

The girl died 200 metres from Police; just behind CPS. That is the Pine place. That is where she was killed after she had been removed from her house by Police, brought to Police offices and handed over to hooligans who beat her to death. We are wondering whether we can continue to trust the Uganda Police and whether we can get justice from Police. That is the Police you are talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Can we know from the Prime Minister what we can do about these gaming things, which are everywhere? I am told that in all trading centres in Uganda, they are there in tens and thousands.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I think the advice given by the chairman of the committee and you that we should pass the law as quickly as possible since it is in final stages is correct advice and we should act accordingly.

With regard to hon. Kiiza, the Police should be trusted. There may be instances like the one you have described, which is regrettable. The responsible policemen or women involved should be investigated and the law should take its course.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done enough on the communication and raising issues of concern from our electorate. Let us move to item 3 but I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be able to respond to hon. Ogwal’s issues when you come to the floor. 

BILLS
FIRST READING
 
    I) THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.13
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I represent the Minister responsible for Kampala. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. The certificate of financial implications is hereby attached.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. What is the matter, hon. Latif?

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The Attorney-General has just read the KCCA (Amendment) Bill for the first time. Is it procedurally right for the Attorney-General to lay on the Table the KCCA (Amendment) Bill, which is unconstitutional according to all those who have read it? Is it procedurally right for him to lay on the Table an unconstitutionality?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are familiar with our rules; you cannot anticipate. Therefore, we do not know what is in that Bill. It has come for the first reading. I therefore send it to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back.

    II) THE HUMAN RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT BILL, 2015
    III) 
4.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. 

In accordance with the provisions of the Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act, the Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications duly issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the 16 June 2015. I beg that I lay both on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Is it from the committee or it is a private members’ bill. Is it from the Committee on Human Rights or from the chairperson?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, it is from the Committee on Human Rights. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.
 
III) THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. 

Madam Speaker, it is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications in accordance with the provisions of the Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

IV) THE UGANDA FORESTRY ASSOCIATION BILL, 2010

4.17
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a private members’ Bill entitled, “The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010” for the first reading. The certificate of financial implication has already been presented. This Bill had been saved from the previous Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

    IV) THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2015
    V) 
4.19
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. The certificate of financial implications is attached.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT, JULY 2013 – JUNE 2014

4.20
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay before Parliament the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets documents. I beg to lay.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, members are not quite clear about the Bill I had moved for the first reading; the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill.

You may recall that recently, the Constitutional Court challenged the election of special interest groups in the Parliament in particular Workers, Youth and UPDF representatives. Persons with disabilities were exempted because some time back, we had made a law regularising their stay here.

Madam Speaker, sometime back in 2001, Parliament passed legislation - If I may start from the constitutional provision, the Constitution gave powers to Parliament to make laws or regulations to prescribe laws for the election of special interest groups. When Parliament was making the legislation, they delegated that authority to the Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That is the genesis of the problem and somewhere, somehow, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in respect of army representatives in Parliament, further delegated it to the Army Council. 

Therefore, the Constitutional Court said that since the power was given to Parliament to enact the regulations, Parliament should not have delegated that responsibility. We are really regularising that process. We are bringing the regulations in the form of an Act of Parliament for you to debate and pass them as an Act of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Bill has come for a first reading so we cannot debate it. We shall discuss it when the committee reports here. 

Honourable members, I commit the report on the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority annual performance report to the Committee on Finance for perusal and report back.

    II) MODEL PRODUCTION SHARING AGREEMENT FOR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION OR PETROLEUM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, we are still preparing our submission, we are not yet ready. I beg your indulgence to allow us to submit next time. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also thank my colleague, the Attorney-General.

Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General was on record after the ruling when he asserted the fact that he was going to appeal the Constitutional Court ruling in regard to Article 78(1)(b) and (c) for which he is seeking an amendment of the Parliamentary Elections Act and in effect, try and regularise and come into compliance with that ruling.

I would therefore like to seek guidance from the chairman in light of the fact that if indeed the Attorney-General went ahead and appealed this decision then probably, this motion is not rightly before this House. 

If he has actually not appealed, it means that the precedent set in that judgement has not been challenged. Therefore, what would then be the fate of those MPs here so that this House is not bogged down in the predicament of whether some MPs should be in this House or not?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the Attorney-General said but since he is here, he can tell us his position.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, normally when you lose a case, it is normally tactfully proper to put in a notice of appeal. Later, you put in a memorandum of appeal after you have actually got the record of proceedings and the rest, which we have not yet done. 

We put in a notice of appeal. Depending on the process of this Bill on the floor of the House – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, let me be clear the way you want it. The notice of appeal will be withdrawn.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am constrained to protest under our rules of privilege. You have already read before this august House, the decision of the Supreme Court in the matter involving us emphasising the principle of separation of powers. It is not only an abuse of the Judicial arm of Government for Parliament to start considering matters, which are already in court, including the KCCA matter, which has just been brought targeting an individual. How shameful it is! 

If an Attorney-General who knows the cardinal principles of separation of powers comes up with a Bill before Parliament, well aware that he has even lodged a notice of appeal because an appeal in a court of law is commenced by a notice of an appeal - Surely, how can you abuse the two arms of Government and have parallel processes on the same matter?

Is it therefore not procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that actually, the House stays consideration of these two Bills until the Judicial arm of Government has finalised those matters by either the appellants withdrawing or something like that? Otherwise, we shall be in a mess!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether the notice has been filed as I have not been served. Even for KCCA, I do not know. Honourable members, we have committed these Bills to the committee. Go there and raise your objections. The committees will report back and advise us on what to do. We cannot speculate. I have not read any of those Bills. Next Item.

    III) REPORT ON THE RECRUITMENT EXERCISE OF IMMIGRATION OFFICERS AND IMMIGRATION ASSISTANT TRAINEES (JULY – AUGUST 2015)

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report on the recruitment exercise of Immigration Officers and Immigration Assistant Trainees. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for perusal and report back.

    IV) REPORT OF THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT ON THE ALLEGED ILLEGAL RAISING OF THE FUEL CONSUMPTION OF AGGREKO KIIRA THERMAL PROJECT BY ENG. KIYEMBA ELIAS AND MR JOHNSON KWESIGABO JOHNSON (HQT/43/7/14)

4.26
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Education Service Commission annual report for the Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Local Government Finance Commission annual report for the Financial Year 2013/2014. 

I also beg to lay on the Table a report of the Inspectorate of Government on the alleged illegal raising of fuel consumption of Aggreko Kiira Thermal Project by Eng. Elias Kiyemba and Mr Johnson Kwesigabo (HQT/43/7/14). I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report of the Inspectorate of Government is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

The report on the Education Service Commission is sent to the Committee of Education while the report on the Local Government Finance Commission is sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER SECTION 8(3) OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005 (ACT NO. 17 OF 2005) FOR REVIEW OF THE REPRESENTATION UNDER ARTICLE 78(1)(b) AND (c) OF THE CONSTITUTION

4.29
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution under Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 for review of the representation under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution:

“WHEREAS during the Constitution making process, the people of Uganda emphasised that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament is participatory democracy;

AND WHEREAS the Legislature should be composed mainly of representatives directly elected by the people, due regard should be made for the representation of special interest groups that had been marginalised by society;

AND WHEREAS Article 78 (1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall consist of – 
‘ 
(a) 	members directly elected to represent constituencies;
(b) 	one woman representative for every district;
(c) 	such number of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine’;

AND WHEREAS Parliament in 1996, determined, through section 37 of the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisional Statute of 1996, which is now repealed, that the numbers for the special interest groups would be as follows:
    1. Ten representatives of the UPDF  
    2. Five representatives of the youth
    3. Three representatives of the workers
    4. Five representatives of persons with disabilities;

AND WHEREAS subsequently, Parliament through Section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 made provision for the district women representatives and for representation of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, youth, workers and persons with disabilities as follows:
    a. One woman representative for every district
    b. Ten –“ (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General is reading a motion, which has not been seconded. Is it procedurally correct to have a motion read before us when it is not seconded?

THE SPEAKER: He has not yet moved; he was still moving it. Complete the motion and then we shall see whether it has been supported. 

MR RUHINDI: “ Ten representatives”- (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: No, he is still moving the motion. He has not justified it.

MR RUHINDI: I beg to move the motion for a resolution under Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act for review of the representation under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders? It has been seconded by several members from all sides of the House.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I beg to continue from where I had stopped.

“… AND WHEREAS subsequently Parliament, through Section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001, made provisions for the district women representatives and for representation of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, youth, workers and Persons with Disabilities as follows: 
    a. One woman representative for every district
    b. Ten representatives of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces
    c. Five representatives for youth; at least one of whom shall be a woman
    d. Five representatives of the workers
    e. Five representatives of persons with disabilities; at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005, in Section 8 provides for the following representations in respect of Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution:
    1. One district or city woman representative in Parliament for every district or city
    2. Special interest groups: 
    a. Ten representatives for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces; at least two of whom shall be women
    b. Five representatives for workers; at least one of whom shall be a woman
    c. Five representatives for the youth; at least one of whom shall be a woman
    d. Five representatives for persons with disabilities; at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS in the past, women, youth, workers and persons with disabilities were denied participation in the governance of Uganda through customs and practices that marginalised their status in society and could not participate on an equal footings with others, and yet they have special interests that need articulation and representation;

AND WHEREAS their inclusion in the composition of Parliament is a guarantee of minimum participation by these groups in the democratic process of Government and their representation is one form of affirmative action, which the state is required to take under Article 32 of the Constitution in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom;

AND WHEREAS the representation of the Army has been part of the process of politicising the Army to appreciate how the problems of Uganda are solved by political leaders in order to evolve a culture of commitment to the rule of law and constitutionalism; a culture in which the Army is subordinate to the civilian authority in accordance with the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS Article 78 (2) of the Constitution provides that ‘Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it’;

AND WHEREAS the period of ten years after the commencement of the Constitution expired on the seventh day of October, 2005 and Parliament, in December 2005, reviewed the representation under Article 78 clause (1)(b) and (c) in accordance with Article 78(2) and resolved to retain the representation;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is required under Article 78(2) to review the representation every five years, after the first review;

AND WHEREAS the review is due since the article was last reviewed by Parliament in 2010;

AND WHEREAS it is imperative that the review is done by Parliament in light of the forthcoming general elections;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. That in accordance with Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and Article 78(2) of the Constitution, the representation in Parliament under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) is reviewed for the purpose of retaining the representation as follows: 
    1. One woman representative in Parliament for every district or city
    2.  Special interest groups:
    a. Ten representatives for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces; at least two of whom shall be women
    b. Five representatives for workers; at least one of whom shall be a woman
    c. Five representatives for the youth; at least one of whom shall be a woman
    d. Five representatives for persons with disabilities; at least one of whom shall be a woman.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You have moved; can he be seconded? Okay, he has been seconded. The main seconder is not here. He is seconded by the workers, the women, the Legal and Parliamentary, Chair of Finance, hon. Asamo, hon. Ayoo, hon. Lyomoki and hon. Nalule. Do we still require justification, honourable members, or should I put the question? 

4.41
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I can duly appreciate that in 2005, Uganda made a decision to carry out multi-party politics. In so doing, we are commanded by the Constitution that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be non-partisan. 

In an era where we are under a multi-party system of governance, this Parliament is under obligation to conform to the dictates of this Constitution. The continued presence of the UPDF and their continued sitting on the NRM side should, in every inch of the law, make them partisan and according to my understanding, this offends the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Now that we are going to review the composition of Parliament and the clear mandate of a national army, which has done a noble and patriotic job over the years - I think they have had a finishing point and they should go back and do what the Constitution commands them to do; to defend the sovereignty of this country and not involve themselves, in any way, in matters that are political in nature. 

This is because over time, members of UPDF, who have been Members of Parliament, have paid a high price for their continued stay in Parliament. I can understand how Gen. Sejusa has had to pay a price and the contradictions in there were apparent. I understand Gen. Tumukunde, Col Bogere, Gen. Aronda - All these have been gallant soldiers who have a mind and they are human beings.  

In order not to continue to complicate the work of the UPDF, I would like to appeal to this Parliament that we are empowered by the Constitution and we love the army. We do not hate the UPDF. However, time has come for us to have a fully multi-party democracy with an army that is non-partisan. 

We are struggling to get the likes of Kakooza Mutale out of politics and you know what they are doing. All across the country, the army commander has just made a pronouncement trying to deter army officers from participating in politics. 

I think, with all honesty, the time has come. It is a patriotic duty. We have just opened this Parliament by saying a prayer that we will do our solemn duty. We should end the representation of the UPDF in this Parliament and that is only to conform to the dictates of the Constitution. 

4.45
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you and welcome you back here. 

First and foremost, the presence of the UPDF in Parliament here has brought the army into politics and has a risk of taking politicians into the military. If we see members of the UPDF come here and sit amidst us putting on army uniforms, this has an impact in the minds of the people who are here during debate. This is especially when all of them come here with their escorts. It appears as if Parliament is under siege.

Madam Speaker, the presence of the army in Parliament has even made the Police and the Prisons to demand representation here. Every military unit in Uganda such as the Police, wildlife authority forces, prisons, private security guards and crime preventers want to be here in Parliament.

The best thing that Uganda can do along the long journey of democratisation is to separate the military from politics. This is the best thing we are left with. Elections with problems are taking place but the best thing we are left to do in order to call Uganda a completely democratic country is to separate the military from politics. 

We have other problems. You see sub-county chiefs wearing army uniforms. When Members of Parliament who are not even soldiers go to Kyankwanzi for some education, they want to put on military uniforms. We are not respecting the army as it should be if we mix with them in this way.

Therefore, in this current representation –(Interruption) 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you for giving me way to give information. Madam Speaker, it is quite absurd to find army officers escorting some Government officials. It should be the role of the Police, according to our Constitution, to escort Government officers. 

Therefore, if we are to be multi-partisan or a national Government of good integrity, which respects good governance and democracy, the army should be out of politics and it should not escort officers of Government. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for granting my colleague the opportunity to give me that information. The presence of the UPDF in Parliament has gone to the extent of militarising the civil Police. Look at where the civil Police is headed by an army general called Gen. Kale Kayihura. Tomorrow if he is removed, you may get another general. Before Kale Kayihura, there was Gen. Katumba Wamala. 

The Police therefore needs to be looked at because it is being militarised. Every aspect of civil life and politics is colonised to be militarised. If we remove the army from Parliament, we shall remove the army from the Police and we shall have a clearly separated system where the army will do its respected job of protecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda from external attacks then we have a good and well equipped Police doing internal and civil policing internally. I oppose the motion in this aspect. Thank you.

4.48
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the portion of the motion that seeks to retain the UPDF in Parliament, just like my colleagues have done. 

Madam Speaker, we are not strangers to our Constitution. Article 208 says that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be non-partisan. Sitting in this House now and aware of the provisions of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament and looking at my good brother, the representative of the UPDF, sitting on the side of the National Resistance Movement, this speaks volumes. 

I think it is time that we do ourselves a service and be honest with this country as well as with the political dispensation that we are in. This is a multi-party dispensation. My assumption is that when the provision to have the UPDF in Parliament was put in place, the constitutional makers were looking at the one party system; the Movement system of governance. They were not looking at the time in 2005 when we went multi-party. 

If we sit with the UPDF on the ruling side, they view me as a real political opponent. No wonder when elections come, the people who really beat us in the elections are people in the forces. They think that we are opponents to them and not even opponents to the members of the ruling party. You can now see my good brother, hon. Charles Angina, looking at me. I do not know what you will do in Serere come elections next time, because he sits there and he thinks that he is directly in contest with me politically.

It is okay to retain the other special interest groups but let the UPDF go and do the noble job of protecting the territorial integrity of this country. They should protect you and me irrespective of our partisan inclinations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at our Constitution, you know very well that the President normally has 10 nominees and the same President also participates in identifying those members that come to this Parliament to represent the UPDF. That means that the President alone had 20 Members of Parliament here over whom he has direct control and yet the President is the head of the Executive. By virtue of the fact that he has 20 Members of Parliament here over whom he has direct control –

THE SPEAKER: No, he does not have 20 Members of Parliament. There are only 10 UPDF representatives.

MR NZOGHU: He has 10 nominees, Madam Speaker, from which he can appoint ministers who come to this House. Although they do not vote, they also participate in debating. Therefore, Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for my good friend, hon. Nzoghu to tell this House that the President of Uganda has 10 nominees that he nominates to sit in this House when in fact that is not a factual position? I will await your ruling on that very significant information.

THE SPEAKER: I think that they are 13. Are they not 13? Hon. Nzoghu is talking about the 10 nominated Members of Parliament in addition to the 10. That is what he is talking about.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I respect your ruling on this matter but maybe some more information may be helpful. It is not the President who nominates the 10 army representatives. They represent the UPDF and there is a process for doing that.

The Army Council is not the President. It is the Army Council, which makes nominations and which elects among some members identified to come to Parliament. It is therefore not true that it is the President who nominates people to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, do not divert the debate by talking about the ministers as they are not part of this motion. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. My point of emphasis is to the effect that there should be separation of powers and there cannot be meaningful separation of powers where you find that the Commander-in-Chief of the army participates fully in endorsing seats on the other side and yet he is a President of the country not the President of NRM.

Madam Speaker, the issue that we must address ourselves to is the UPDF. In the circumstance that they sit on the other side and they do not sit on this side but they are paid by both this side and the other side, why should they identify on the other side and yet all of us pay taxes to this country from which they benefit?

I would therefore propose that the UPDF leave Parliament. They should go and do the work of protecting Ugandans and their property.

5.00
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga County South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the previous speaker for articulating this issue of international and national concern. As we speak the Army Commander recently wrote to Gen. Sejusa warning him against talking politics. What does that indicate? If a person like Sejusa, who is no longer a Member of Parliament can be warned not to talk politics, what about those that sit in Parliament, which is a multi-party dispensation?

We are internationally ashamed to be heard to be housing soldiers in a Parliament that is based on democratic values. This is a very important point, which honourable members should be invited to address squarely.

Pursuant to Article 2 of the Constitution of Uganda, which says the Constitution of Uganda is supreme and binds all authorities, organs of state and persons; if it is said under Article 208 of the Constitution that the army should not participate in politics, by letting it be housed in this Parliament we are openly violating the Constitution. We therefore have an obligation to protect the Constitution even if it means invoking the contents of Article 3 of the Constitution.

As if that is not enough, I am very worried because the way we are moving is bound to create many more problems for us. Why don’t we resolve that the 10 members of the armed forces leave Parliament so that we devise a mechanism where they can be briefed about what we are doing?

The courts have also decided that they are not supposed to be in Parliament. Madam Speaker, we therefore have the duty under the Constitution of Uganda that the rest of the groups, as the Attorney-General has articulated - We have accepted to accommodate them as they are various peoples who have a role to play.

However, there is no explanation that can be given, even by the Attorney-General, to the effect that the 10 members of the armed forces can stay here legally and constitutionally. Why don’t you take action now? Thank you very much.

5.01
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Parliament, we have special interest groups and these groups have been elected by their electoral colleges. For example, we have the disability group, the youth and we now have the armed forces, among others.

We have representatives of the Uganda Defence Forces elected by the UPDF Council. That is also a special interest group and it is under affirmative action. All the special interest groups are here under affirmative action and they have got their electoral colleges. Therefore, it is in order for the army to be represented in this Parliament. Thank you very much.

5.05
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on two points: The first one is about the UPDF. There are no doubts that the reasons that led to UPDF to be represented in Parliament were very noble. Actually up until now, this is the first time in the history of Uganda to have Parliament existing continuously for over 25 years. There are specific reasons why we had UPDF come to Parliament; therefore, anyone who tries to insist that they be removed is not looking at the history of Uganda and where we have reached.

It is clear that representation of UPDF is important. They will not think of entering politics through other methods since they are now represented in Parliament –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Lyomoki is a worker’s representative in this House and the UPDF are also a part and section of the workers –(Laughter)– if hon. Lyomoki feels that the UPDF should be here, does he think that we should drop his interest group of workers so that the UPDF can represent themselves? Is he therefore in order to contradict with a section of the people he represents, imagining and assuming that he is not doing his work?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all members of this House are free to speak on any subject; be it a motion on the floor, whether he is worker’s representative - he is free to speak what he thinks on the motion and that is what he is doing.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. The second point that I raised is on the number of representation for the youth, persons with disabilities and for the workers. Out of the five interest groups; when representation in Parliament started, we had 33 districts and 33 representatives of women. Now we have 112 and that means we have 112. The number has grown by over three times. 

These interest groups - the youth, persons with disabilities and workers have remained constant. There is a view from the public that, this number be moved to 10 for each of these representatives. I, therefore, move an amendment that, for 2 (b, c and d) we substitute 10 for 5 so that we have five representatives of workers, five representatives of youth and five representatives of persons with disabilities at least ten of whom should be women so that it is in tandem with the representation of the women who have increased by three times and at least this should increase by two.

Again the representations of the general constituencies have also increased because we have had some few constituencies that have been formed in the last 20 years. That is my amendment - to have 10 for workers, youth and persons with disabilities respectively. I thank you.

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Peter Lokeris):  Madam Speaker and honourable members of the august House, I know some people loose memory. These people are here because of historical facts. Long time ago, we were seeing soldiers as if they were enemies because they were isolated and could not mix with other people. Whenever you saw them, you thought there was trouble. 

However, at the time of change of administration; these people came, liberated the country and found it imperative to mix up with the other people in every grouping, including Parliament.

Do you know what has happened now? The stay of these people here is neutralizing suspicion among soldiers that we Members of Parliament are thinking of something else. They are also contributing and defending the members of this House; we are on course together to defend this country - (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering - the minister said that we Members of Parliament are thinking of something else. What is that something else? We are debating out of clear headed minds and we are talking with points of reference. You should clarify what you have said because what you are saying is not correct –(Interjections)– so are you in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, I did not get what you said. What is the point of the order?
 
MR TAYEBWA: Is the Minister in order, to say that we Members of Parliament are talking about something else when we were saying that soldiers should not be in Parliament - is he in order? What is that something else he is talking about? 

THE SPEAKER: He is justifying his support for the motion. That is what he is doing.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was put on order, which was not clear anyway.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for accepting my point of clarification. The Minister has said that those people are here because of historical facts. Is he aware that pursuant to the constitutional preamble which foresaw the significance of their presence as an entity warned us against   doing anything in this country which can take us back? If you are –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order!

MR LOKII: I rise on a point of order. The Constitution that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is referring to is the same Constitution that prescribes the representative of the UPDF in Parliament. Is he therefore, in order to misinterpret and misinform the country about the specification of what the Constitution says in terms of representatives of the UPDF in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much. You do not read properly. I would like to state the importance of this group of officers here.

They are elected as prescribed by the Constitution. They come here to deliberate with us; they also go and brief their constituency that things are like this and therefore there is no problem. I am an old man and I know what was happening. One time in history, those people misunderstood the Members of Parliament here and came and blockaded Parliament. They were saying you people are deliberating on something else. That is what I said the other time.

Now with their presence here, they defend Parliament, they explain the deliberations of Parliament to their constituency, which helps in the demystification of the army.

As I told you, long time ago, when you saw a member of the armed forces, you would shiver. By being here and in other institutions - we have now mixed together and we feel that they are brothers and sisters amongst us. What is wrong with that? Is that what you hate that you should ask them out? Where is out? This is a Parliament of the people of Uganda and those who are prescribed by the law to be here should be here. Thank you.

5.13
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that we retain the members of the interest groups including the UPDF. Specifically on the UPDF; I think we are within the law because the Constitution, under Article 78(2) provides that after the expiry of every five years, Parliament will have to sit and review –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, can I have protection from you. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. 

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, the reasons why UPDF was allowed to be in Parliament by the framers of the Constitution – I believe that all of us are aware of our history; it was the army that was overthrowing governments and causing havoc in this country from time to time, not the police or prisons.

For that matter, they are part of the decision making that others will promote freedom and development in this country or, they are part of the group that will distort and cause problems. We are on the right track having the UPDF in this Parliament, they see whatever we are doing –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due humility, the content of the Constitution namely Article 208(2) openly states that the army shall not be partisan. By being in Parliament, which is the centre of politics, they are participating in politics. Is the hon. Ayoo in order to assume that their presence here does not involve them in politics?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 78 requires them to be here. Unless you change the Constitution, it is a command of the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise your statement that the Constitution mandates UPDF to be represented in Parliament. Some time in 2008, you made a ruling here that it is up to the representatives of the Army to choose where to sit.

There is nowhere in the Constitution, quote for me a provision in the Constitution, which binds the Army representatives in Parliament to vote in a particular way.

By being here, there is no requirement in the Constitution that stipulates how the Army representatives should vote –(Interjections)– is that how you interpret a Constitution? Therefore, there is no provision in the Constitution, which stipulates the partisanship of the Army. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. It is now clear that it is the same Constitution that provides for the UPDF to be in this Parliament, we respect all the articles.

Madam Speaker, for the Army representatives in Parliament, the Chairperson of the Army Council proposes 30 members, it is the Army Council to elect 10 out of the 30 members proposed.

Even if tomorrow the President of Uganda comes from any other party, the UPDF will go by the President or the Government in power. It is for that reason that they have to be in Parliament and get domesticated and understanding, so that in future - maybe 10 to 40 years in future, we shall say please get back to other things.

As for now, this country has not yet reached where we want to go in terms of democracy. We should have UPDF in Parliament. I urge members to support this motion so that UPDF is retained like any other interest group. Thank you.

5.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion on retention of special interest groups and I would like to say something about the presence of the Army in Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the ruling Government is NRM and the Chairman of the NRM Government is the President of Uganda; he is the Commander in Chief. If the person that the Army receives command from as per now –(Interjections)– the Army is in this Parliament for strategic issues, if you look at the history of Uganda, all government overthrows have been from the Army.

With due respect to having the Police and the Prisons, it is the Army that has been doing that, maybe because they were not in Parliament. Whereas they are in Parliament now, they participate in the process of legislation and I have never seen anyone gagging the Army to make a decision.

Madam Speaker, the other day Gen. Tumwine voted against a Government position but I still see him in the House, nobody has sent him out; he was the lone voice. Everybody was wondering what would happen to him, but he is still here.

Madam Speaker, when the Army is here, we are freer to talk to them; I sit on the same committee with Gen. Angina, but I have never heard him interfering with foreign affairs. When we are moving out, he even says that I do not know what is happening in the committee; can I be updated.

He is always in time for meetings. He has never gone against the chairman of the committee because of his green uniform. Madam Speaker, the Army tries as much as possible to be non-partisan.

Recently, Gen. Oketa represented us in the UN and he read a document here. He performed very well as far as Ebola was concerned. I support the motion for interest groups to remain as they are. Thank you, very much –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Point of procedure -

THE SPEAKER: Read Rule 69 -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Interruption of debate: subsection (d) upon a point of procedure, I can interrupt debate.

THE SPEAKER: You should have given me notice.
 
5.19
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and specifically I would not like to over emphasise the history of this country, that made the makers of the Constitution during the Constituent Assembly include the Army in Parliament.

Some of us who were older went through the brutality of the Army at that time. The reason they were brought into Parliament was to make them participate in the making of the laws so that they do not display ignorance by overthrowing Government, and that is why they are here.

The Opposition keep on reading Section 208; maybe they have not read article 78 - I do not know these things but I will learn. Section 1 (c) says, composition of Parliament shall consist of - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague holding the Floor said she does not know what she is talking about. She does not know what she was reading in the Constitution. Is it therefore in order for us to continue listening to someone who does not know what she is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: She was reading the Constitution, which she is familiar with.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Article 78 talks about composition of Parliament and Article 78(1) says, “Parliament shall consist of… such numbers of representatives of the Army, youth and workers…” I am wondering why those who are opposing the motion –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, people have continued to quote Article 78(1)(c) without reading clause 2. In clause 2, the analogy that the Army is the command of the Constitution is not true. Sub-section 2 says “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause (1) (b) and (c) of this article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it”. 

Therefore, for people to continue quoting sub-section C(1)(2) as if it is a permanent feature that the Constitution demands that the Army should be here – no, every five years, we can decide whether they stay or go. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to say that the Army is here forever and ever by command of the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, until the Constitution is reviewed to delete that particular clause, it will continue to be a command of the Constitution. You arrange to amend the Constitution to delete it then it will cease to be a command, but as long as it is there, it is a command. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think they have understood what I am after. The only comforting move that the Speaker can do to satisfy the Opposition is to have the Army members sit on the island there and then the other side will be comforted. Otherwise, the Army is here for reasons of our historical background. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.24
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues who have supported the motion and I do rise to support the motion. Laws should reflect the social, cultural, economic, historical and political norms, values and aspirations of our people. The presence of this special interest group is all about inclusion and they have added value to the laws and policies of this nation to ensure that those laws and policies are relevant to the various sections of our community.

For example, I am sure we all agree that the women in this House have added value to ensure that the women of this nation get better health care for maternal and child health services. The women of this nation are now considered in the budget; the budget agenda is more responsive so that the actual needs of –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to give you some information, especially on the women representation as proposed in the motion. Madam Speaker, there is a challenge in the Constitution under Article 33 - the rights of women. It is very clear that two out of 10 - the one out of five is simply affirmative action in relation to Article 32. However, Article 33 gives us a command on what we should do and it says women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men. However, Article 33(4) goes a step further to say women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in politics. 

When you look at fairness of the marginalised groups, yes I would understand honourable colleagues that sometime back we were lagging far behind and we needed a major shift. However, we have moved away from that and to talk of a shift of women representation - even if it is the workers or army or youth - I find that quite unfair. Why do we not talk of equal treatment; this is in your interest as women. I am surprised –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for trying to imply that women are given equal treatment with men, but I would like to know whether he is in order to bring in women, an issue that is not under debate. Is he in order to drag women into the debate well aware that the equal treatment he is talking about is not true - some women are representing five, six and three constituencies where men are representing only one? Is he therefore in order to equate us the women who are representing large constituencies to UPDF who do not even go for primaries and are not elected by the people they represent?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately Article 78 talks about so many groups all together, so you cannot avoid talking about one or the other, but what he was trying to do was to support hon. Kamateeka who was discussing the issue of women.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Magyezi for giving us that information. Indeed the numbers of women in this Parliament as granted by the Constitution are too low so we will be looking towards 50 percent. I would like to say that the women have added value to service delivery in their various constituencies through their mothering, caring and nurturing roles.

As for the UPDF, the issue of participation that once they participate in the making of these laws then they own the laws and they make sure that the laws are implemented, this is why our Army has become one of the best in the region because it is a disciplined army; it is a truly peoples’ army and I do not know why they would want it to be otherwise –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have heard my honourable colleague repeatedly say the UPDF has contributed to the laws in this House and therefore in this country and they contribute meaningfully. Does she mean to say that without the UPDF being here, the contributions of this House would be inadequate? Is she in order to imply that UPDF must contribute specifically and without UPDF the contributions of this House will not be as meaningful for purposes of running this country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the UPDF have been members of the committees of this House since the Sixth Parliament, therefore their contribution is part of the work of the House. Any law that we make when they are in that committee is done with their contribution. So you cannot pretend that they are not there. Please conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all here as representatives to represent our people and we all enrich the laws. I would like to agree with those people who are saying that maybe the UPDF should not side on the NRM side and instead sit in the no-man’s land so that they are free to debate and give information without sitting on the government side.

But I do strongly support that the special interest groups including the UPDF - for now, they should remain in this Parliament. I thank you.

BRIG. CHARLES ANGINA (UPDF Representative): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and also to clarify a few areas that would help us to appreciate the role of the UPDF in Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, we have hosted a number of military officers from the region and beyond who have come to understand how our system is effectively working with members of the armed forces in Parliament.  (Applause)

They have all echoed that this is the best way to have better governance of a nation – (Interjections) - when you have the people who ensure the sovereignty of the nation, being part of the law making process, it is very clear that when you see the guilty being afraid, they know why they are afraid. If you find a leader hiding from the Police in yam gardens, then what about if it was the military? They would have even run away from the country – but because of living and working together with the military, it has made it easy for them to be comfortable to stay with the military – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Information from Col. Mwesigye.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I thank you comrade General. Mr Speaker and the House, I would like to add to my colleague and inform the House that UPDF is actually a vanguard of this revolution. UPDF is a foundation of stability and peace in this country and we should respect that. I thank you very much.

BRIG. ANGINA: I thank you very much, Col. Mwesigye, for that information. I would wish to add that it is very apparent that when we are here, most of the honourable members, including those ones and especially my brother, hon. Fungaroo – he has always said that this is an opportunity for me to be able to air my issues to you because it may be difficult to come to your bases or barracks. (Applause)

I have been on a very good ride with hon. Fungaroo from Kampala to Arua and all that he was speaking was praising the UPDF for being very professional. Information - 

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Odonga Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just wanted to give some information that I recently found some UPDF soldiers who had returned from Somalia who are residents of Pader. They were looking to their MP to assist with the issues of their payment. It took the intervention of Gen. Julius Oketta whom I met in Parliament here to have those soldiers appropriately remunerated. I just wanted to give that information. (Applause)

BRIG. ANGINA: I thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto, for confirming what I am saying. For sure, the Army is no longer just an army but it is the military because we are now a multi-service army - what they are trying to say indirectly is that we need to increase the number because we are now not just an army. (Applause)

So as we continue to review this position, we should only be looking at the aspect of increasing the number. I submit, Madam Speaker.

5.44
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): I thank you. Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion and to say that we still need the Army represented in Parliament.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the drafters of this Constitution did not make a mistake and they had reasons for including the Army as one of the interest groups that need representation. I believe that the reasons were given.

As Members of Parliament, we have seen what the Army is today compared to the Army that we used to know before. The Army of today, as explained by the various honourable colleagues is an army that we all admire. It is disciplined and it is no longer the uniform that we used to fear. I no longer fear anybody at the rank of General because I know that they are disciplined – [MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “Information.”] I am well informed, my brother.

The Army today is a very productive army. In my constituency, the Army has been involved in building schools and helping during the times of disaster when we had floods and famine with emergency rescue – this is the army that we are talking about.

We are proud of this Army. There was Ebola recently in West Africa and our Army was at the forefront to ensure that the Ebola epidemic in those countries was handled. This is the army that we want to continuously participate in the politics of this country by being in Parliament.

Madam Speaker, when they are here in Parliament, I believe that they do not just come to sit here. When they come here, they go back to sensitise their colleagues and I believe that it is the reason that we have peace. We have an Army that understands what goes on in this country compared to what we used to have. 

I would therefore like my colleagues to appreciate that we need to support this motion to ensure that the Army is retained in Parliament for the reasons that I have mentioned. I beg to move and I thank you.

5.47
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): I also rise to support the motion to have interest groups retained in Parliament. In particular the contentious issue of having the defence forces in the House is a healthy idea. 

When you look at Article 209 of the Constitution that stipulates the functions of the defence forces, then I believe the best avenue for them to meet their functions is being in this august House. 

When you look at the preservation and defence of national security, which allows for our sovereignty and territorial integrity, it cannot be done elsewhere when we are not together here in Parliament because it is part of the work that we do. It provides an avenue where we can discuss issues and guide on how they can be resolved amicably without much effort.

On issues of cooperation with civilian authority, we are here to represent the civilians. Now what harm does it do to link up with the army here and make work easier? I believe that if we are talking about representation – in fact, I would agree with the General that we should be talking about adding on their numbers other than saying that they should not be here.

Their presence is good for fostering understanding and harmony with the civilians. It is us who represent the civilians here regardless of the side of the House that one sits – the issue is that we have to relate. 

The biggest issue is demystifying the uniforms; initially, when you would look at their uniforms, you would run away thinking the soldiers were animals or a myth. But the fact that we are close and you can even touch and feel that this is just uniform - we hug them. This is the best opportunity that we have as Ugandans to further embrace this representation and move forward together as a country.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Constitution requires that every five years we review representation of special interest groups in this House and this is what we are doing.

I think that hon. members should know that anybody with a question on the constitutionality of the presence of the army has a place to take that question not here. But I think you have already heard that the Army is here under the command of the Constitution – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of order, under Article 2 of the Constitution of Uganda. It is stated that the Constitution of Uganda is supreme and binds all organs of state, authorities and persons. Is the honourable member in order to make the statement he has made with reference to Article 202 of the Constitution which openly states that the army shall not be partisan?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members can you explain to us how they have been partisan?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, you had already made guidance on that so hon. Ken Lukyamuzi should have listened.

What we are debating now is to review the relevance of the different interest groups; the Army, the women, the PWDs, workers and youths. It is my view that the reasons, which were advanced by the Constituent Assembly are still valid today for the various interest groups that are represented in this House. 

I think we should go slowly on the issue of the numbers because we need a scientific analysis as to why we should vary the numbers, which are provided in the Constitution. I suggest that we maintain the numbers, which are prescribed by the Constitution and also maintain all the groups that appear in the Constitution. 

There were reasons as to why the Army was included as one of the special groups to sit in this House and I do not think the presence of the Army in this House has created any harm. There were reasons that after Independence the Army was a problem to the stability of this country and because there was need to link the politics and the army, that suggestion was brought that the army should sit in this House so that there is a functional relationship between the politicians and the armed forces.

I think the peace we have enjoyed over the last three decades is partly due to their presence; the armed forces have been demystified to the extent that the population can easily mingle with the army.

Given the fragility of our politics, I would think that it is still important and relevant that the army stays until that point when we think they should be out of Parliament. But for now, I suggest that the army remains in Parliament as the Constitution provides.

5.54
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda is a member of the international community. In the world we find dictatorships and democracies; we have dictators who are refined generals.

On Sunday, a country called Myanmar went to elections and I hope San Suu Kyi wins that election. Their Constitution states that 25 percent should be from the army. You can see the dictatorship in Myanmar and the dictatorship in North Korea; we have to choose. We should choose democracy as members of the UN, as members of the Commonwealth, as members of the AU and as members of the EAC. Why do we want to behave differently; why do we want the army in Parliament when the Constitution comes out very clearly that the army will keep the borders of Uganda safe.

Now, if you want to have the army in the House, let them remove the uniform like the army officer I see behind there and go to the people and ask for mandate from the people to come and represent their own constituencies. Why should you select the army and bring them in the House. The Constitution is clear that they must keep peace.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member are you aware that Article 78 is it part of our Constitution? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: That is part of the Constitution but the main work of the army - we now have the army everywhere, they are in the Police, they are in NAADs and they are in Government. Do we want to militarise this country? Unless you want to make Uganda a military state – (Interruption) 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is constitutional and if you look at Article 209(c) and see the functions of the defence forces; to foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians.

If you look at 209(d), they are to engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda; NAADS is productive. When we are talking about legislative issues here, these are productive and they are for the development of this country. Is the Member in order to mislead this House that the UPDF is engaging itself in every department in this country yet it is constitutionally here? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course our Constitution has a history and if there are members who want to change it, I think we should arrange to have a constitutional review commission; we present our views there, debate the matters as a country and make the changes. But now we are stuck where we are. Please conclude.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, we have graduates in the army, we have those with Senior Six, which is a qualification to come to the House. Let them remove the uniforms, go to the people, get the mandate and be elected to come to the House. But to come here in uniform, this has caused us in the EAC – (Interruption)

MR LOKII: In 1966, the Kabaka crisis was caused due to the lack of representation of the army in Parliament. I want to say that 29 years of the UPDF in Parliament has created stability and progress; it has created confidence among the people. Is the hon. member in order to refer to democratic representation as a dictatorship? When the Opposition was challenging the Speaker here to chair properly, I did not see the UPDF take sides? Is he in order to lie that the UPDF has a different role other than to represent the interests of the army?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us focus on the motion and let us not get involved in disparaging colleagues who are here by the Constitution because they were brought here under Article 78, which we have not yet amended. If you do not want it, delete it but as long as it is there, they have to be here and they are part of us. 

I have been as a Speaker and I have not seen any of the army men prevent any of you from speaking. Therefore if you want to change, change it at the right time in the Constitution review commission. Since members are tired after the recess, I put the question that this House do approve the motion.

(Question put, and agree to.)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I protest. I indicated to you that I want to make a contribution and you are ruling when there is no quorum in this House.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, when we adjourned last time, we informed the House that we were going to make - (Interruption)

MR ISAIAH SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure as I seek your guidance. Currently, we are discussing very pertinent and important issues in the Bill, which affect all Ugandans and it is as if the House is not well composed. I do not know whether we can continue with the debate and make wonderful resolutions and pass the motion when there is no quorum in the House.

THE SPEAKER: I gave notice for all the Members to be here today. Proceed.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have made consultations and tried to harmonise and we are ready to progress with the debate on the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Last time, we requested you to go and make consultations and update us. Where do you stand? That is what we want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is true we have made consultations and we have made some concessions on a number of proposals we had and one of them is a requirement that we have a certificate of gender responsiveness deleted from the law. On that we have conceded that it should be maintained.

There was the issue of removing the powers of the ministers to do reallocations and place them in the hands of the Secretary to Treasury. We have also conceded to the requirement of the House.

The other concern of the Members was about the issue of the constitutional requirement that every loan must have prior approval of Parliament. We have consulted with a number of stakeholders and key in the stakeholders is the Attorney General who can substantially report on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: No, the report was given and the committee gave our position. They are now responding to our report.

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, maybe the minister of finance would have first of all categorically stated that they have recast clause 8 of the Bill to reflect the import of Article 159 of the Constitution, Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act and Section 82 of The Bank of Uganda Act.

Madam Speaker, let us start from this point of view. Article 159 –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is it okay to proceed when they have circulated the recast version? I am trying to imagine what the Attorney-General is saying that they have recast it to accommodate this. You know in legislation, every word, comma and sentence is very critical. Is it procedurally okay if that version of the remodelled clauses can be circulated to us then we follow critically?

THE SPEAKER: The minister of finance circulates his present position; did you circulate the recast position? Your response to the House, did you circulate it?

5.58
MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it was our understanding that when we come to the committee stage, we would be able to propose these amendments. However, I have a copy of the proposed amendments, which we can upload on the system, in five minutes. It was circulated to the House - (Interjections)– however, I think what was important was for us to respond to the concerns of members and they were only three concerns, which I thought might not need - (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, the view and request of the House is to have copies of what both the Minister and the Attorney General are explaining to the House. The minister in charge is insisting on holding the Floor even when Members have requested for copies. Is he therefore in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we defer the debate to tomorrow and you handover because Members will need to look at those proposals so that we can - 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the report of the committee was circulated to the House. The minority report was also circulated; we read and debated it. The only thing that we were supposed to do is the concerns raised by Members and they were only three, which we have.

However, Madam Speaker, I beg that in five minutes, we can upload this amendment –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is not true that the minister was to respond on the concerns raised by Members. The issues I raised in the minority report were constitutional, legal and some of them were direct flaws. The Deputy Speaker instructed that the Budget Committee, first of all, goes back and translates their concern to reduction in figures, which was not done.

THE SPEAKER: Which figures?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Look at the Hansard; we had to reconcile the figures because there were issues that were raised which required the deductions from the final figures raised.

THE SPEAKER: There were no figures. Public Finance Management Bill had no figures. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am talking about the constitutional issues as raised in the minority report. 

THE SPEAKER: We are talking about the Public Finance Management Bill.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am armed here with the Hansard not of the supplementary whatever, but of the Public Finance Management Bill report. I have the Hansard here with me.

THE SPEAKER: Can I have a look at the Hansard.

6.04
THE CHAIRPERSON; COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, I think you were the one in Chair. We held a debate and – (Interjections) - and it seemed like the -

THE SPEAKER: He is the chairperson of the Committee; he is part of the process.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The committee had proposed away from what the minister had proposed. You told the minister to go and harmonise with the positions of the committee.

I thought what the minister was doing was to respond, saying what the committee suggested is right and we have also dropped that amendment. What remains are those two or three clauses that he was explaining about the supplementary and the advances; that is all. Otherwise, the committee had proposed to delete those provisions that seemed controversial in the eyes of the members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate it was the Deputy Attorney-General who was available and I am sure he never briefed the Attorney-General well. On page 34 of the Hansard, you said: “Honourable members, I think we need to give ourselves time to put this matter to rest with proper arguments so that when we take a decision we are all moving together. We either burry the Bill or we allow it.” You went ahead and said: “We need the brains in the Attorney-General’s chambers to be aligned”. It was the issue of the Attorney-General to align the brains – maybe the full Attorney-General with the deputy – so that they come here with good information.

When the Minister of Finance started speaking, he was saying, “We have done this, we have done that.” That is when hon. Alice Alaso rose and said we have not been privy to what you are saying. We need to see what you are talking about, every comma and full stop.

Basically, when we left that day, we had all agreed – if you look through the arguments we had - this Bill was either supposed to be withdrawn or rejected. If you read through the whole Hansard, it was clear that Members of Parliament had agreed not to allow their power to be given to the Minister of Finance to go and deal with the matters of finance which is a function of Parliament – via virement or going to Bank of Uganda and opening the safe without our authority. That was an agreed position.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, from what the minister has said – I know why he came to talk to me - he told me he was talking about cash flows - I did not understand him. Cash flow is after projection from what you expect. When I was explaining to him how cash flow should operate, he told me, “No, you do not understand”, and went away. Therefore, I do not understand him up to now. (Laughter)

That is the reason we as Parliament, should take a decision on this Bill - that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development withdraws the Bill or we go to the committee and reject or amend it from there. In any case, what you are talking about, you had agreed with us from clause 1 up to 7. If you are still interested in clause 8, we can deal with it. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, either the minister gives us the brain of the Attorney-General very clearly or you put a question on the law, which we all agreed was in bad faith because we had just passed the law eight months ago. Before it can be applied for one year, they are coming to amend it. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, is the former Leader of the Opposition in order to say that we agreed not to proceed with the Bill when actually the Hansard is very clear that you requested the Attorney-General to make clarification on issues of the law? 

I think this habit must stop. Every time I have a private discussion with the Leader of the Opposition, he comes on the Floor of the House to disclose what we have discussed as if he is not a leader. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course the substantive Attorney-General was not here, but we had just wanted clarification on the legal position of how we are going to move. That is what we really wanted to see so that we can move forward. I do not know whether you are ready and if not we can give you time. 

6.09
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, the issues which were presented to me for resolution by the House can adequately, in my opinion, be addressed by looking at the following provisions: 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 159; when we look at Article 159 of the Constitution, I think we did not actually read it fully. Article 159 of the Constitution provides for power of Government to borrow or lend. 

We are all knowledgeable about the provisions of Article 159, but I do not know whether we are aware of clause 8 of that Article. Clause 8 of that Article says: “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this Article subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.”   

When you make reference to Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, Section 36, clause 2 (b) exempts the application of Article 159 from seeking prior approval when you are dealing with advances from Bank of Uganda or any other source on matters to do with management of monetary policy.

However, when you go to Section 82 of the same Act, that exception is lost. Section 82 (1) (b) which is an amendment to the Bank of Uganda Act says, “The Bank of Uganda Act is amended in (1) (b) Section 33 of the Bank of Uganda Act by inserting immediately after Sub-Section (iii) the following:

(iv)The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any person on behalf of Government without the prior approval of Parliament. 

Section 36 makes exception. Let us look at it carefully. Section 36 of the same Act in clause 5 says, “With the exception of a loan raised for the purpose of Sub-Section 2(b) or a loan raised through issuance of securities.” The exception here is in respect of Sub-Section (2) (b), which relates to the management of a monetary policy. This means for the purposes of sub-section 1, the minister may raise a loan;
(a) 	To finance a budget deficit
(b) 	For the management of a monetary policy
(c) 	To obtain foreign currency
(d) 	For lending to an approved institution 
(e) 	For defraying an expenditure which may lawfully be defrayed. 

When it comes to 5 it says: “With the exception of a loan raised for the purpose of Sub-Section (2)(b).” This relates to the management of a monetary policy or a loan raised through issuance of securities. The terms and conditions of a loan raised by the minister shall be laid before Parliament and the loan shall not be enforceable except where it is approved by Parliament by resolution. 

That means that when you go to 82, that exception where you do not need prior approval of Parliament in respect of raising money for management of a monetary policy is also now lost under Section 82. 
What the Ministry of Finance is trying to do is to harmonise these sections; Section 36 and Section 82 of the Public Finance Management Act with Article 159 (8) of the Constitution –(Interjections)

What the Ministry of Finance has done is to recast Section 82 (1) (b) which reads, “The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any person on behalf of Government without the prior approval of Parliament.” They have recast it this way. 

In other words, by deleting or replacing the current aid of the Bill with the following; “The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any other person on behalf of Government except as required under Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act”. This goes back to our enabling provision, which is Section 36. 

Another inclusion that they have made in Section 36 is to amend Section 36 in 2(b) which says, “for the management of a monetary policy” and to include at the end of that particular expression, the expression “and treasury operations”. I am sorry I am not a financial engineer and the wizards in that area can actually help, but treasury operations I am made to understand will take care of the day-to-day operations of the Government. 

I have been told and we all know that we operate a cash budget; you get money and spend it. You may appropriate money but through your appropriation, you may not realise that money through collections other than when you need to spend. What they are saying is that you have appropriated the money and it is in the budget but we have not realised it. All they are saying is that help us and give us the power to see where we can get that money, and the clear source to them is the Bank of Uganda; go to the Bank of Uganda and get an advance. They have even tied it down through another amendment where they are saying that it should not exceed 18 per cent of the domestic revenue and it should be repaid within that particular financial year in which you are borrowing it. This is a departure from what it had been because it has been open ended but now it is going to be tied up; you get that advance not exceeding 18 per cent of the domestic revenue and it is repaid in that particular financial year.

That is the clarification I can make in short on this particular subject, from a legal point of view. It is tying up things, making them much neater, resonating with Article 159(8) of our Constitution. Thank you.

6.20
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, when we adjourned the House, we had requested the Attorney-General to give us a written legal position - and that is in the Hansard - so that we do not meander. We can make reference and proper quotation. The Attorney-General is just thinking aloud and making quotations which are inconsistent.

We had a disagreement that that advance is not a loan. However, if you look at section 160 of the Constitution, it defines any money you borrow by whatever name that is supposed to be paid back with interest as a loan. That is point number one. 

Secondly, the reason we amended the Bank of Uganda Act - The Attorney-General is aware and, Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Bank of Uganda is impaired. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was the chairperson of PAC, hon. Alice Alaso and all of us. If you read the Auditor-General’s reports, for the last 15 years the Bank of Uganda has been in negative and impaired to that level and that is why we passed a resolution here to re-capitalise the Bank. 

One of the arguments is that Government has been issuing a letter of comfort, where the Minister gives directives to the Bank of Uganda to give an advance and the bank asks commercial banks to lend money to private people on condition that Government will pay. We took a decision in this House here. There are so many letters of comfort and that is why we say that the bank shall not guarantee any payment to any person on behalf of Government or make advances to Government or any person on behalf of Government without the approval of Parliament. 

We included this and it does not contradict the section the Attorney-General is talking about - section 82 - for purposes of monetary policy. Monetary policy is to regulate internal operations of the bank but this section is saying that the bank shall not guarantee any payment to any person on behalf of Government or make advance to Government. We did not block the Bank of Uganda from issuing treasury bills for purposes of monetary policy. We were very clear.

The bank has been issuing treasury bills, bonds and securities - 10 years, three years, one year, three months, among others - for purposes of monetary policy and the bank has been trading. Therefore, honourable Attorney-General, be clear; this does not contradict Article 159(8). If we want to do a proper amendment, let us do it properly. Otherwise, what we are doing is just taking us back. 

I have talked to the bank and the bank has always advertised treasury bills; I think they did so yesterday and even today. The only problem on which the Government needs to come out honestly and we come in and help is that some of these bonds and treasury bills have not matured or customers have not been coming because of the problem that Government is aware of. I have shared that with Government and there is a way we can sort this out. Therefore, section 82 does not contradict section 36(2) (b) - for the management of a monetary policy. Therefore, Attorney-General, I respect you – (Interjection) – Subsection (5) is here, I can read it for you: “except a loan raised for purpose of subsection (2) (b) or a loan raised through issuance of security.”

Section (2)(b) was for purposes of monetary policy; that one is protected because the Bank is issuing treasury bills for purposes of mopping out currency to control liquidity in the market –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. The exception you read under Article 159(8) really touches on this. You can see that subsection (5) is one of the exceptions as it was in the Constitution under Article 159(8).

MR EKANYA: That is one very serious legal issue. Secondly, I have a copy of the budget speech here and the item under treasury operations is basically meant for interest payments, loans and debts. They are now bringing a new terminology, “operations”.

If you check through the budget speech, treasury operations are interest and loan payments. Somebody can look at it; Attorney-General, you can look at it. The argument as to why our budget moved away from Shs 15 trillion to Shs 24 million is because the Public Finance Management Act required that all the money the Government has been borrowing without declaring through treasury bills and under treasury operations should be declared because it had reached maturity. Most of the bonds had matured and there was no way Government was going to borrow to re-pay. Government was required by the IMF, the World Bank and the law we had passed here to declare all the total debt we had. 

I really want to help Government; we need liquidity. I have proposed to Government to bring a resolution here, whether you want Shs 3 trillion, Shs 4 trillion. As I speak, Madam Speaker, the teachers only got the release of the first quota and yet they have examinations for the primary school children for the end of the year. The pensioners have not got money for five months. So, we understand the challenge Government is facing. Tell us you want to borrow Shs 2 trillion but you do not exceed the total budget we have passed and we give you a resolution so that you move on and operate but leave this law.

Even if you bring a resolution now, we can extend the sitting for 30 minutes and we give you money and tell us the purpose, other than amending the law.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I would like you to address us on Article 159(8). When the Attorney-General was speaking, I understood him to say that he was proceeding under 159(8) where there is a category of loans, but this a category of loans which can be exempted under Article 159(8).

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, Article 159(8) gives exemptions to the Constitution and it reads, “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this Article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.” 

This requires Parliament to give delegation. Madam Speaker, I did not want to go into this because the Attorney-General is aware of certain concerns I have raised to him. If we amend to give those exemptions, the terms and conditions should be in the law that you are going to do – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister has circulated his reports because he had some conditions. Let the Attorney- General explain the conditions he is talking about.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, may I go ahead? Those terms and conditions must be restrictive, define a timeframe and the purpose. All the loans that we approve here are defined - this is a loan for hospitals, this is the interest, this is the maturity and this is where we are getting it from and the agreements are clear. Therefore, are we saying that we are going to put those terms and conditions? 

The Government needs to come to us with this. You need to put in the law the purpose of the money because that has been the practice, - we borrow money for roads, agriculture, hospitals and many more - the source and the maturity period. If you want us to put that in the law and also make sure that it does not exceed the total budget, we can do it because those are the terms and conditions.

For purposes of monetary policy, we know monetary policy is for purposes of stabilizing the currency and that is why we left it open. Even under the current law, we have what the minister has talked about, even the securities. We said that Government can borrow using securities and we use that clause but you did not provide for the terms and conditions. It is even a legal matter which is in court and the Attorney-General is aware of it.

THE SPEAKER: You wanted to say something, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much for your submission, hon. Ekanya. Madam Speaker, I think we are one with each other. To say that you provide for the need now – Let me put it in my own perspective but the Minister of Finance can articulate it better because he is the one who raises loans on our behalf.

First of all, I agree with you with on the exemption under Article 159(8) being in section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, subsection (5). What the Minister of Finance is doing is to amend that exception - and he can justify it because they have their paper - for the management of monetary policy and treasury operations –(Interjections)– Please, let me first finish from the legal point of view and then you can put that to the Ministry of Finance.

Having done that, all we are saying is: what are the terms and conditions? From the way I understand it, the terms and conditions are also to be prescribed by this Parliament. What they have actually brought for you to approve is that it should not exceed 18 per cent of the approved domestic revenue. That is condition number one. Condition number two says it should not be open ended; it should be paid within that financial year. Those are the conditions I gather from the submissions of the Ministry of Finance and, therefore, the conditions are stipulated.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am an advocate but I have not understood anything the Attorney-General has been saying and yet I have not participated in any primaries recently. (Laughter) I now understand why hon. Alaso requested that we needed a written version of what he is submitting. 

I would like the Attorney-General to address me like a layman and not as an advocate. Why do you want to remove money from the Treasury without the approval of Parliament? Where is the problem? What is hurting you so much in the current regime where you have the majority in Parliament and goodwill? Where is the problem? In my 15 years in this Parliament, Parliament has never refused to pass any loan request. They bring requests here and we pass them on top of the table when everyone has a document that this loan is for Kiryandongo Hospital, Bududa landslides or an emergency; that is how we have been operating. We have even been having supplementary budgets to solve urgent problems. Where is the problem today that you now want to borrow money without the approval of Parliament?

You gave two reasons that you cannot borrow more than 18 per cent of the domestic revenue collection. The amount of money you collect domestically is the privy of URA and Government; we, as Members of Parliament, do not know. We are not even sure if what is declared to us is actually what is collected by URA –(Laughter)– and yet you are coming to tell us that you need 18 per cent of a figure that we do not know. That is problem number one.

The second problem is that you are saying you want to pay it within one year. Let me tell you, when President Jomo Kenyatta was dying in Kenya, the year he died was the single year in the history of political science that the biggest number of political appointments were made in Kenya. Some of us who are political scientists were questioning whether someone was not just appointing others when the man was already dead. Therefore, one year is quite a lot time. Do not tell us that you are going to borrow now and pay within one year. One year is 360 days; you can empty the entire Treasury and you will not be able pay it. 

Therefore, please bring any request you want and some of us, members of the Opposition, will even jump that side and support that request on this table here. However, this issue that we allow you to borrow money and you do not want to do it over the table, please save us from this kind of argument and let us not push this argument far. 

I was talking to a friend in Bank of Uganda and I asked him why the shilling is gaining against the dollar. He said that there are very many international investors who are bringing their dollars into Uganda because Government is issuing treasury bills, which is attractive to people from around the world as they come and buy money in Uganda. That is why the dollar is going down. I also asked him, “Can it go down?” He told me that it may stop around Shs 3,400 because of elections.

Now, if the Bank of Uganda, on its own volition, can exercise monetary and fiscal policy and even attract dollars and we all see tangible results, they do not need approval from us. Therefore, this kind of motions brought in bad taste - We have elections and you say you will pay within one year! Save us from this. Bring any motion here and we shall approve; we shall always second you on top of the table. Anything swept under the carpet - Save us lay men from that kind of legal argument of sections; we do not need those kinds of sections.

6.41 
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like hon. Odonga Otto, I am an advocate but you will permit me to take leave of my legal mind and look at this as a matter of economics, in which field I also have some core competencies.

The Attorney-General makes the case that Article 159(8) enables Parliament to exempt categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of the Article, subject to such terms and conditions as Parliament may prescribe. From a strictly layman’s perspective, what this means is that Parliament can relinquish its power to approve loans on a case by case basis and entrust Government with it. There is absolutely nothing wrong with that. We do that by way of legislation and that legislation must contain the fact that we are exempting them from seeking approval on a case by case basis and secondly, it must include terms and conditions.

We are therefore in agreement that it is well within our constitutional mandate to exempt some loans from the operation of Article 159 (1) and (2). The problem then is this, and this is what I can read from the House: Members are not convinced that there is merit in exempting this particular borrowing from the Bank of Uganda. That is the case that the Minister of Finance has not made and it is the case that the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance must make. You need to come out openly and tell us what it is you want to borrow for, for what duration and what terms and conditions you want us to attach to this borrowing.

As a person, I understand that you may be cash strapped now and you have a Government to run. Tell us in very honest terms why you are broke now, why you want us to give you money and where you are going to spend that money and we move instead of going around in circles. Madam Speaker, that is the missing link. If we all agree, it will be –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, let me first share with you the reason we came up with this proposal. At the beginning of this financial year, as minister I was faced with a very embarrassing situation. Because of the law as it stands, I could not get sufficient funds to even pay wages of government workers. The revenue collections from the Uganda Revenue Authority had not started flowing in and yet operations had to continue - I had to pay wages, salaries, Parliament and all sorts of things. We found ourselves totally incapacitated.

We looked at the law and the Bank of Uganda. We sent a requisition and they said, “No, we cannot give you more money because your account is dry.” That was the beginning of this story - (Interjection)– Honourable members, let me finish; you want to get an explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! You want to know the reason and the minister is explaining why he has come.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Exactly! I am giving you the background of this change that we are seeking from you. [HON. MEMBER: “But you are breaking the law.”] No, we are not breaking the law.

Secondly, in the course of running a financial year, because we operate a cash budget, - we all know it - we will reach a certain point where our cash position is very down and we cannot meet the requirement of government operations. That is why we are talking about treasury operations. What then happens? Will the minister have to come back every time a situation like this appears? That is why we are saying that Parliament legislates and gives authority to the Minister of Finance so that whenever a situation like that arises, you can go to the Bank of Uganda, borrow or take an advance but we limit it; so, you do not leave it open ended. You can only –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I would like to give the honourable minister information. In the Bank of Uganda Act, there are temporary advances to Bank of Uganda. [HON. MEMBERS: “It was amended.”] What was amended has now caused a problem. Can I read to members what was amended such that people know? It says, “The Bank may make temporary advances to the Government and the local government in respect of temporary advances of the recurrent revenue.” That is what the minister is saying.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the present law or the repealed one?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: This is what was repealed when we were considering the public finance law. Honourable members, not everybody is a financial guru here. We said that the Treasury at the beginning of each financial year shall identify –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, the process of learning never stops. The Member holding the Floor is explaining what is even difficult for him to understand and then he says some of us are not financial gurus. Are you in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not a financial guru but I have understood what the chairman is saying, that the provision which was amended originally gave Government leeway to do that borrowing without coming here. Now that we removed it, the minister is stuck and that is why they have come.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, let me give you information that will help us. What the Speaker has explained is what we said last time - that let us go back to the status quo like it was in the Budget Act so that Government is able to do it without coming to Parliament. That section in the Budget Act was clear; it gave flexibility to Government to operate even if money is not there. 

I can read it verbatim; section 12 of the Budget Act says that you can deal with supplementaries. It says, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” 

That means you are free to play around with three per cent. When you find that you do not have that money, come back and Parliament approves. That was the flexibility in the Budget Act. They are now saying that they want to give advances to borrow using the leeway of Bank of Uganda, but this law was giving you flexibility on how to operate in case you do not have the money. You go to the other appropriations and deal with it but do not go beyond three per cent; when you go beyond three per cent, come back to us and we give you more. That is how we can raise the money you want to use in the budget. It is as simple as that. 

However, the amendment you would like to bring says, “The bank may, with the approval of Parliament, make temporary advances to the Government and local governments in respect of temporary deficiencies of recurrent revenue…” Then in (ii) (1a) you say, “notwithstanding subsection (1), the bank may make a temporary advance to the Government without the approval of Parliament where the advance does not extend beyond a financial year.”

The other Budget Act gave you leeway to spend three per cent over and above. If you want to have more money which Parliament has appropriated, come back and we give you more money.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, I would like to be very transparent and honest here. When we did the legislation that governs oil revenue, we made Bank of Uganda the custodian of our oil revenue. The underlying fear of Members is this: we have an oil account with the Bank of Uganda – Honourable minister, I can see you shaking your head but I am raising these issues so that you answer them. 

You have the Bank of Uganda as the custodian of our petroleum revenue and you want us to give you authority to borrow from the Bank of Uganda and pay within a year. The Members are uncomfortable that you want to exempt yourselves from parliamentary approval at a time when we have appointed Bank of Uganda the custodian of our oil revenue. You need to come out and explain all this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I think let us get a few terms correct. I can see we are mixing this with revenue from our oil. In this amendment, we are very clear; we are talking about domestic revenue and that is the revenue obtained from the non-tax revenue – (Interjections) - No, if you want we can define it specifically in the law. Please, revenue from oil will not be, in our own language of running the Treasury, domestic revenue. If I could be protected, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: What we are talking about is revenue collected from taxation of the domestic consumption in the country, of income tax. That is what we are calling the domestic revenue – (Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, honourable member. The honourable minister continues to say that one of the reasons why this type of situation is coming up is the fact that they have not been collecting enough money. Just last week, I was invited to a party in URA, although I did not go, but one of the reasons for this was because for the first time, the current Commissioner-General has collected money over and above. So, are we in Uganda? 

Uganda Revenue Authority is having a party saying that they have collected more money than expected but the Minister of Finance is here telling us that the money is not enough. Really, what is it? Does it mean to say that URA is collecting money –(Interjections)– Yes, because they went for prayers to thank God for having allowed that situation. The question is: where is this money which is being over collected going if the Minister of Finance is saying there is no money? That is the clarification I would like to have.

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, honourable minister and Madam Speaker. On the issue of Government borrowing money from the Bank of Uganda without parliamentary approval, in my understanding Government wants to borrow money not just without approval but also without parliamentary knowledge. This is because if you come here to ask us for approval, you are also informing us about the amount of money and purpose. Why would you like Parliament not to know the amount of money you want to get from Bank of Uganda this time? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let the minister clarify and then we go to hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: We are not trying to hide anything. We have specifically said 18 per cent of the domestic revenue of Government. That is one precaution that I see.

Secondly, we have said if you borrow that money as Government, you must pay it back by the end of the financial year. If Parliament so wishes, we could even have an amendment that says that maybe at regular intervals - quarterly or half yearly - the minister will come and report to Parliament on how much money they have borrowed. Otherwise –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, can I complete – (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, have you analysed and do you know how much money leaves Uganda daily in foreign currency? The banks in this country are transferring millions of dollars from this country monthly and the country is going to run bankrupt. We are facing problems because this country has never taken any measures at all to stop all these businessmen and banks from transferring money on a daily basis. If you check with all these banks, you would know how much money goes out of this country. 

I have seen countries like USA and China where you never take out US$ 10,000 but these guys are at will and they transfer money on a daily basis and you are looking on. Now you are coming to Parliament and you want a blank cheque and you want Parliament to give you permission to borrow from anywhere without coming to Parliament. That, we are not going to do. 

What we want is for you to come here and tell us that you have not paid pensioners and you used their money in some other sector. Come here and tell us you used money meant for pensioners. It is now three months and they have not been paid. Ask us to give you permission to borrow money but if you want us to just allow you to borrow from this and that sector, we are not willing to do that.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, would it not be better to go to committee stage so that we run through the amendments one by one?

6.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, the Bank of Uganda belongs to us. You must know that the Bank of Uganda is ours. If you gave the Minister of Finance a blank cheque, you are telling him to go to our own bank and pick our own money without authority or permission.

Madam Speaker, the reason as to why we stopped it is because we had allowed the minister to go to Bank of Uganda and get money, spend it and then report. That is the reason as to why we came back for the amendment because he had been given authority for many years.  That is the reason we must try it out first for about 10 years and then we review it. In proper management, if we have given you the authority to look after something and you have done badly, let us now put the law so that you do not mismanage our resources.

Madam Speaker, for the information of Members, the Government of Uganda is operating what we call a single treasury account. This means that there is money in a pot and so you just pick when the need arises. So at the end of every financial year, there will be money from those ministries that have not consumed it. There will always be what we call “cash balances” that are always returned and these are basically in Bank of Uganda. So, at any particular time, from 1st July there will be a balance on account because of the single account. 

What the minister is asking for now is that he wants 18 per cent. You know mathematics; 18 per cent of Shs 25 trillion is Shs 4.5 trillion, which he wants to walk with in his brief case every day. (Laughter) My colleagues, Shs 4.5 trillion for a finance minister at any particular time is very dangerous. 

What would happen in case he failed to pay it at the end of the year, like hon. Odonga Otto raised? We will not crucify him. The minister will say that he expected to pay back but because it rained a lot and URA did not collect enough revenue, he cannot pay back the Shs 4.5 trillion. You will again have problems and we will come back here to Parliament to pass a resolution to capitalise Bank of Uganda.

To avoid all these problems, we should say that whenever the minister needs money for pensioners because it is finished, he should call us because we are here. I have heard these stories that they gave MPs money. I am now talking as an accountant; nobody should lie to the public that they gave MPs money. The money we got here in Parliament was Shs 40 billion compared to the Shs 25 trillion. What is this Shs 40 billion that is for our salary compared to Shs 25 billion? Can we be the ones who blocked the Treasury? No! Do not use us as an escape route. What we want you to do clearly is to bring your resolution here and we shall pass the money.

Madam Speaker, I remember that you were in the Chair one time when cows needed water, and all Members who were in the Seventh Parliament can bear witness; they invited us at short notice and we came. I think they never even paid us our transport –(Laughter)– but we were invited to come and pass a supplementary of Shs 7.8 billion to give water to cows. If we can come and give water to cows, what about pensioners?  (Laughter). What is his problem?

I am really failing to understand what the minister wants this money for. Why does he want this authority? Why can’t he bring the resolution here? I am failing to understand. Is there something going wrong? Maybe the law has been made and everybody is seeing it and Bank of Uganda – (Interjection) - one minute. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, close.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Okay. He is giving me information.  

THE SPEAKER: I did not allow it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, let me conclude if you have not allowed. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, finally. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The World Bank and the IMF are thanking us for having made a very good law and they are telling all countries to replicate our law. It would be very dangerous for us who have just applied it for less than a year to now amend it. We shall then be telling the other countries that our law is not the best law.

I would like to plead with my brother, hon. David Bahati, whom I love so much; if what I have said here has annoyed you, I apologise. The next time when we talk about cash flows, I will never leak them. (Laughter) I am asking you to really allow this law to operate for the next two or three years then after that, we can come and amend it. For now, let us apply it as it is. I thank you.

7.04
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would just like to assure the minister and the House that this issue of money being borrowed without the approval of Parliament was raised in this House at one time. We had realised that Government had secured loans to a greater tune and without the approval of Parliament and we complained. We found that most of the loans were underutilised and were not performing at all. The loans were earning interest but were not performing. As Parliament of Uganda, we said we should not borrow money which is not even being put to use. Some money was borrowed and it was not even necessary, and the interest of these loans is so miserable and not worth the borrowing that we do. 

Madam Speaker, in this circumstance of domestic borrowing, we asked the ministers why they borrow. They said that in that time, there were emergencies like Ebola and Marburg among others and we then agreed. Now in this circumstance, they want us to allow them to borrow without approval of Parliament; where is the emergency? We are saying that they should utilise the three per cent -   

MR SSASAGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague. I would like to give my colleague information about those borrowings that you are talking about. As the finance committee, we processed that Bill which eventually became law and during that time, we had some good time with Bank of Uganda officials, right from the Governor, Deputy Governor and the Secretary to the Treasury. That is why you see all the members of the finance committee in agreement with what we passed except the chairperson. 

They gave us the master key; we keep blaming the Bank of Uganda for allowing Government to come and take this money like this and yet we were given the master key to tighten things. Let every borrowing request they think about come back to Parliament where we can scrutinise them very well. The master key that we were given is that law that they want to undo. That is the information that I want to give you.

MS ONGOM: I thank you so much for your submission. I was saying that we allowed them to use up to three per cent of the budget and if it is depleted, they have the right to call us and we come to appropriate funds. We are not saying that we are not ready; we are ready. 

What they are asking for encourages misappropriation of funds. Sometimes we have budgeted and they have brought it to the House but what have they used that money for when there is even no emergency. What is it? We are encouraging corruption in this circumstance. We are saying that as Parliament, we are not ready to allow our powers to be usurped. Let them call us and we come to approve the request they want and then they can utilise it in the best way. I thank you.  

7.07
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2012, some of my colleagues misunderstood me when I supported Governor Mutebile because of misusing funds owned by the bank. One of the reasons Mutebile was able to pay Bank of Uganda money was because the law then allowed the minister to direct him to spend Government money the way the minister is seeking to do now. From that experience, when an opportunity came and we had to amend the law – the Public Finance Management and Accountability Act and subsequently, the Bank of Uganda Act - we insisted, together with my colleagues, that this route must be closed and henceforth we brought a useful and good amendment. I get surprised today, not even six months down the road, that Government is coming back here to amend this very good section that we put in the Public Finance Management Act.

Madam Speaker, it does not mean that when laws are stringent then they are bad. The purpose of having some of these laws is to tighten. There is a risk if you open a window for Government to access Shs 4 trillion without approval of a certain authority, which authority in this case is Parliament. I know when Government wants money, it can be speedy. I know that it will not take Government two weeks to get through Parliament to access funds, if it so requires. I therefore want to propose that the minister concedes for the purposes of moving forward.

Secondly, throughout my years of accounting practice, I have never come across a situation whereby a financial year closes and another year opens and you fail to access money. There is always a difference between budget and cash. I have never heard of a situation where the Consolidated Fund has a zero balance or a negative balance. So it not true that at the beginning of the financial year, the minister will find difficulty in accessing money simply because we have not provided for a temporary advance. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.10
DR JOHN BABTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I am surprised because the move to bring the Public Finance Management Bill was by the Ministry of Finance because they felt that the Budget Act was not giving the leeway that they required. It is therefore unfortunate that the same instrument that they brought is the one they are crying over.

Corruption is one thing that has riddled our country and when talking about corruption, I am looking at where the biggest form of corruption could be. The one of the NGOs is not highly publicised because the Auditor-General does not look at their books. However, when you look at what comes to Parliament to the Committee on Local Government Accounts, how districts misappropriate money, it is monies that are appropriated by this Parliament. So, if the ministry is seeking leeway that usurps the separation of powers, then where are we heading? 

I think that the best way for the ministry, if they are finding things a little difficult - Of course, I appreciate, Madam Speaker, that even when we have a food crisis in Karamoja, we have had meetings with the Prime Minister but the question of reallocation is failing and that is biting for us. However, what is true is that if the ministry finds itself in a very difficult position, then maybe it is important that we go back and carry section 12 of the Budget Act and import it back into the amendment so that we maintain the three per cent and anything in excess, you come back to the House for approval. 

Madam Speaker, we need a win-win situation. What would happen in the world where a Parliament in Uganda just sits to make laws without powers to appropriate? What kind of Parliament shall we be having? I would like to liken this to a household where there is a father and mother; I would not imagine a situation where a wife at one time would want to play the role of a husband when the husband is there. It will only happen in households headed by single mothers but in this case, we have the three arms of Government, which are required by law to perform their rightful functions. What should we do in this case?

I also think that the Ministry of Finance needs to concede and maybe repeal the Public Finance Management Act in order for us to bring back the budget Act, otherwise no one will want to lose the authority that they have in order to be able to represent the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.13
MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo North Constituency, Wakiso): Honourable members, when we are legislating, I think we should be patient with each other. What I was telling you, and the honourable minister will come and tell you, is that when we were amending the Public Finance Management Act, we used this law to amend the Bank of Uganda Act but we did not amend everything in section 33. I would like to read you the first three sections and what we amended, that is when you will understand this matter better:

“Temporary advances 
(1) 	The bank may make temporary advances to the Government and local governments in respect of temporary deficiencies of recurrent revenue. 

(2) 	The Treasury shall, at the beginning of each financial year, identify and submit to the bank all its requirements for temporary advances for that year; and the bank shall, subject to subsection (3), operate within that requirement.

(3) 	The total amount of advances made under subsection (1) shall not at any time exceed 18 per cent of the recurrent revenue of the Government.”

 Recurrent revenue is the money which Parliament appropriated. Using this Public Finance Act we added a fourth section, which has brought a problem. The three are still standing in law and they allow Bank of Uganda to do what I have read. It says, 
“(4) The bank shall not guarantee any payment to any person on behalf of Government or make any advance to Government or any person on behalf Government without prior approval of Parliament.”

Therefore, our import was only for prior approval of Parliament, otherwise the temporary advances are standing. What we can do here is to assert the approval but allow the advances to continue. That is what we added in the new Act and that is what the committee agreed with in the report. We can say “prior” or “after” and then we give it a period but it comes to Parliament. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Kasule and I amended this law together with others. The purpose is that the Bank of Uganda, a lender of last resort as per the Auditor-General, was totally impaired and in red and that is why we did capitalisation. 

Hon. Kasule, the principle of temporary advances is agreeable by all Members but Members are saying that you should come here so that we avoid letters of comfort and impairing of the bank. We looked at that provision, you and I, and you if pick the Hansard and the committee report, we left all those provisions but we said that Parliament is the last authority. If you want temporary advances – If URA collection has fallen and you want to frontload say Shs 1 trillion or Shs 2 trillion, you come here and say, “Give me Shs 2 trillion and when URA collects the money, you put it back.” That is what we put in the law with you and that is what the Members are saying. They are not opposed; they are just saying, come here. I thought we agreed on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the Member is saying is that they want consideration on a case by case basis. You state the need and you come and tell us that I need to buy some maido and we give you money. You run out of bullets, you come and tell us and we say, “Okay, you can go and buy the guns”. I think that is what the Members are saying.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, may I beg that we go to the committee stage so that we could consider other provisions –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Honourable minister, there is clarification. I heard you say that we should go the committee stage to consider other provisions. At the start of this discussion, I asked the Attorney-General to give us the write-up of what he was saying. If I got him very well, he said all the other things had fallen by the way side; you had conceded. Therefore, when you now say we go and consider the other provisions, what exactly are we going to do? 

In any case, this that we are discussing is the crux of the matter. The authority to scrutinise that expenditure, the borrowing, the budget is the crux of the matter. Which other ones do you want us to go and deal with? Madam Speaker, I think if the honourable minister wants to concede, let him concede and say he will come here seek advances with the approval of Parliament and we go home. 

In any case, Madam Speaker, it is past 7 o’clock. We have primaries tomorrow, we had primaries yesterday. If you could release us for now or the minister concedes and then we go.

THE SPEAKER: He cannot concede unless we go to the committee stage because this is a Bill.

MS ALASO: We have been discussing and he conceded earlier to one, two or three of them. He can also say that he has conceded to this one and then we decide on whether to go to committee stage.

MR DAVID BAHATI: The Bill has a number of clauses and actually they are like four remaining: one on supplementary, on advances, virements, and we harmonise with the committee position -(Interjection)– No; there is some adjustment to say “the minister or a person designated by the minister”. 

Therefore, I think it would be procedurally right for us to move since it is a small Bill. Let us go clause by clause and where we have to concede, we concede and move forward. Otherwise, there is no way we can concede at this stage.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, when we adjourned last time, we had agreed that they come and report on everything. Now the honourable minister is leaving out the report on virement. Let him first report on that provision of virement if he wants before we go to committee stage.

Madam Speaker, we really mean well for Government here. Unfortunately, the ministers are making it very hard for us to make progress on this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Minister of Finance should be fair. The virement he is talking about is section 22. First, they had wanted to remove the minister and put the Secretary to the Treasury and we said, “No, it is the minister who comes for money”. 

Secondly, what they had wanted is that now it should be more than 10 per cent. We said no; even under the PPDA, when you advertise for a tender and you want to vary that tender by 10 per cent, you have to re-advertise. Now here we stopped at 10 per cent because we said that maybe there will be a problem and you can go up to 10 per cent. 

The problem with Government, Madam Speaker, which I must tell you, is that these accounting officers would say if their total budget is Shs 100 billion, they would put Shs 50 million on water and Shs 200 million on electricity. He would want to put such money so that when it comes to Parliament, you approve immediately so that when the minister is going to travel, he would say, “Pick money from water or electricity”. The reason they want virement is because we tied them. They now want to go and pick that money to do what they never came to ask for here in Parliament in reality.

For us to avoid that –(Interjection)– It was your appetite. Why don’t you bring all your appetite? You show us that you want to travel and you ask for Shs 200 billion; or you want drink or parties and you ask for Shs 600 billion so that we approve. 

Madam Speaker, in short, what the minister wants now is to go and approve their own budget as soon as you approve yours in this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we said, this is a Bill and our committee reported on it. The Minister of Finance also said there are areas where he now agrees with the committee. Why don’t we take out the areas of agreement and then we remain with what is contentious? The Bill was read here and a report has been presented.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think the right procedure is to go to the committee stage. We have heard areas where we have common ground and where we have debated and we see the direction it is taking. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill was amending section 9 of the principal Act. It was amending section 13 to do with the Budget Framework Paper. On those two, we have conceded with the committee. It was amending section 17 and the committee amended our proposal. They agreed with the ministry but amended our proposal. Therefore, there is a position of the committee. That was where there are balances on the vote to be extended for a certain period. The committee has a proposal to the House for a certain period. 

The other amendment was to do with section 20 regarding transfer of functions from one vote to another. The committee recommended that we maintain the minister to have the authority. On that, we have conceded. The other one is on supplementary and finally on advances from the central bank. Those are the five amendments we are making. We have already had a common ground on three and we are only remaining with two.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you listened to the debate very well last time and you made a wonderful summary. I have been listening and it looks as if we are just repeating ourselves. The spirit of this amendment was rejected. What Members feel is that let us give a chance for this law to be operationalised and we see where the gaps are. Let us give it one or two or four years. That is the primary argument which came out.

The second argument is that we cannot allow, at any one time, Government to borrow money without the approval of Parliament. Only two things; both spirits went ultra vires the spirit of Parliament. That is how you observed.  

Madam Speaker, where we are now, it is as if we you repeating - I would like to read what you said last time. What you said last time, as I can summarise, was that “You can see the House; Members have problems in their constituencies but they are here. Therefore, I do not know why you are circumventing Article 156 of the Constitution. Let me read to you the Article…” which you did. You summarised by saying, “We are here; I do not know why you want to amend the law to fix one transaction…” - those were your words - “…Maybe the Attorney-General will explain to us.” When the Attorney-General came in, the Attorney-General actually freed us. In summary, the Attorney-General said, “I would seek for some time to go and realign my thinking and come back with a proper legal exposé on the issues raised by the honourable members in this debate”.

Madam Speaker, I have tried to understand where the exposé is because Parliament is expecting an exposé –(Laughter)– and how the Attorney-General has realigned his mind to the debate as it was last time. I have not seen this. I do not see where at this moment we disagree with the summary you made. The spirit is the same. We cannot change. We can go to the committee but what for? This is because the spirit of the entire amendment to this Bill is wrong. I can only say I beg to move that the Bill be withdrawn and then maybe we go for other business. We are wasting time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill is important and our committee took certain positions and the Government also conceded certain positions. I think we should close the gaps at the committee stage so that we close the areas which were closed and Government should not attempt to come without doing something. The proposals are on the Hansard; we cannot just leave them. We are here; can we finish it tomorrow? 

Honourable members, I think let us allow Members to go and reflect on the proposals by the minister. I ask the Clerk, if they had not been circulated, to send them to the Members’ iPads so that tomorrow we start with this; it is a priority. Let us close the areas for disagreement and discuss what is remaining, which is very small. Tomorrow, we will start with the committee stage. 

We will meet tomorrow afternoon. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m.

(The House rose at 7.35 p.m. and adjourned until 11 November, 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
