Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 26 November 2019

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I will begin by amending the Order Paper to allow the first reading of the Sexual Offences Bill and to reinstate the first reading, which had been on the Order Paper last week. They should be reflected again.

Secondly, I would like to apologise for our failure to meet last week. I was engaged somewhere and delayed.

Concerning the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway; I inquired from the Inspector General of Government and she informed me that she is investigating circumstances surrounding the signing of a contract by Government officials. I do not want to say more; I will just stop there.

I want to appeal to the Electoral Commission to step up the advocacy about the voter registration. I have seen something in the papers but I have not heard anything on radio. They should step up so that people can take up the exercise.

Honourable members, on your behalf, I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the conduct of the Director of Wamala Academy in Wakiso; a person who appears to have established a school so that he could access free sex from the students. For someone who is in a fiduciary position to the students, his conduct is an act of gross abuse of office and abuse of authority. 

I implore the State to make a very clear example of him by cancelling his license and barring him from ever establishing or running an academy or a school where he can access students.
He should also suffer serious sanctions within the penal code once the legal process has been completed. I am told he is at large.

I would also like to report that in the last one week or so I visited a number of constituencies. I confirm that Members are really doing work in their constituencies; I commend them and inform the public that the members are working. I commend you for that.

I am glad that now I see the Minister for Micro-Finance because we have wanted to hear about these funds which are supposed to go to the hair dressers and the “juakalis” and so on.

We hear people are receiving money but no one has come here to tell the House how the programme will run and how they can access it. You know when we go out there they ask me; “Madam Speaker, how do we access this money?” Even the Speaker does not know. I hope that you will be able to explain to us what is happening.

Yesterday, I was in Moroto at the urban leaders’ forum, a group of mayors of the municipalities and town councils. They have the following issues to raise:

They are complaining that many services are being recentralized; for instance procurements which are done on their behalf from Kampala; they just see finished products they cannot supervise and those people who do not get contracts from them are not able to account to those local leaders.

They are also complaining about the delay in the Ministry of Justice ad Constitutional Affairs to process their bylaws. They said that it takes about four years before a bylaw comes out of the Ministry of Justice. I thought I should raise it also so that the Attorney-General takes it up.

They are also complaining that this was not the first time; there was a presidential directive that no revenue should be collected from the taxi parks and bus parks and it was a major source of revenue for many of these local authorities. Now, they have no income and in some places, they cannot even collect garbage because there is no income being earned.

I hope that the Government will, at some stage, evaluate the impact of this ban and see how they can be assisted. Of course there is always the complaint about the poor allowances of the local councillors but mostly the taxation of that small money; they talk about it wherever we go.

I do not know whether the Minister of Local Government will help us on the bicycles; I am tired of the issue of the bicycles of the LCIs. Wherever I go in this country, they ask me for the bicycles but I have no answers. I really hope that the minister will help and tell us what to do. 

They also complained about a pledge of Shs 1 billion made by the President in 2015. They would like it to be fulfilled. I hope the minister for the Presidency will attend to that.

They are also requesting for more USMID programmes to cover other municipalities and town councils. I asked them to do proper planning to include sanitation, green space and proper housing. Thank you. Honourable members, there were a few matters of national concern.

2.22
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back in 2008, I brought papers here where the Ministry of Local Government had said that Sigulu was going to become a district and when you came to the islands, the same memorandum was given to you and the state minister’s statement for you was most obliged.

Now many years down the road, I see a list of municipalities and town councils but the issue of Sigulu district is quiet. It is my humble appeal that since you were in the islands and you know how peculiar it is with a bigger population - because Kalangala got district status with 12,000 people because of its peculiarity.

The people are waiting and all that time when His Excellency was in the islands, he promised them. As a mother of this country and also a person who pleads for the people who are not listened to; may you prevail over the minister to make sure that the issue of Sigulu District is brought here and operationalised as you had said; that is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that Sigulu District was part of 8 other districts which were operationalised already about six or seven years ago. I do not know what the problem was with Sigulu because it was the only one left out; we had approved them as a House.

I would like the Ministry of Local Government to give us the final answer on why Sigulu has not been operationalised; it is very long overdue. 

That is a simple one you should come to us this week on Thursday and explain. It has been raised here many times. We want answers about Sigulu Island District.

2.24
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you all recall that on Wednesday, 20th November, the world celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

I thought we would bring this as a matter of national importance but when I consulted with the major child rights stakeholders, they requested that we present a formal motion.

Therefore, I would like to seek your permission to present a formal motion to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the CRC.

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving notice?  

MR ATIKU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have noted it. 

2.25
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are losing lives at Mulago Hospital due to the absence of a CT scan machine that is very important to access accident victims.

Before the doctor does anything to an accident victim, especially when they have head injuries, they always ask for the CT scan. All these patients are usually referred to private hospitals for this scan. In Uganda, we have got many accident cases. Private hospitals charge between Shs 200,000 to Shs 300,000 and even Shs 500,000 for these CT scans. 

There is a private CT scan machine in new Mulago Hospital that always charges patients around Shs 150,000. There are very many people in Uganda who cannot afford to raise Shs 150,000 for this CT scan. In cases of head injuries that need surgery, a CT scan is mandatory. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that Government intervenes and provides a new CT scan for Mulago Hospital. It is really a shame for a national referral hospital like Mulago to lack a mere CT scan, which even small clinics can afford to have in their own private facilities.

Therefore, I would like to pray that Government acquires not only one but about five CT scan machines because Mulago is really overcrowded. When you go to the casualty wards, there are very many cases. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Health is required to come and explain first, the status of the CT scan machines in Mulago Hospital. Secondly, she should explain whether there is actually a private CT scan within Mulago Hospital. She should come to us next week on Tuesday. Let her come and when she brings the statement, we shall discuss it.

I see the minister in charge of microfinance. I do not know whether he can update us on the issue of the microfinance sector in the country.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About the new programme of specialised enterprises and SACCOs in Uganda, spearheaded by His Excellency the President, I am supposed to mobilise Ugandans who are into the specialised enterprises.  

We are supposed to select 17 enterprises in every district; the mechanics, salon operators, restaurant owners, boda boda cyclists, taxi operators, veterans and many others, including leaders from LCI up to LCV.

Madam Speaker, the main reason we are doing this is to firstly encourage people to save –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would like to know how the programme is going to run. You have not informed the country how it is going to be run. We know the reasons but how is it going to operate?

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have started mobilising people –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you mobilise, you are supposed to have come to this House to inform the country that you are introducing this new programme, this is how it will work and these are the parameters.

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I am going to bring a detailed statement on how this programme is going to be implemented. However, allow me to update me on where we are now.

THE SPEAKER: We do not want to know where you are. We would like you to tell us what that programme is, when did it start, who is going to benefit. We want the formal statement, not off-cuff.

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I beg that I bring the detailed programme on how we shall implement this programme next week on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Send a copy to the Clerk and then she can upload it on the Members’ iPads. 

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.31
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, I was on this Floor of Parliament and I reported about floods in Bulambuli. Madam Speaker, you directed on two issues; 

    1. That the Committee on Natural Resources should come to Bulambuli and indeed it came.
    2. That the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees quickly comes to Bulambuli and assesses the damage.

Madam Speaker, to my dismay, up to date, the honourable minister has never come to Bulambuli yet people are still suffering. I would like to know, through your Chair, why the minister has deliberately neglected your directive yet we entirely depend on you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, I do not know whether you are able to answer the issue of Bulambuli.

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, the good news is that the Chief Administrative Officer and the entire Bulambuli District Disaster Management Committee has prepared a comprehensive report. We have it now in the Office of the Prime Minister.

It will be part of what I may be commenting on in the presentation for the general position in the country. It is not only Bulambuli and Bundibugyo but all other parts of the country that are inundated because of the floods ravaging the country.

2.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The President, Gen. Museveni, has directed all investors and Ugandans who are occupying wetlands to vacate. In the same spirit, the President has directed that the protection of the environment is very key for our development in this country.

Unfortunately, last Sunday, I was in Bundibugyo and there is a forest called Semuliki. The entire forest has been depleted and it is being depleted under the protection of the UPDF. I do not know whether there is no contradiction to this effect about the President’s directive.

Therefore, I would like to know from the Minister of Water and Environment why they are cutting down the Semuliki Forest. In 1970s, they cut that forest and it became a menace to the people of Bundibugyo. Therefore, I would like to get an explanation from the Minister of Water and Environment as to why they are cutting down the forest and yet the President directed otherwise.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Water and Environment should come and update us on the issue of Semuliki Forest. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the entire House about Semuliki National Park is, it is true that Uganda Wildlife Authority engaged a private company to cut down exotic tree species in Semuliki National Park. 

I have gone there personally, engaged with UWA and monitored the cutting down of trees. They are removing only two species: Terminalia and Cinderella. These exotic species were planted in 1993 when Government evicted people from that area because they had been completely depleted of national vegetation. They planted exotic tree species to quickly grow and cover up that area.

As part of the 10-year management plan of Semuliki National Park, UWA decided to remove the exotic tree species because they are spreading and actually destroying the indigenous species and as a result, spoiling the forest cover and the national park.

Therefore, it is a management plan to rid the forest of the exotic tree species to allow natural regeneration of the indigenous tree species. I have been there personally and I went with the District Natural Resources Officer, the District Forest Officer and some district councillors to monitor the tree cutting while following guidance from UWA on how they are removing the exotic tree species from Semuliki National Park.

That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, there is no problem? 

MR GAFABUSA: No, there is no problem.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that you ask the Committee on Natural Resources to go there and get the information on the ground. This is because I was there last Sunday and they are cutting down all the trees.  

THE SPEAKER: Are they cutting down trees beyond the exotic species?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, they are cutting down trees beyond the species that hon. Gafabusa talked about. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, no harm done. I know the committee is overloaded with the miners and power but let them take a quick trip to Semuliki and give us a report. Can we give them a week? Okay.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to give some clarification. There is a difference between UWA personnel and the UPDF. Hon. Nzoghu, having seen the UWA officers, could not differentiate them. The officers responsible are UWA officers. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we go to Item 3?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2019

2.40
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me this afternoon. I do not take it for granted. 

I move under the rules of this Parliament to lay before this House a Bill entitled, “The Sexual Offences Bill, 2019” for the First Reading. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? The Bill is seconded by several members of the House. Are you moving with the old certificate?

MS AMODING: Yes. Madam Speaker, you gave us leave, on behalf of UWOPA, to re-table this Bill in April. In May, we wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requiring a Certificate of Financial Implication. Specifically, we wrote on 28 May and this letter was signed by the Clerk to Parliament requiring that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives a Private Member a certificate to lay this Bill before the House.

There was no immediate response, as usual and I would like to talk about that here as I lay this Bill because when it comes to gender related Bills, we have to beg, crawl and plead. Sometimes, we have to shout to ask for this and yet under section 76 of our Public Finance Management Act, we have the right, as Private Members, to move Private Members Bills.

Therefore, we are proceeding under that section, Madam Speaker. Having written to them, Section 4 gives us the leverage to proceed to lay before the House a Private Member’s Bill if, after 60 days, there is no response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, we wrote in May and on 4 July 2019, the Permanent Secretary wrote to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development requiring that the ministry advises them on this particular Bill. I do not know why, although the evidence is here. I beg to lay this evidence, which is communication between us and them requesting for this certificate.

We are proceeding under Section 76(4) to present, before this House, this Private Member’s Bill. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, it has become a continuous trend for Members to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a Certificate of Financial Implications and they never respond in time. Several Private Members’ Bills have come here and they have been rejected, including the Local Content Bill, which you remember very well.

This House needs to know from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why there is this continuous trend. Are they against Private Member’s Bills? Should Members not think about Private Member’s Bills anymore? They need to come before this House and explain so that we know what to do about the matter of the Certificate of Financial Implication. 

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to apologise that we did not respond in time regarding this particular Bill. For the record however, hon. Patrick Nsamba knows that for some Bills, which are straightforward, we have been able to issue the Certificate of Financial Implications even in a matter of days, for example, the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill. The certificate was issued in one day. 

There are others, which we have also issued so the record is not correct that we always delay. However, moving forward, we would like to promise the House that we shall have a maximum of one month for every – if we receive a letter, in one month, we should have sorted out the Certificate of Financial Implications. That is a commitment that we give the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister. If you do not, we shall proceed under our rules and just ignore you and we do our work. Thank you. Why don’t we allow hon. Amoding to finish her submission?

MR NIWAGABA: Because I want to enrich her. Honourable members, when we got a challenge in the last Parliament about issuance of Certificates of Financial Implications while enacting the Public Finance Management Act, we included in section 66 that if within 60 days, you do not get the Certificate of Financial Implication, you get it by operation of the law.

Therefore, we will only be requesting the Speaker, after the expiry of 60 days as long as there is proof that the Clerk wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; to allow us to present our Bills. 

In this regard, Madam Speaker, I will invite you to also allow me present my Bill; give me space this week on the Constitutional Amendment Bill, because the request expired on 18 November 2019. I am now presumed to have the certificate. 

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, having laid before the House this evidence and also guided by our Rules of Procedure and the Public Finance Management Act, I now seek the House to receive this Bill and consider it and I report with the guidance of the Speaker on the way forward on the Bill, if it is acceptable to the House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as we have agreed, the statutory period for the minister to send their certificate has long expired. Therefore, we are now proceeding under our Rules of Procedure to receive the Bill. It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious perusal and report back. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF UGANDA’S PROPERTIES IN NAIROBI, MOMBASA AND KISUMU

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we request that we make this statement tomorrow. It was ready but there were just a few things we are crosschecking so that we give accurate -

THE SPEAKER: On the properties? We, therefore, move it to tomorrow’s Order Paper. Now, I do not see hon. Maganda. However, I read his statement and it was talking about the economic progress but it was not addressing the issues. The issues, which Members were raising here about the closure of the borders and our relation with the neighbours, he did not address that. 

He could present but he did not touch on issues which Members raised. For the population, that is what they are more interested in. I do not know what the Prime Minister has to say about the East African Community.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we can present this tomorrow -

THE SPEAKER: Include the other areas.

MR BAHATI: To include those areas of –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is what Members are interested in, to complete the picture.

MR BAHATI: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: It is also deferred to tomorrow. However, Government is required to improve on the coverage of the scope of the paper.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 215 on a procedural matter. As you may all be aware, today, we mark three years since the attack on the institution of the Rwenzururu Kingdom. Three years ago, this House asked the Committee on Internal Affairs and Defence to go to Kasese and Bundibugyo and find out about those issues. 

Madam speaker, since that time, the committee has never reported back to Parliament. Last year, we raised the same procedural matter and the chairperson of the committee said she was ready with the report and that she was ready to present it to the House. She pleaded with the sitting Speaker then that she only needed time to be put on the Order Paper and she presents the report.

Madam Speaker, since then, the chairperson has never asked for additional time. I pray and ask whether it is not procedurally correct that a matter that came three years ago cannot be handled by this House. I beg to ask whether it is not procedurally correct that this matter is substantively put on the Order Paper for it to be discussed.

Otherwise the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo and Ntoroko may end up thinking that it is this House that is sitting on that report. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: If the report could be availed, the Clerk will put it on the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DAMAGE BY FLOODS IN THE COUNTRY OVER THE PAST FOUR MONTHS

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, first of all, this report was supposed to have been presented last week but I am happy that it came up to today. I would like to start by doing two things; to welcome you back from Amuria where you very ably and as usual represented Parliament in the fundraising for one of the major churches in my constituency.

Secondly, to inform the Members of Parliament that yesterday was my birthday. I am just one day old. It was unfortunate that the House was not sitting. Otherwise I would have brought my cake here for us to share.

Madam Speaker, this statement is on the floods damages - fairly old but still around.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations from all of us.

MR ECWERU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, before I speak about disaster mitigation, actions and plans by Government; allow me to first draw the attention of my honourable colleagues to our present reality that the destructive human activities have resulted into these phenomena that are technically known as climate change.

Madam Speaker, the phenomenon is impacting in different parts of the world differently with far reaching consequences necessitating huge investment for mitigation.

For example, the landslides, the floods, the heat waves the drought, in our country now when we are expecting dry spell, we get drought, when we are expecting normal rains, we get storms, and in some parts of the world, hurricanes. These are ravaging different parts of the world as we speak. For example, the city of Venus is submerged now; South Sudan has declared a state of emergency because of floods etcetera. 

It is important to note that mankind has destroyed forests, like we heard here at the start of the sitting; has depleted mountain covers like what we witnessed in both Rwenzori and mount Elgon,  has silted swamps and wetlands including silting rivers, unfortunately. 

Our industries are releasing huge dangerous gases to the atmosphere. This cumulatively has caused the dangerous reality we are grappling with today. 

Madam Speaker, we want to thank you individually and as a leader, for championing the cause of reforestation through tree planting. As Parliament, we must recognize this reality and engage in climate change adaptation. It is good for our own survival and for posterity.

Madam Speaker, following the weather forecast from the Uganda National Meteorological Authority of what they described as above normal rainfall in most parts of the country, Government, through the sector ministries, stepped up measures to mitigate the impact of the expected flooding, landslides, windstorms, hailstorms and lightening.

The huge magnitude of the damage and losses caused to infrastructure and livelihood assets across the country have been faced as challenges to responding institutions.

The magnitude of the problem

Let us start with Works; Madam Speaker, the national roads network which comprise about 20,854 kilometres of national roads, 38,603 kilometres of district roads and 19,959 kilometres of what we call urban roads and 79,947 kilometres of community access roads have witnessed damage ranging from culverts being washed out, submerging and washing of sections of the roads. 

A total of 1,422 kilometres require urgent interventions involving spot improvement, raising of 34 kilometres swamp crossings, re-graveling and installation of 868 meters of culverts.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport has in stock 3,680 meters of metallic pipe culverts and 1,624 pieces of gabions. These materials are being delivered to the districts and urban councils. 

However, the available funds of just Shs 700 million is far short of the Shs 17.7 billion required for installation, re-gravelling and raising of some swamp sections under this phase - if you look at that graph, you will see what the magnitude is.

Short-term requirements

The requirements under short-term interventions include graveling 1,203 kilometres of road and construction of 44 kilometres of swamp crossings. The total funding requirement is Shs 26 billion. This was prepared before we witnessed what we just witnessed in Mbale about two days ago.

The ministry also plans to procure 10 units of bailey bridges at a cost of Shs8 billion to provide bridging solutions in the event of serious damage to major bridges on public roads.

Medium terms requirements

The extent of damage to the roads and bridges network that can be handled in the medium term include 20 damaged bridges requiring overhaul and 21 kilometres of road requiring resealing. The total funding requirement of this category is Shs 31 billion.

When we look at food security and livelihood, the above normal rains has caused water logging in many villages -(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, without mentioning the rule, I have been following the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees carefully. He is busy telling us about the broken roads when the minister of works is around -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, please.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the minister has gone on to quote the kilometres -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, please take your seat. The Prime Minister promised you a comprehensive report done by all the Ministries, that is what he is doing. Please proceed.

MR ECWERU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance to my honourable colleague.

Emergence requirements 

The abnormal rainfall has caused water logging in many villages, rotting of foodstuff in the gardens and inability to dry crops harvested leading to huge post-harvest losses across the country. 

The most destroyed crops include root tubers - cassava and sweet potatoes, cereals like sorghum, beans, cowpeas, green grams and others.

The affected population numbering about 8,500,000 people urgently require shelter material that is tarpaulin, blankets, jerry cans, soap, sleeping mats and relief food. 

The Office of the Prime Minister had in stock just 100 rolls of tarpaulin that can be divided to create small pieces and each roll just creates about 20 of the small pieces, 5000 pieces of blankets, 5000 pieces of sleeping mats, 1500 pieces of jerry cans, 500 cartons of soap.844

I am happy to report that deliveries have been made to the 68 most affected districts such as Bududa, Bulambuli, Sironko etcetera.

Madam Speaker, I want to indicate to you that from this response, we have discussed with the Minister of Finance who must take this very urgently and bring in the question of the Contingency Fund, which has not been utilised since the crisis started. 

We have just been depending on some support that we have been getting from partners for all the response that we have been undertaking but a discussion, chaired by the Prime Minister, has directed the Minister of Finance to use the Contingency Fund to process a response.

Short term requirements

Madam Speaker, Government through the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries – NAADS and Operation wealth Creation will provide seeds that are fast maturing and disease resistant planting material and pesticides.

However, they have indicated to the meeting that they will need Shs 2.1 billion to procure the inputs at the beginning of the next planting season.

Madam Speaker, just to emphasize this, the reports that we shared with the Minister of Agriculture have indicated the magnitude of crops loss that has been occasioned to the different parts of the country and the peasants may not be able to recover on their own unless supported by the Ministry of Agriculture, particularly when the next rains start.

Madam Speaker, the de-silting of dams to control flooding – and I say this with a heavy heart. We have talked so much here repeatedly about the de-silting of the dams. The 59 year old and silted dams in water logged prone sub regions of Teso and Bukedea will be de-silted in phases and new ones constructed. This will reduce water logging and mitigating rotting of root crops.

The requirements for de-silting in the short term by the districts local governments are as below:
They have requested the Office of the Prime Minister to ask the Ministry of Finance to just release fuel and lubricants so that they can use the equipment available in the district to de-silt the dams.

Maybe just to draw the attention of the Members here who may not be familiar with those plain areas like Teso and Bukedea. When the British were here colonizing us, they saw that Teso, given the plain nature of the place, receives torrential waters from the Elgon ranges and Mt. Moroto ranges. Therefore, in order to avoid flooding in people’s homes, they constructed a number of dams that were meant to arrest the torrential waters and unfortunately, over the years, all these dams have silted hence require de-silting and that must come through. 

The Minister of Health has stepped up measures to prevent the leading causes of morbidity and mortality especially in regard to Malaria, diarrhoeal diseases and respiratory infections. A total of 20 districts most prone to waterborne diseases have been prioritised namely Bududa, Namisindwa, Bulambuli, Manafwa and Bukedea.

For the emergency faced, the ministry planned for medical needs of about 100,000 households or 800,000 people in the 20 districts. The incidence of Malaria cases in the country has increased, because of this situation, from 750,000 to 1.3 million cases between April and October. It peaked to 1.8 million, affecting 77 districts by November 2019.

The Ministry of Health has supplied emergency anti-malarial rapid testing kits and anti-malarials for 77 districts. The ministry has reached 4.8 million students, through their mobilisation, to attempt to sensitise them. The ministry has so far distributed 583,659 mosquito nets. However, in our meeting, we realised that this is a drop in the ocean given the fact that waterlogging has caused the multiplication of malaria, causing mosquitoes in many parts that have been affected so the ministry is taking up the matter. 

Regarding prevention of diarrhoeal disease outbreaks, the Ministry of Health has stepped up measures for detection, reporting and treatment of cases. Fortunately, there has been no cholera outbreak detected or reported in all the flood affected areas. 

What was not captured in the report, which we shared with the Minister of Health, is that when we reached some parts of Bukedea, we found out that the water that people pump from the boreholes is contaminated. From the tests, this presents a big risk. The Ministry of Health’s attention has been drawn to all those districts and they are working around the clock, with the district leaders, to ensure that there is no cholera breakout. Due to contamination of water sources, cholera risk is high but so far, the interventions seem to be containing any outbreak. 

To ensure that the country is not threatened by cholera outbreaks, a total of 740,000 oral cholera vaccine doses were imported in October 2019 to be used in the following cholera hotspots: Bududa, Zombo, Nebbi, Pakwach and Buliisa. Vaccination campaigns in these districts will start soon. Vaccination campaigns in cholera hotspots have a wider benefit of protecting the population within the hotspots, the surrounding districts and the country as a whole.

Madam Speaker, the ministry has supported districts to reactivate district epidemic task force meetings and it has mobilised funds for an additional 4 million anti-malarial treatments from the Global Fund. In spite of all the responses so far made, the challenges are huge and increasing every day. The ministry requires additional support of Shs 9 billion for emergency activities detailed in the following table. 

Madam Speaker, we have short-term requirements like community engagement so that the communities are aware and the local leaders do the mobilisation. The Ministry of Health has undertaken to use most of the FM stations in the country to help in that direction.

Forecasting and Early Warning

Madam Speaker, when we met with the Meteorology Department, they said that the rainfall outlook indicates that the current climate drivers, that is from September to December rains, in the country are still on and the rains are expected to continue to the end of November. Madam Speaker, you witnessed this yesterday in the places that you visited. It is worse in Mt. Elgon and the Rwenzori region. 

Due to the devastating impacts of the rains, which have persisted from August to date, the Uganda National Meteorological Authority requires some support to enable them to do what they are doing effectively. They have also listed their requirements that we have presented to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The impact of flooding is highest in the sub-regions of Bugisu, Teso, Bukedi, Kigezi and Rwenzori. The districts of Ntoroko, Kasese and Bundibugyo are equally affected. 85 per cent of the population in these sub-regions and districts have experienced severe losses of livelihood and assets in addition to common user infrastructure such as schools, roads and bridges. The sub-region of Bugisu is experiencing high levels of landslides in addition to flooding. Although many landslides are occurring, no deaths have occurred apart from two that occurred in Sironko District.

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report to you that the messages that have been communicated to the districts allowed our people to relocate from the steep hills to go and live with their people in the plain lands. The Government has been supporting them while they live with the host communities. As such, while landslides have taken place in the steep parts of the mountains and we have lost crops, among other things, we have not lost lives. To me, that is very positive. 

I would like to thank the leadership of Mount Elgon; members of Parliament who have collectively come to support us in spreading this information and ensuring that people who live in steep places leave the place. 

Although many landslides are occurring, no deaths have taken place. This time round, the people at risk cooperated and heeded guidance from the Department of Disaster Management and especially, the mitigation officers. The low lying parts of sub-regions of Busoga, Rwenzori, Lango, Bunyoro, Karamoja and West Nile have experienced losses due to flooding and storms as well as the compounding factors of destructive winds and hailstorms. 

A number of districts in the sub-regions of Buganda, Ankole, Acholi, parts of Toro and Bunyoro, though not heavily affected by flooding, have also witnessed destructive winds, hailstorms and lightning. 25 per cent of the population in these districts have incurred losses of plantations and crops, especially bananas, maize and beans. 

When we discussed this with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, these are the districts that we have captured and we have indicated the need to support them with implements, seedlings and seeds come the next planting season, so that they can get back on their feet - (Interjections)- when hon. Fungaroo entered, this happened. Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise on behalf of Irene Muloni and Eng. D’Ujanga for this.

Shelter and housing

The floods have damaged many houses in several villages and the country, especially in Teso and Bukedi sub-regions. Many houses have collapsed, others have developed cracks and others have become too damp for human settlement. Hundreds of people have been displaced. The damp floors have increased the risk of pneumonia and bacterial infections among the affected population. 

The Office of the Prime Minister, the Disaster Department, has intervened with some waterproof plastic tarpaulins and sleeping mats. However, the need overwhelms the available stock. Like I said, the little intervention that the ministry has been able to undertake was, thanks to support, from our partners. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has accepted to mobilise adequate resources after this so that we can respond adequately to other parts of the country. 

The education sector is one of the most prone to the devastating effects of floods in regard to children and infrastructure. In the first four months, the district local governments reported 750 primary, secondary and technical institution buildings from across the country that have suffered destruction due to strong winds and floods. Some schools had closed due to flooding. 

However, when we discussed with the Minister of Education and Sports, we were happy to learn that almost all the schools sat for their examinations and even those schools that were affected relocated their students to places where they were able to sit for their exams. We would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for that intervention. 

However, there is need to address the matter, particularly, critically from the place where the impact has happened.

Under the capital development budget, the Ministry of Education and Sports has a provision for emergency construction. The ministry, working with the district local governments, is assessing the damages and losses across the country and will support renovation and reconstruction of the most deserving cases.

Madam Speaker, the rest is really a narration of the problem. I would like to say that what we have requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do immediately – and as we talk, the Prime Minister is meeting the team from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – is to break this down like we have done and the total requirement will come to about Shs 43 billion. 

However, we are saying we need only Shs 9 billion for emergency interventions and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to provide that immediately so that response continues unbroken. The moment this emergency support that has come from partners is concluded, we should be able to proceed with the intervention from the ministry.

Madam Speaker, we would like to ask Parliament to direct my colleagues from the finance ministry to sometimes also be conscious so that timely response helps us to respond in time. Sometimes they seem to have a little bit of bureaucracy. They do not block the system but sometimes they have a bureaucracy that is not in tandem with the kind of urgency that emergency response deserves. 

I am happy that my colleague and the team that is here have accepted. That is what I can say for now. We will continue to do what we can. However, climate change is real and the whole country needs to rise up to make sure that we do climate change mitigation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, as you recall, we asked the Government to bring a comprehensive paper and I can see other ministers are here. We shall give a limited debate. However, before that, I would like to know something; you said something very curious – that the Prime Minister had to sit in order for you to access the Contingency Fund. That is illegal. Under the law, it is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Why does it have to take the Prime Minister to direct that the Contingency Fund be accessed?

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, I think the bureaucracy in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not responded to the urgency of the situation and that is why the Prime Minister, as Leader of Government Business, has had to chair this meeting.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are you aware of section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act?

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am aware of that section. When the Office of the Prime Minister wrote to us requesting for money from the Contingency Fund, we advised them to first utilise what they had in the budget –(Interjection)– yes, that is how it is managed. If you have money in the budget, you cannot draw from the contingency fund – if it is for the same purpose. The money that they had was for emergency. After that, we had to do it as Government – that is how the Prime Minister came in – to look at the entire thing. 

As you recall, Madam Speaker, we have Shs 60 billion only in the budget for contingency. We had to sit down to look at the Ministry of Works and Transport and other emergencies under the OPM so that we could live within the resource envelope that we have.

THE SPEAKER: Why have we not de-silted these dams? Even in my area, the dams which were built by Babiha are the only ones there.

MR BAHATI: I think the Ministry of Works and Transport can ably respond to the issue of dams.

3.19
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the ministers of finance and disaster preparedness that since the earthquake that happened in my constituency in 2016, people have not yet been assisted. However, they released $200,000 to our neighbours in Tanzania. When H.E Magufuli came to Kakuuto, he thanked H.E the President for assisting the people of Tanzania.

Up to now the schools and health centres – when you come to Kakuuto Health Centre IV, the theatre is not operational. The health centres III and schools have no toilets. We are fed up. We are invited to fundraise to repair these schools and health centres. I would like to know from the minister in charge of disaster preparedness whether they have plans. I am no longer coming to your office or the Office of the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that Uganda gave money to the Tanzanians?

MR KALEMBA: I am not suggesting; it is a fact. They asked for assistance in September 2016 and in December, they released money for Tanzania. Our neighbours in Tanzania replaced all the damaged schools and houses but in Kakuuto, when people ask us, we have no answers. We should be assisted. If you can no longer assist Kakuuto, just ask Kakuuto County to go to Tanzania.

THE SPEAKER: I came to Kakuuto; is that the health centre where there were cracks in the theatre? Are they still there?

MR KALEMBA: They are still there. Even Kakuuto Health Centre IV theatre is not operational because of the cracks. You will find damages when you go to Minziro Health Centre, Kyebere Health Center III, Kasensero and Mutukula health centres at the border. Our neighbours across the border repaired theirs and people now cross to Tanzania for medical services.

Recently when there was a fire outbreak, we went to Bikoma in Tanzania for assistance to stop the fire in Mutukula town. What is happening? 

THE SPEAKER: That is regional cooperation. (Laughter)

3.21
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister informed the House that they had to first rely on donations to respond to emergencies. We need to operationalise the Contingency Fund because according to Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act, 15 per cent of that money has to go for emergency. I wonder why we would have to rely on donations yet we have money kept there for response to disasters. 

Sometime back, the Ministry of Works and Transport was requesting for Shs 74 billion as emergency response for the infrastructure that had been destroyed by disasters in the country.

Emergency response has to be a multi-sectoral approach. In our planning for infrastructure, don’t we foresee these for us to ask for Shs 74 billion in the middle of a financial year? We have a challenge. In Bududa, Bududa Circular Road is being washed away and – the drainage is very poor. What plans do you have in terms of drainage to make the roads durable? I think we have not planned for long-term. Maybe we do short-term plans so that we keep getting money every time.

We talk about people who have been resettled in Bulambuli but we still have many people in Bugisu – Bududa and Manafwa – who are still in those risky areas. Even those who have been resettled in Bulambuli still have some needs. Resettlement cannot be complete unless the needs of the people have been met –(Interruption)

MR WATENGA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my sister is that in July, Bududa was hit by landslides, mostly in Bwali and Bubita. As we talk, the minister may not be aware – the people who were displaced in Bubita are still at Bubita Subcounty Headquarters. The people who were displaced in Bwali, where I am also affected –(Interjection)- over 2,000 people – hon. Nambeshe was in the other meeting and he has the information. These people are staying in Kitsawa and Bumayoka Primary Schools. That is the information I wanted to give my sister.

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, honourable member, we come from those affected areas so when you see a Bududa issue, those are the challenges we are facing. Special attention should be given to the Elgon sub region. Thank you, so much.

3.24
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. However, to set the record right and correct the impression created by the minister, the minister in his statement indicated that some areas including Acholi sub region were not always affected by floods but this is not correct. 

Speaking specifically for Pader District, I have over 50 per cent sub counties in Pader District that are seriously affected by floods. Some people had to be displaced from the sub counties of Laguti, Atanga, Angagura part of Awere, part of Lapul part of Pajule because of floods.

There were families in those sub-counties which had to look for relatives in sub counties that are not affected by floods to bury their dead because graves could be dug in their homesteads.

Honourable minister, even if we are to travel now to Pader District, you will see for yourself that we have over six sub counties seriously affected by floods and some people are displaced up to now as we speak.

We could be having problems of submission by the district leadership but I request that you get in touch or we coordinate with you and set this record right. Acholi sub region and specifically Pader District is seriously affected by floods. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Katakwi, particularly the area of Toroma, is usually affected by the problem of water logging; most especially Magoro, Kapujan, Omodoi, Amusia.

The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees tried some interventions but there is still a very big challenge. The families which had cassava and potatoes totally do not have tarpaulins for drying them. Therefore, I request the ministry to give these small sized tarpaulins to families so that they are able to dry cassava.

Secondly, on the issue of de-silting valley dams; there was a project but it completely did nothing in Katakwi. Majority of the valley dams especially those that used to contain this heavy water coming from Karamoja are silted.

I have spoken to the officials from the Ministries of Agriculture and Water but there is no intervention. I do not know what the Government can do especially in de-silting these valley dams. If they are de-silted there will be no problem completely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister of finance will tell us - we are talking but are you going to give this money? That is the important thing. 

3.29
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When disaster occurs, people with disabilities are more affected but the method of giving out things - people fight for food, basins etcetera.

There should affirmative action of considering such people that they can be given their share; otherwise it depends on your energy. I beg the minister that these people are more vulnerable and we need to take care of them.

I raised an issue last time of Wakiso School for the Deaf, the only secondary school we have in Uganda. I am being informed - the Minister of Education and Sports came here with a budget but to date, the school has not been rehabilitated yet the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education had agreed to support that school.

We just asked for some tents to be taken to the school and nobody thinks about them. Why are we so insensitive to people who did not ask to be what they are? As we speak here to ask for money for budget we need to think of Ugandans on equal basis. 

Otherwise some of our people keep asking and wondering whether they belong to Uganda; so, I would like to ask the minister to come up with the right programme - affirmative action - such that everybody can access this kind of support. Thank you.

3.30
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that maybe these issues of disaster are separated. For example, if we have a problem with schools, we know where to go.

Last year toward the PLE exams, I went to the honourable minister and almost all the blocks where the children were supposed to sit their exams were down. Nothing was done when I went to the ministry.

I remember being told that they did not have money for schools and they asked me to go to the Ministry of Education. When I went to the Ministry of Education, the same answer was given and they keep telling you that and you do not know where to go.

This year I still have the same problem; one of the schools in my sub counties is down. A primary school is completely down; they had to move to another school to sit for their exam but we do not know where to go because when you go to one of the ministries, schools are not considered. We are looking at basins like my sister said but what are we going to do after that?

Madam Speaker, come next year, we are going to have a problem in our district because there will be no food. As we speak, we are giving people food but are we going to keep giving rice, beans to the people?

What are we going to do next year because all the gardens are completely destroyed? I do not know what we are planning; we might be planning for today but what are we going to do tomorrow?

I, therefore, call upon the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to look at tomorrow because right now all the gardens are down. The irish potatoes are finished, all my gardens are down and when you go they tell you come for the rice tomorrow and it is not there. The blankets are not there; you keep moving and get tired.

I would like to call upon the ministry and other ministries concerned to come together and get a way forward to help our people in all our sub counties. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope the Ministry of Education and Sports will confirm what has been written here that under capital development budget, the ministry has a provision for emergency construction. I hope you will be able to confirm that money.

3.33
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like thank the minister for the statement. Most Members have spoken with a lot of pain because we know what we go through when our voters insult us thinking that we are preventing them from receiving what they are supposed to.

Madam Speaker, our case is different that even when it has not rained in Butaleja, we get floods from the waters that come from the neighbouring districts.

For this reason, I would like to request the minister to give special consideration to such districts. For instance, in Butaleja where we are affected and houses have been brought down, I do not think we need rice as relief aid because we grow rice in Butaleja. Actually, we do not have market for our rice.

Last year when we were debating this issue of floods, we requested Government to give business to our people who have enough food. Let them purchase our food and store it in preparation for seasons when we have disasters. However, I do not know why Government has failed to do this. Why should we import rice from other countries when we have people who grow rice in Uganda? 

Madam Speaker, we have areas where people simply need iron sheets, blankets and tarpaulins for shelter. However, when you come with rice as the first priority, we really do not understand what kind of assistance this is. We appreciate what the minister is doing but let us give priority where it deserves. Butaleja District needs a special strategy because we are really facing a lot of problems in giving answers to our voters. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR ILUKOR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the way the people are speaking, every constituency right now has a disaster and the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has a programme on how to address it. The issue is money.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for us now to deal with the issue of money to the ministry rather than individually? All of us have disasters. He broke the law by not providing for money in the Contingency Fund. Why don’t we deal with that and have the money go to deal with disasters? We will then deal with him if he does not provide it.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I had said that the minister will have to confirm that he is going to provide the money. All these problems need money. He has asked for money. Tell us, are you going to give him or not? That will solve the problem.

3.36
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two issues that I would like the minister to know. In Otuke, the floods have washed away cassava, sweet potatoes and pumpkins that we feed on. They are all rotten. Compared to the western part of Uganda where people live on matooke, these are root tubers, which stay underground. Therefore, when you look at the condition of people in the north and east and how they are suffering, I think this is unbearable.

Secondly, in Otuke, we have two main dams, which were dug five years ago. I do not know whether these dams are for advertisement because they have no use at all. During the dry season, people suffer because of water shortage. They cannot even use this dam for irrigation.

These are the kinds of things that our country suffers from. When something is built for use, it simply remains there, either for historical moments or to teach people. I would like to request the honourable minister to look into these dams to be used accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that the minister has provided information about the whole country concerning food, houses, dams and schools. It is really about money. Are you going to give him this money? That is what we would like to hear so that we leave him to go and deal with these issues. Let us hear about the money. What we want is the money, which the minister has asked for here.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we had a meeting under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister and looked through what is actually needed to address the immediate emergencies. We are providing the money that is needed to cater for immediate emergencies through the Contingency Fund.

THE SPEAKER: I would like you to confirm the following that you are going to provide:

    1. Shs 17,766,796,948 for the works sector;
    2. Shs 9,055,000,000 for non-food commodities;
    3. Shs 9,538,250,000 for emergency requirements;
    4. Shs 580,000,000 for Early Warning Meteorological Authority and
    5. Shs 9 billion for water, sanitation and hygiene.

This is a total of Shs 43,716,746,000. That is what we are asking for, honourable minister.

MR BAHATI: That is what the ministries have asked for but what we can raise at the moment, given the cash situation, is Shs 20 billion to cater for immediate emergencies. We are working with them to go through the immediate items required. Not all that money is needed now because some is needed as we implement.

For example, if you go for water, there are those –(Interjection)- Just a second. Madam Speaker, what we can confirm is that money for the items that are needed immediately will be funded through the Contingency Fund. 

From our estimates, the Shs 20 billion will be sufficient, for now, to cater for immediate items like food, to fix the bridges, which need to be fixed now and then water. However, it is also important that this House broadens the debate to talk about how we can avoid some of these issues in future. 

The issue of wetlands and how to do proper farming to protect our terraces are issues that we need to discuss as members of Parliament so as to avoid these emergencies in future. However, for now, the resources needed to cater for immediate items for emergencies are available. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, are you able to move with the Shs 20 billion? 

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, we will have to. We appreciate the challenge that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has. However, like I said, we need to do something for the three sectors of relief, health and critical roads. The Minister of Health – (Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I normally do not like interrupting senior ministers, especially when they are trying to tell us what they are doing in the ministries.

However, we are talking about the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I would not like the senior minister in charge of disaster preparedness to be a disaster himself. (Laughter) I have said, “I would not like”; I am not saying he is.

Is it in order for the minister to say, ‘if there was money he would wish…’ yet there is a lot of money that he is using to buy hoes for ministers? Is he in order to tell us that there is no money for disasters like in Sembabule? Is he is order to misguide the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will the Shs 20 billion be available? Is it tomorrow?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) has put in a request and it is being processed. We think, in the next two days, we should be able to release the money to the ministry. It takes a few days to release money as you know.

What we can confirm, however, is that through the meeting that we had, the items which were identified as critical that needed immediate attention will be fixed.

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just would like to seek clarification because we seem to take the whole country as if we have the same problems and use the same solutions. Also, we seem to push the issue of money as if it is the only thing that we need. 

I stood on this Floor two months ago and informed this House that a whole parish in Busaru Sub-county is sinking and I requested Government to send scientists, geologists and meteorologists to go and study what is happening in Bundibugyo. We are in the rift valley and we are scared that maybe the processes that formed the rift valley are again coming up.

As I talk, we have over 100 families that we have guided to move away from that place. Do we need money to send our own scientists in the geology department of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning to go and find out what is causing the problem? Are we waiting for people to die and then we begin rushing there? 

Up to now, Government has done nothing there. When we reported here, the Prime Minister said we were using the wrong channel to bring the report. He said we should report to the Office of the Prime Minister. Our District Disaster Committee reported to OPM and I have copies of those reports but OPM is not responding.

This is not only about money. There is a lot of indifference. Our ministers are not listening to us and they are not responding to the issues we are bringing. Is it only about money, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, I asked whether there is money because there were a number of interventions proposed that needed money. That is why I asked whether the money is there. Of course that is what we need to hear first. 

Now, concerning the issue raised by hon. Gafabusa, it is true he raised that that part of the land in Bundibugyo was sinking and we asked the Government to go and establish what is happening. 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, we are going to send our team immediately.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there anything which is not part of this? Is there a volcano somewhere?

3.48
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for ably indicating what is happening in Uganda.

I carefully listened to my neighbour and he mentioned that food and non-food items including tarpaulins, soap, blankets and medicines are being delivered to Bulambuli. Yesterday, I was from the constituency and I had a very big meeting with all the Chairpersons of LCI, LCII and LCIII. The people told me that they received some little rice but there were no non-food items that my colleague spoke about. 

We need to be very honest in this House. I know that very important issues are decided in this House and once we have decided, we implement. However, when you allege things which are not there, it is very unfortunate. 

Secondly, what we urgently need, as the people of Lower Bulambuli, is for the broken bridges which connect the Health Centre IVs to be fixed –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is what the minister has said. He said he is giving money to the Ministry of Works and Transport as a priority for those bridges. It is only hon. Gafabusa’s issue which had not been covered by this.

3.50
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this information. An emergency is urgent and it means now. There are certain things, which he has raised here and which we had raised as well but the responses we get from the Ministry of Works and Transport, for example, when roads are blocked – the ministry said we wait for the rain to subside so that they can start the work on the road. 

Technically speaking, that is okay. That is part of the rehabilitation response. What about in the case of emergency in Obongi where all the three roads taking food to the refugees’ settlement in Palorinya are blocked? Therefore, why don’t you think about another alternative of delivering food, for example by air or water? Delivering food by water can work. If you had critically thought about it, you could bring food up to Pakwach. 

Madam Speaker, right from Pakwach, you can move along the Nile up to Angalia Chini Landing Site in Tula Sub-county where you can offload the food and it goes directly to the camp.

I agree with the Minister of the Ministry of Works and Transport because I have worked with them. I came through the Water Department but your element of emergency is not working. I have talked to the people of the Ministry of Works and Transport at Moyo’s UNRA station and I also went to Gulu but the answer they give is that I should wait until the water subsides –

THE SPEAKER: Are you responding to his statement or are you bringing your own issue? 

MR FUNGAROO: The statement does not address the issue of emergency in Obongi where Obongi-Adjumani-Atiak Road, Obongi Kwilikwilinga Road and Obongi-Moyo Road are closed and there are vehicles with food stuck there. Food cannot go. You have the World Food Programme, the UN and other international partners here. Why don’t you use the helicopter? Why don’t you use water transport for the Ministry of Works and Transport to deliver medicine and food to Palorinya Refugee Settlement so that you help the refugees? This is the issue I am raising.

3.53
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have Shs 20 billion as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said. However, the big issue is how this money is going to be utilised.

When the emergency fund is got, the way it is distributed to the entire nation is not fair. I am stuck with two requests from the people of Mayuge, which were faithfully approved by the minister. When you go to the commissioners, they toss you up and down. I do not know whether after the minister approves the requests, he calls his commissioners and say, “Hon. Waira is coming. Don’t give.” 

Madam Speaker, let us look at how these funds are going to be utilised. We want this money to be distributed fairly to all corners of the country –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Waira Majegere for giving way. The information I would like to give this House is that if you listened to BBC, they reported massive landslides in the Western Kenya rift valley, killing about 40 people. They also said that there is going to be heavy rainfall in East Africa.

Therefore, the information I am giving you - Madam Speaker, the honourable minister should tell the country when it is going to stop raining because these problems - (Interjection) - just a second. They should make the country know because the Government cannot reach every household. We are a third world country. Can we be told when these rains will stop, for planning purposes?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this statement, the honourable minister explained that and he is also asking for money for the metrological Authority to improve on the forecast. Please conclude.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the minister approves, you go to the ministry and they toss you up and down. I went to the ministry and they told me that they are giving food to Wakiso. Can you imagine Mayuge and Wakiso and you are prioritising Wakiso; how do you prioritise your activities? If you compare Mayuge and Wakiso - I am stuck with your two approvals and I have them.

Madam Speaker, when we look at the issue of roads and the Ministry of Education and Sports buildings, we need to look at -where did the engineers of the Obote regime go? The buildings built during that time are still standing but right now, our engineers build a classroom and within six months it is already collapsing. Where are those engineers so that we can be able to improve on our building and be able to mitigate these disasters? I thank you.

3.56
MR DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, there seems to be an endless debate about these issues of disasters in every part of Uganda. I would like to propose or procedurally speaking, the National Budget is passed by this Parliament. Now, would it not be good procedure if the portfolios concerned with disaster such as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is at the centre of the discussion and has the national purse sit under the Budget Committee and make a proposal so that we can recast the National Budget because we have the legal mandate.

If we think that there is sufficient information and a problem that there is need to readdress or recast the Budget before the next fiscal year, we can do it here. Would it not be a correct procedure to push all these issues back to the Committee on Budget and we recast the National Budget to reflect the needs of the day?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should help the minister and ourselves. If the minister could assemble the chairpersons of disaster committees in all districts in one place, they can sit and prioritise because they will come from all over the country and prioritise the needs.

3.58
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya Country, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The budgetary allocations that have been made in that statement by the minister exclude crucial components of emergency operation.

Take the case of Bududa and Bundibugyo for instance; he has mentioned in that statement that there are many landslides which have mainly devastated crops and livestock. He has not mentioned lives. However, with the pounding heavy down pours there are looming landslides that may cost of lives. He should have come with an allocation for an evacuation plan. 

These people who are sinking for instance ought to be evacuated. Such a plan should be in this statement. How about those who are living in high risk hills which are full of numerous cracks? And with the heavy down pours, those cracks will let loose and heavy catastrophic landslides will destroy lives.

It is by omission and commission that a budget allocation to evacuation of such people living in those high risk places is missing.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. This falls down to the question of money. However, you presided over a Parliament that passed the Public Finance Management Act and you specifically specified a Contingency Fund.

We had a long debate with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Budget Committee when he failed to provide for Shs 140 billion that is required under the law to be put aside as a Contingency Fund. All this debate would not ensue if we had stuck with what the law says.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right if we find a way of going back to what the Budget and Constitution stipulates and we provide the money? You are crying this year; Government is not giving this Parliament right information.

What is even envisaged next year is worse than - because this country is going to have the worst floods ever seen in decades in next rains- They are going to be the worst we have ever experienced? Government has all this information.

Therefore, as we fire brigade –(Interjection)– they know. As we fire brigade, let us go back and stick to what the law says. There is money put aside in the law which the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development fails to provide every Financial Year and they come here, bombast Parliament and make you cry loud and clear.

Therefore, why can’t the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development specifically go back to what is provided in the law, put it aside and it can solve all these problems of Shs 40 billion. He only provided Shs 37 billion. That is the information I wanted to give that let us go to what the law says.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all appreciate the position that the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development is in.

However, also the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development has clearly indicated that out of the Shs 43 billion, it is Shs 20 billion that can be raised as of now. May be to put all this to rest because Members are still raising issues from their constituencies, I would like to propose that the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness could go and sit down so that we look at the most critical. When you look at this Budget, the Shs 43 billion in its bulk, Shs 17 billion goes towards road works and bridges to repair and so on.

Therefore, would it not be procedurally right for the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to go and sit and come and inform this House maybe tomorrow on what the Shs 20 billion is going to be used for so that we can move and see in the immediate what we can use the Shs 20 billion for? I am just proposing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether - of course I had proposed that may be he sits with the disaster committees of the districts. I do not know whether he has update on the issues.

4.03
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and that last year when we had famine, he helped us. However, this time, I think I have understood because I have been angry with him.

We recently had many landslides in different parts of the district. In Kayonza sub-county, we even lost a woman who the rain found in the kitchen preparing lunch for her family. She was swept away with her kitchen and part of the House. That issue is there but we have not received any relief. However, thanks to God, I hope that the money that the honourable minister is going to release will benefit Kanungu as well. 

Madam Speaker, I am somehow worried because one of our colleagues made a statement here that it seems in the west, because we feed on matooke, maybe we are somehow okay. This is not true. The matooke died a long time ago because of banana wilt. We no longer have bananas in most of the districts. I decided to say this so that I can arrest my fears that maybe when this hope comes, you will not forget the west because you think there are bananas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is directed to go and prepare a schedule of priorities for the Shs 20 billion and come back with it to this House tomorrow.

4.05
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is scientific evidence in high impact international journals from scientists sending early warning signals to people and Governments that care about their citizens. When you take interest in those high impact journals or international publications, Uganda is highlighted and this is critical, Madam Speaker.

There is something fundamentally going wrong in the East African Rift Valley and no amount of strong Parliament might revert this. However, I think the best way to solve a problem is to identify the problem fundamentally and then find a fundamental solution.

Madam Speaker, I am here to provide a solution and I think this is kind of gray - We have heard from the minister and really want to thank him because he really works hard. I am one of those that commend you for your great work. You are diligently serving our country.

Madam Speaker, I have heard from the Budget something concerning bridges. I am just asking if the problem is the limited resources. Why can’t we say that instead of using disaster money on bridges, we ask UNRA to handle that so that the limited money that we have focuses on emergencies in terms of food relief?

Madam Speaker, every time there is a disaster in my place, I give a copy of our needs to your Office. The minister is here and I have written about four letters. Every year I have disaster; 2016, 2017, 2018 and even this year we have had disasters. 

When it happened this year, I decided to write another letter to the minister for one reason; every time I write a letter seeking for relief intervention, I get a response from the minister that there is no money available. I said, how long will I continue with that? We keep responding to these emergencies using our meagre resources.  

Madam Speaker, my last submission is, this being a big and countrywide problem, I ask that the minister looks at the national perspective including every district. I think the entry point would be that this country is endowed with resource capabilities. Every district has a disaster committee. Can you call an emergency meeting? Call these people from upcountry to give you status reports and you would base on those reports for clear intervention. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is directed to go and work out the priorities for the Shs 20 billion and come back tomorrow to report to the House.

The Minister of Energy has agreed to go and address the issue in Bundibugyo and give us a report I think by Thursday. The Minister of Health is here, let her answer about Kakuuto.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the guidance you have given to the House that the minister should return tomorrow.

However, I also think that the issue you raised about district disaster committees would work better. The experience we have had - The other day, colleagues held a press conference and accused the Minister for Disaster Preparedness of using his office and the funds for disaster to buy hoes to give to the ministers to distribute in their respective constituencies.

In my place, we reported a number of disasters to this House and the district chairperson made a report that was duly received by the Prime Minister’s Office.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: My procedural issue is, whereas we are emphasising the issue of money, there is also something to do with the use of the money and whether everybody is going to be covered.

THE SPEAKER: On that one, I think we will need the Auditor- General to tell us how the money was used because no one knows. Let us get the Auditor-General’s report on that. Honourable minister, tomorrow -

MR ECWERU: I will do that tomorrow, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE BRUTALITY ON SOME LEADERS AND DELEGATES FROM THE FORUM FOR DEMOCRATIC CHANGE (FDC) BY THE UGANDA POLICE FORCE ON MONDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2019

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mario Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, before I read this statement, just for my guidance, it was uploaded last week and we had not presented it here. However, it was published in one of our daily newspapers. I do not know the procedures of Parliament regarding statements that are made in Parliament, whether they become a public document after or before they are presented. I would like your guidance for posterity.

THE SPEAKER: The challenge that we have got nowadays is that once you upload, you have actually laid. Therefore, it becomes a public document.

MR OBIGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We were supposed to have made this statement on 7 November 2019 but because of some events and activities in Parliament, last week, we were unable to do so. I will not read the introduction, which essentially, I was explaining why there was a delay. I hope that this statement is on your iPads.

I will go to the chronology of the events. On 14 October 2019, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, Spokesperson for Forum for Democratic Change party (FDC) and Member of Parliament, Kira Municipality, wrote to the Inspector of Police indicating that his party was intending to have a one day seminar on governance at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole Car Park. In his letter, hon. Ssemujju indicated that FDC leaders, Members and supporters mainly around Kampala and Wakiso would attend by invitation. 

On l November 2019, the Assistant IGP, Asuman Mugenyi Director of Operations, in response to the notification, informed hon. Ssemujju that his letter had been received. However, Mugenyi raised the following five points: 

a) 	He requested that the police be availed with proof of permission from the owner of the venue (Management of Mandela National Stadium).
b) 	He advised that the Car Park is an open space, which would not be conducive for holding a seminar of that nature.
c) 	He suggested that the seminar be held indoors. 
d) 	He informed hon. Ssemujju that the conduct of the intended activities should be in compliance with the road map of Electoral Commission. Here, he was basically referring to the issue of an open campaign if it is to be so.
e) 	Finally, AIGP Mugenyi advised hon. Ssemujju to provide a copy of the day’s programme to enable police draw a comprehensive security plan in order to be able to secure the event. Sadly, in spite, of the response, the requests and guidelines given by the police, hon. Ssemujju never responded to the five points that I have raised. 

I would like to read the letter of AIGP Mugenyi. It is not part of my text but I would like to read the letter, which was written. It was dated 1 November 2019, addressed to hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, FDC Spokesperson, Chief Opposition Whip, Parliament House, Kampala. 

“Reference: FDC 15th anniversary Event at Namboole on 15 December Reference is made to yours to the Inspector General of Police dated 14 October 2019, regarding the events at Namboole: 

1. 	This is to request you to show proof of permission of the venue owners.
2. 	The car park is an open ground, which is not enclosed. You are advised to conduct your seminar consultation indoors and your activities should be in compliance with the Electoral Commission roadmap. 
3. 	A copy of the day’s programme should be availed to this office to enable commanders draw sufficient security plans.
 
Looking forward to your response.”

This letter was dated 1 November 2019. I will lay this copy on the Table. Here, we are talking about the car park of Mandela National Stadium, not inside the stadium. 

Instead, on 3 November 2019, at 14.00 hours, hon. Ssemujju sent some people to erect tents at Namboole Stadium Parking Ground. Based on intelligence, the DPC Kira division responded immediately and tasked the organisers to avail her with the necessary requirements as had earlier on been requested in the response of the Director Operations. Hon. Ssemujju did not produce any document.

On 4 November 2019, at 10.00 hours, FDC members led by their leaders who included but not limited to; hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi, hon. Ssemujju and Dr Col Kiiza Besigye, forcefully attempted to access the proposed ground. However, police had earlier sealed off the venue because of non-compliance with the requirements. Upon realising that the premises had been sealed off, the leaders directed their supporters who had gathered and were now numbering about 500 to proceed to FDC offices in Najjanankumbi. 

Soon, a rowdy procession started heading towards Kampala Central Business Centre, waving and shouting ”Twerwaneko”. At about 11.00hrs, police intercepted this rowdy procession at Kireka farmers’ market and cautioned them not to move in a procession. They defied the police. Instead, they parked their vehicles in the middle of the road, thereby blocking and paralysing the flow of traffic. Police had no choice but to disperse this defiant crowd. This was done after making a proclamation, declaring the process illegal. 

By then, Dr Kiiza Besigye had emerged as the de facto leader of the procession. Police, therefore, engaged him in a talk. He was even offered a lead car in order to give way to other road users. He refused this offer or to heed to any suggestions towards peaceful movement to Najjanakumbi. As a result of the standoff created by Col Kiiza Besigye's refusal to heed to any negotiations, rowdy crowds built up. These rowdy crowds started pelting the police with stones resulting in the injury of: 

1. Cpl Anthony Bwiho, a driver 
2. PC Denis Maliyamungu 
3. PC Christopher Oyet. 

In addition to injuring the above, two police vehicles were damaged. The normal traffic flow was seriously disrupted. These cases of assault and malicious damage have been opened at Kireka Police station. 

Attempts to tow away Dr Kiiza Besigye's vehicle failed thrice. This was because the towing hooks on the vehicle – both in front and behind – were missing on Kiiza Besigye's vehicle. We suspect these had deliberately been removed earlier in anticipation. After all, in earlier similar circumstances, this same vehicle had been towed away. After sometime, Dr Kiiza Besigye and group, in defiance of police instructions, continued to drive towards the Central Business District, waving to the crowds but also causing a lot of jam. 

On reaching Nakawa at Spear Motors, he parked at the junction. This caused traffic paralysis along all along that junction – to Mbuya, Jinja, Kampala and Ntinda. Police had no choice but to use reasonable force to remove Dr Besigye and other occupants who had locked themselves inside the vehicle. This action on the part of police is provided for in Section 3(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act (Cap 176) and Section 21(2)(b) of the Police Act (Cap 303). 

Madam Speaker, for the information of Members, I could read these sections. Section 3(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act reads follows:

“3. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.

If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under subsection (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue but cannot be obtained without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity to escape, for a police officer, to enter the place and search in it, and in order to effect an entrance into the place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification of his or her authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he or she cannot otherwise obtain admittance.”

Section 21(2)(b) of the Police Act reads as follows:

“21. General powers and duties of a police officer.
 (2) Subject to Section 27, a police officer in the performance of his or her functions under subsection (1) may, without warrant, and at any hour of the day or night, enter into any premises to which dissolute or disorderly characters are resorting” – (Interjections)- Yes, premises in our view includes a vehicle.(Laughter)

After being removed from the vehicle, Dr Besigye was arrested with his driver Fred Kato and his ADC Benson Twesigye. They were all detained at Nagalama Police Station on charges of inciting violence and obstructing the road. A further total of 56 suspects were also arrested, detained at Kiira Police Station and charged with inciting violence. The 56 suspects are residents of Kawempe, Makerere, Makindye, Rubaga and Nakawa, divisions.

That is the explanation of the circumstances under which he was arrested.

Our observation is that there is a growing tendency by some members of the public to hurl insults at police while police are doing their legitimate work. The legitimate work within the law includes the legal process of arresting a person. This is unacceptable. Many people have gone as far as physically assaulting the police, which is unlawful. Furthermore, police are human. 

If I could paraphrase – this is not in the text. There is a book I read: Merchant of Venice and there was a character called Shylock the Duke, who was demonised. He said “if you tickle us can’t we laugh? If you prick us, can’t we bleed”?

The police are human and they can only take so much. Let us all be supportive of our police as they do their work of maintaining law and order and keeping us all safe. If they make mistakes, let us use the proper channels to address those mistakes. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, let me lay on Table the letter of Mugenyi, which he wrote on behalf of the IGP on 1 November, 2019. The heading is: “FDC anniversary Event at Namboole in November and December.” It was copied to the FDC President, FDC Secretary General, Commandant Kampala Metropolitan Police and the District Police Commander, Kira. I beg to lay.

The others are public documents and I can only refer to the headings: The Criminal Procedure Court section 3 (2) you can refer to that and the Police Act, under general powers, section 21(2)(b). I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have a few comments.

4.33
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for shocking the nation. While our fellow citizens were recovering from the shock of what could have happened if that high pressure water had killed one of our leaders, I am shocked that there is no remorse whatsoever in the minister’s communication. Human beings must be treated with dignity, respect and honour no matter who they are and where they belong politically.

Honourable minister, be kind to the people you meet on your way up because you will find them on your way down. People do not fall from the valley, they fall from the top. You are on top today, you will be in the valleys tomorrow but we promise that when we take over Government very soon, we will treat you better.

Aside from that, I would like to believe that the letters presented before this House could be a concoction. I am asking you very kindly to demand from the minister proof that the purported letters were indeed received by the leaders. My Secretary General is here and he has just whispered to me that he did not receive that letter. We want proof that hon. Ssemujju indeed received your letter.

Madam Speaker, we have been to international conferences together and some of the questions that the audience has presented for our attention are the level and scale of human rights abuses. I would like to end with a citation from the Constitution; Article 21 states that fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and guaranteed by the state. I want that to be noted by the minister and other officers.

Two, the rights and freedoms of the individual - and Dr Besigye in particular and other leaders - and groups enshrined in this chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs, not some, and agencies of Government and by all persons.

This is the supreme law of Uganda that shall have burning force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda. This authority includes the authority of IGP, including the Minister for Internal Affairs and all persons includes those that hold offices. 

Madam Speaker, it is now a pattern and a trend that the people highlighted here – Sadly, I lost a mother - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I lost a mother and as a leader, Dr Besigye was touched and he travelled to Kasese to empathise with my family and I. However, he was blocked from getting to the burial to condone and empathise with me until I told the crowd because literally the entire district had assembled at home.

I said, we are going to abandon the burial and rescue Dr Besigye and I will have him ushered into the burial. This has nothing to do with processions, you are going overboard. You are over stepping your mandate.

Lastly, hon. Winfred Kiiza lost her father-in-law and hon. Kyagulanyi travelled to go and bury. He too was stopped until we used the same threat that we would abandon the burial and go and pick him up. As a country, have we lost our sense of shame? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.36
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, let us start with the law in force. It is regrettable that the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs lays on the Table a letter purportedly written to hon. Ssemujju Nganda on the 1st for an event that is supposed to happen on 15th December. 

The FDC is organising an anniversary at Namboole on 15th December and so, hon. Ssemujju Nganda wrote and this letter that the minister is displaying is a response to a completely different event. Before I proceed, I request that he humbly withdraws this letter.

THE SPEAKER: Is this the letter, which the minster tabled? Okay, the heading is, “FDC’s 15th anniversary event on December 15th 2019.” This event has not yet happened.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I did not read hon. Sssemuju’s letter. If you permit, I will read the soft copy and produce a copy for the file. The heading is exactly the same but it contained two events in the same letter and that is why we are referring to the heading as it was addressed to the Police. We are answering to the first event contained in that letter. 

Madam Speaker, if you wish, I could read the full letter of hon. Ssemujju as it contains both.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is better.

MR OBIGA: I will lay a hard copy thereafter. Hon. Ssemujju’s letter was written on 14th October 2019 and it was addressed to the IGP and it is on the letterhead of the FDC. The subject is, “FDC’s 15th anniversary event at Namboole on December 15th 2019. The content reads as follows:

This is to notify you that the FDC will host her 15th anniversary on December 15 2019 at Namboole National Stadium. This function will attract about 2000 FDC leaders, members and supporters, mainly around Kampala and Wakiso.

The FDC will also host a one-day seminar on governance on November 1 at Namboole Stadium, which will attract about 1000 participants. Permission to stage these two functions in the car parking yard of Namboole has been lodged.

Sincerely,
Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda,
FDC Spokesperson
The Chief Opposition Whip

CC FDC President
CC FDC Secretary-General
Cc Kampala Metropolitan Police
CC DPC Kira”

So, AIGP Mugenyi was responding under the same heading, as captioned by FDC, to two events. It was in this particular respect that the earliest event which was taking place. I thank you.

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, that is the gravity of what we experience when we are organising these events. In the Public Order Management Act, it was envisaged that if there is contention between the organiser and the authorising agency, a magistrate should intervene, after you have failed to agree on a meeting convened.

The law directs the authorising agency to invite the organiser for a meeting to discuss an alternative venue. In the event that they disagree, they should go to the magistrate to hear a case out. Now, what they do is to write these kinds of letters; that is where they commit actual fraud.

Regarding that letter, which he says referred to an event on 1st; 1st is when that letter was written and the function was on 4th. Madam Speaker, if you read that letter, it only refers to the content of the event on 15th. It does not in any way speak for the events that were to happen on 4th; not a single letter, paragraph or even a comma.

So, Madam Speaker, how would the organisers respond? How would they know what they meant for the events that were supposed to be on 1st and how would they move court if they wanted to disagree? That is the method of work, which we have insisted on; that let the authorities work within the ambit of the law. We are simply saying the law may be bad but can we all attest and work within the dictates of the law?

The police is failing to work within the dictates of the law. They are abusing and offending the law consistently. That is what we believe is extremely unfair.

Two, in response to the minister, he does not in any way justify the method used because it was an attempted murder on Dr Kiiza Besigye. Those of you who saw the video clips on television; that kind of water boarding was a terrorist act. Had Besigye not been so lucky, by this time, he would be dead. 

Madam Speaker, our bone of contention is, should a letter like this stand, when actually, it does not in any way refer to the events of 4th? The minister should be honest to goodness and say he never responded to hon. Ssemujju’s content on the events of 4th. Therefore, you acted outside the law.

4.48
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to school the minister on what the legislative intent in enacting this law was. It was to safeguard public order. That was the intent. However, whenever there is destruction, chaos, teargas and blood in these activities, then the legislative intent is lost at that point.

The law is to the effect that police has no mandate to prohibit these activities. Their mandate extends to regulation of these activities. I am fortified by the case of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi vs the Attorney-General, where the court was very clear on the mandate of police; that you can only regulate.

Having said that, honourable minister, you are a very good friend of mine. I do not expect you to come here with that type of letter. Hon. Ssemujju consulted me on the 1st that the IGP had not responded to his letter. It is me who gave him the number of the Director of Operations, AIGP Mugenyi and asked him to call him and insist that he should respond to the letter.

The IGP told him that he was busy and he should wait but I told him to call him again. We insisted. Under the law, Uganda Police is required to respond to letters written to them. There is no evidence that the letter the honourable minister is moving with was ever served on hon. Ssemujju or on the parties he is alleging.

Finally, we would like to lay a foundation for the security of our country. You can only do that by those who have public power exercising it lawfully, the way it is supposed to be. Honourable minister, as a friend, go and instruct Uganda Police that when we write to them, they must respond.

For instance, Madam Speaker, at the training, on Friday, which I organised as area Member of Parliament and Microfinance Support Centre, I wrote to police two weeks earlier. They told me that they were consulting with Kampala. I kept on calling whoever is responsible and then later, they told me that they have not got clearance from Kampala so the function may not take place.

I told them they do not have the power to stop it. When I insisted, their RPC told me that I should simply go on with the function and they will monitor. The function went on without them writing back to inform me about their –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.
 
MR MWIRU: In conclusion, what we are requesting from the minister is that it does not help us to come here and start exchanging words. We would like you to instruct Uganda Police that if they have issues with any organised function, they should write back and point out the issues. The law does not give them the power to prohibit an enjoyment of a right. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister of police –(Laughter)– oh, Minister of Internal Affairs has decided to defend all the activities, including illegal ones, of the police. 

The person they were beating up is a former Minister of Internal Affairs. He is a former National Political Commissar. We must respect the police but you should also respect some of these leaders who are senior to you. The way you respond to what happens to them; we do not know what the future holds for us.

Secondly, the letter is advising FDC to organise activities indoors. Can you imagine the police are deciding what activities FDC should do and where they should go? Can we let it continue that the police advise on what activities and where – Honourable minister, please, this is not fair. 

The reasonable force he is talking about is water spray, breaking the vehicles and pepper spraying the occupants of the vehicle. 

Finally, he is talking about the police getting orders from court to go to the premises. Which court allowed the police to enter the premises of the vehicle of Dr Besigye, if those are the premises he is referring to? There must be a warrant from court to go and do such a thing. You see a senior police officer breaking the vehicle and pepper spraying the occupants. 

Honourable minister, I know some of these things are given to you to come and read but you need to read through and appreciate that some of them are not fair. I would like to thank you.

4.54
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a senior cadre of NRM, I get disappointed the way police acts. Honourable minister, most of these Opposition candidates especially for the Presidential races do not have votes. Why don’t you leave them to go? They have votes on social media and televisions. Leave them to go. (Laughter) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not understand what hon. Waluswaka is talking about because in the 2016 General Elections, Dr Kiiza Besigye got 3.5 million votes and I can tell you he got those votes without rigging. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to insinuate that Opposition candidates do not have votes and the votes they have are on social media and yet, it is on record that Dr Besigye got 3.5 million votes?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he can elaborate on where he thinks they have no votes.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that the votes Dr Kiiza Besigye gets cannot allow him to be President. They are negligible. (Laughter) Whenever he comes, I tell the people - I told hon. Mbabazi that, “You have been the Prime Minister but you will not get enough votes.” Now, I am even telling others who are coming that they will not get votes. (Laughter)

Therefore, honourable minister, why do you brutalise people who are insignificant in terms of votes? (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for yielding the Floor. We are discussing the law, legality and common sense and yet, the honourable member is telling this House that people who have no votes should just be left alone. Are you trying to suggest that we can then allow the police to violate the law because people have no votes? Do you want to clarify that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not know that hon. Waluswaka is helping you. He is telling the police, “Just leave those people. Don’t touch them.” That is what he is saying. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, for clarity, I am saying the police should leave you, the Opposition, so that you continue with your work. For example, my brother, Bobi Wine, should be left to sing because very soon, he will run bankrupt and he will come to the President for rescue.

Honourable minister, that water pressure which you used on Dr Besigye with was uncalled for. If the police cannot handle, you write to Defence. 

I would like to propose – the Opposition, Dr Besigye was a Political Commissar. The other time, over the weekend, I was in Bushenyi. I am told he commanded people to beat Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere. Right now, he is also facing the wrath. Hon. Obiga Kania, tomorrow you might face the same wrath. (Laughter)

What I am saying is, “Can we use these offices responsibly?” To the Members from the Opposition, I would like to request - Madam Speaker, I think the Cabinet listens to your order - if they are writing letters, I do not know if they can copy to you the letters because sometimes they write to the minister or the IGP and the IGP does not respond in time especially if someone has a function in his constituency, - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: When we were enacting the Public Order Management Act, we were extremely careful to protect the rights of everybody including the rights of the police. We did preserve the rights of political parties particularly when it comes to organising meetings. 

The letters envisaged, under the Act, are in most cases for information purposes to the police not to disrupt meetings but to aid the holding of the meetings. That is an Executive’s function. Therefore, if you say we start writing and giving copies to the Speaker, you will be fusing the roles of the Executive with Legislature’s. 

The only challenge that we have is that the police has decided deliberately to violate the provisions of the Public Order Management Act. If you read that Act and follow it, there is no reason why anybody, be it a political party or individuals, would be affected. That is why some of us who know the law have decided never to comply with unlawful order of the Uganda Police Force as long as what I do is within the law.

THE SPEAKER: Conclude and we go to hon. Patrick Nsamba. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Speaker, if that will violate the law, as a courtesy, why don’t you give us just a blank copy to some of us when you are going to hold a rally? For example, if you are going to hold a rally in hon. Fungaroo’s constituency, you write to IGP and give me a blank copy instead of camouflaging that you have informed the police. You will see whether these officers will not work. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to condemn the brutality, which the police use. It is very bad and uncalled for. I also would like to tell the minister that he should let the Opposition move because they do not have votes to bring them to Government. Let them stay and move in their chaotic manner. I would like to submit. (Laughter)

5.02
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, speaking as though the police’s problem is only to the Opposition.

Madam Speaker, today in Kabowa, there are people who are protesting against a factory that has blocked a road. The police came and murdered one of the demonstrators. It was not the Opposition in Kabowa but the people of Uganda who were demonstrating against the misbehaviour of one of the so-called investors.

Therefore, when hon. Waluswaka speaks as though the police problem is about the Opposition, I would like to think that it is far beyond that. This country is witnessing a Police Force that is making laws outside the laws of Uganda. We sit here and deliberate on laws, which they ignore and choose to operate by their own laws.

Madam Speaker, we are here talking about nation building and democracy. How are we going to talk about democracy when somebody in the Opposition is not allowed to even meet five people? Is that democracy? Is the democracy we are talking about a democracy of only one man? Is that the democracy we are talking about because one man can win every time?

We need to start thinking about this country. Our children are seeing whatever is going on. They are going to emulate this and they will think that is the way to do things because they are learning from us. When a minister comes here and starts beating about the bush; instead of condemning, in the strongest terms possible, the misbehaviour of some police officers, the minister of Government is here busy trying -(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in condemning the police brutality against Dr Kiiza Besigye and many other Ugandans.

We already know the profile of Dr Kiiza Besigye -(Interjections) I think you should avoid being disruptive. This is the Parliament of Uganda. If you want to speak, use the microphone.

Madam Speaker, I am beginning to think that there is a relationship between promotion in the Police Force and violence. When police officers who are kept on katebe without promotion get the opportunity, they end up beating Ugandans so that they can be recognised and given promotions.

Madam Speaker, when I saw what happened to Dr Kiiza Besigye and when I hear my elder brother, hon. Obiga Kania’s statement, I begin to wonder whether we are all interpreting the same law. It looks like the Public Order Management Act is being interpreted differently by different stakeholders.

Recently, I was invited by hon. Kassiano Wadri to his village for a meeting in his house. When we arrived there, we found the police had fully deployed. I asked myself, “if we are using the Public Order and Management Act, why would the police deploy in the home of hon. Kassiano Wadri?”

In my opinion, we may need to recall this law and review its weaknesses so that we tighten them to avoid this unnecessary brutality, which is being legitimatised through the former. 

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Police Force is meant –(Member timed out.)

5.08
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. With your permission, I suggest that you request the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and make a statement about police conduct all over the country. As of now, the police have become criminals, especially to boda boda riders upcountry.

In Pader, they now have logs at the roadside. When the boda boda riders come, they behave exactly like the LRA; they throw the logs in the middle of the road, round up people and collect money from all boda boda riders. Police bond is paid for. To arrest someone, you have to pay the police to hire a boda boda to go and arrest that person. Therefore, it is as if the Uganda Police FORCE has been privatised. 

Christmas is soon and I am again appealing to the President to issue orders for the police to leave the highways because they have started collecting money with a clean conscience and in broad daylight. This is our police.

I stay in Najjanankumbi, on Entebbe road. I have now spent three years without stepping at the FDC headquarters because I have decided to keep out of trouble. Nothing works. I am surprised that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Ssemujju are still writing letters; it does not work. You will write whatever letter and check the spelling errors but the fact remains that those meetings will not be accepted. You can keep on trying as you have a lot of stationery.

Madam Speaker, there is no shame with these people. They even found us in Parliament here and you remember what they did. Therefore, they will stop at nothing to retain state power. 

What solution am I giving? Madam Speaker, as the President of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, you may have to save Ugandans by thinking under Article 70 to go back to the individual merit system. This multi-partyism is not working. People that side do not know what we go through.

Using the little salary that you give us, we bribe District Police Commanders and RDCs to hold village rallies. People pay money. You call the man for deployment and security and give him between Shs 500,000 to Shs 3 million to get cleared. You may have to consider increasing the emoluments of Opposition members of Parliament because we use our money for that purpose. Otherwise, you will not address any rally -(Member timed out.)

5.11
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was perturbed by the statement that the minister brought to this House. If you were to subject it to scrutiny, it is full of concoctions. 

I have been forced to go and look up some words in the dictionary like “premises”. “Premises” in the dictionary of the Queen’s language are qualified as a building and the area of land around it. That Dr Besigye’s vehicle can be defined as a premise or premises - (laughter)- this is a lie of the devil.

Madam Speaker, during the times of “walk to work” demostrations, teargas and water canon were all over the place and the justification was that “walk to work” would stretch and end up in commercial places like Owino, Kikuubo and that justification would hold water. However, in Namboole, which business was to be disrupted inside Namboole Stadium that would justify the use of the unreasonable force? The concoction of unreasonable force that such water and pepper spray would be used on Dr Kiiza Besigye who survived narrowly would have died.

Madam Speaker, the gross violation of human rights in Uganda has attracted international focus. Those of us who care to know, we now know that even the likes of the former IGP has been slapped with sanctions just because of violations of human rights that he committed.

The current IGP may be seen to be taking a back seat and aloof but he will personally be held responsible for all the violations that are taking place, just as the minister himself who is arrogantly submitting that police actions were justified. You do not know what tomorrow holds for you.

Madam Speaker, one time I received the honourable members –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: The honourable member is none other hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu. After we had a catastrophic landslide, he procured a full Dyna of mattresses and a lorry full of maize flour and rice. When he got around Nabumali, the Regional Police Commander of Mbale summoned me to go to explain the circumstances under which this honourable member brought those humanitarian items. I met with six pickups full of police with gadgets and tear gas. I pleaded with them and they almost disrupted that very peaceful humanitarian act on the part of the honourable members. 

Therefore, one would wonder, is this a partisan police working at the whims of an individual? - (Member timed out.)

5.16
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join Members in condemning the police brutality that has persistently happened whenever an Opposition activity is going on.

Some of this excessive force depicts the country negatively all over the world. When I hear somebody condemning an individual for blackmailing this country or for blocking investors and yet, the people who are putting this country in bad light are under his direct command, it disturbs my mind.

As the minister was presenting the statement, I asked myself, “why are West Nilers always appointed in that docket?” It should be people like Baryomunsi in that ministry because it is their thing. (Laughter) You should shoulder the burden of telling lies and covering up for this brutality. It should not be people from West Nile because we are not in this thing.

I really sympathise with hon. Obiga Kania. When they dropped hon. James Baba, I thought we had been rescued but now, we are back into the bad light.

Madam Speaker, the things that happened on that day, the pictures that we saw - a police officer was using a baton to break the glass of the vehicle and spraying toxic content inside the vehicle. That brought tears in my eyes. We were watching television with my kids and everybody was in tears. That is not the kind of picture I would like to see of our country if we are talking of democracy.

If, indeed, the Opposition is weak as hon. Waluswaka has said here, why don’t you give them the platform to air whatever they want to air? In any case, this was a meeting, the police was notified, why not give them security and escort them to the venue and see whether they will disrupt public order?

Last time, when we had the famous Walk to Work, there was a police officer who sacrificed to escort the then Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wafula from wherever he was up to Parliament here and nothing happened. So why doesn’t the police, honourable minister –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would request that you add me a few minutes. First, the letter, which the minister is talking about being copied to the Secretary General of FDC - I am the Secretary General of FDC and I have never received that letter. If you have evidence that we have received that letter, please, lay it on Table. This business of coming to make allegations so that you can have your way out; even in the Bible or Quran, one way or the other, you will have answer.

Madam Speaker, the Public Order Management Act, which we made is very clear that a public meeting does not include a political party - and the Police has no authority to grant permission but these people are taking the law in their hands.

I heard here hon. Kamuntu laughing. Of course, we have to excuse him because he is in his evening time, anytime he will go. However, these things would be dealt with one time (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we are praying to God –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, you can really see that honourable members seek to quarrel without provocation. I stepped out a bit, I came back to the House and he said, “Have you seen Kamuntu -” - let me read him the Constitution.

Article 17 of the Constitution states that the duties of a citizen include respecting the rights and freedoms of others and cooperating with lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order.” To that extent, Madam Speaker, I would like you to watch the Member on the Floor. He should respect me because that is a requirement of the duties of a citizen. Is he in order? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you give me a reason why you are attacking somebody, who was seated and listening to you without disturbing you?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Kamuntu came a bit early and when Members were submitting here, he was busy laughing and making noise. (Interjections) [Members: “No.”] – I would like to tell you that hon. Kamuntu is fond of that. I said that everybody will go to God including hon. Kamuntu. (Laughter)

MR KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi does not wish me well and you can see he wants me to go to God. (Laughter) Is he in order, knowing that everybody will go in accordance with his or her own order? Does he know when he will go, what will take him and what time he will go? Is he in order to wish me to go when he could go before me? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The police should be condemned for what they did on that day. If possible, those who acted should have been dismissed by now. From what the minister is speaking, it looks like he directed them to do what they did. I am hearing that hon. Amama Mbabazi is going to come back. Well, these are propagandas. 

You recall when we were making the Public Order Management Act  - he was the first from the NRM side to be arrested in Jinja. He cried like a baby. For us, we had got used. In fact, it was the late Andrew Felix Kaweesi and I who tried to rescue him. I know hon. Odonga-Otto was happy and others. As a Christian, I had to help him.

I would like to tell the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that it is not good to use your offices to tell lies and not to allow multiparty systems to be applied as it should be. We would like to ask you people who are in the executive, if you do not want multiparty system as hon. Odongo-Otto has said, please, state it here and we end the story. This issue of saying that there is multiparty and you cannot allow it to really be a multiparty country, then you are making a blunder. To show you that we are good, not like hon. Wilfred Niwagaba who said that it is wrongful order – for us we have obeyed even – (Member timed out.)
 
5.25
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, blocking Dr Kiiza Besigye, beating him and vandalising his vehicle - blocking Kyagulanyi among other Members of the Opposition means that the issue we should debate here is not about police brutality. Whether they block us politely without being brutal or not, the issue is blocking the Opposition from talking to the people of Uganda and even from talking to themselves.

Do you mean that the Opposition should not organise themselves? For instance, the previous meeting of Namboole was only for party members. They are talking to each other. Do you mean that the Opposition should not even talk on radio? 

Madam Speaker, on 8th November, we were blocked in Adjumani District together with the party President, hon. Patrick Amuriat, on a radio station called Aulogo FM. We were told that we should get permission from the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) who wrote a letter saying that he had stopped us. The next day, we went to Moyo on Voice of the Nile FM and we were also stopped. The next day, we went to Yumbe for a funeral, where we had lost our brother. Our party leaders had gone to condone with the family but we found police deployed at the funeral place. 

That afternoon, we went to Koboko to attend the funeral rites of the late chairman of FDC in that region. Dr Besigye, other party leaders and I had not gone for the funeral but the whole of Koboko town was deployed with soldiers up to the home of the late.

From all these scenarios, we can deduce that the Opposition is not allowed to talk to Ugandans and each other. What should we do? I would like to ask those who came from the bush; you are in NRM, did you have a rally in Kampala to prepare you to take over power here, were you one of them? If there is no rally, it does not mean that no plan can be made to remove you from power. The worst thing is what you are not seeing. Dr Besigye should be decorated with medals because he has shown that the best way is to use democratic means not clandestine means and you are stopping him. What about the one whom you are not seeing? Do you think that there is nobody planning to remove you?

Finally, the ministers who are being presented wrongly come from Teso and West Nile regions. Hon. Kania Obiga was from West Nile and the one before Gen. Jeje Odongo was from Teso region. 

Leave these people to defend their Government. This Government is not ours. There are threatened that their Government is going. Do not fight to defend the Government, which is not yours. Bring the Bahimas and Banyankoles to defend their Government. Why are you wasting your time defending a thing, which is not yours?

Do not beat people to defend this Government; it is not your Government. (Interruption)

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I am defending Government and institutions of Uganda and not a Government in West Nile. I have no partisan interest that there will be a Government from West Nile, which I come to defend. If there is one of hon. Fungaroo, let him wait for it and God bless him. Thank you.

5.31
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kania Obiga is also very aware that he has seen very many regimes come and go. It is true that even this regime that you are serving, very soon is coming to an end. In 1980, President Museveni addressed a rally in Nakulabye and this is what he said. “If the elections are rigged, I will have no option but to go to the bush.”

Secondly, this House is aware that he did not even win those elections but he decided to go to the bush, after losing miserably.

He was talking about the gross mismanagement of elections at that time and therefore, the human rights that were being abused then. The Constitutional Square has become a no-go area. Kololo has become a no-go area. You are now making Namboole a no-go area. Where do you want us to go, hon. Obiga Kania?

Madam Speaker, I can clearly say, without any form of contradiction, that whatever we are doing today is in defence of the Constitution. We are not operating outside the law. Let me tell you what we are going to do and I would like to read it verbatim. Article 3(4) of the Constitution reads: 
“(4) All citizens of Uganda shall have the right and duty at all times –
(a) to defend this Constitution and, in particular, to resist any person or group of persons seeking to overthrow the constitutional order; and
(b) to do all in their power to restore this Constitution after it has been suspended, overthrown, abrogated or amended contrary to its provisions.”

 I am telling you this –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Like my colleagues, I also rise to condemn the manner in which the police acted in pretending to keep law and order. I call it pretence because in the process, the police created some disorder. It was not only disorder but like my colleagues have said, it was attempted murder on the person of Dr Kiiza Besigye. 

The world is full of violence, not because it has very many violent people but because of the few good people who see wrong things happening and choose to defend them or keep quiet. Today, we may look at these issues and consider them partisan and the minister will come here and say that they are okay. Today is Dr Besigye and tomorrow, it may be you, my dear brother, hon. Kania Obiga.

Sometimes when the Government acts, I ask myself, is it because it is a resistance Government and therefore, it looks at everybody with the intention of resisting? It is the Government in power but it has kept resisting and that is why it is called the National Resistance Movement. We do not know whether it is resisting its own people or its own laws. 

Madam Speaker, the law that put in place the multi-party dispensation is the one we should all hold dear because it is the law that makes democracy a reality. I do not understand why taxpayers’ money should continue to be appropriated to political parties when Government does not want them to utilise this money. Money is appropriated to the FDC because it is a registered political party and this money is supposed to be used for political activities, not for going to the market to buy sugarcane or sugar. 

If this money is going to FDC for political activities, what on earth do you want them to use this money for? What kind of activities should political parties be engaged in, in order to use this money? We may not have the audacity to go and distribute this money like Gen. Museveni does. We may not want to use it to buy support but rather use it to mobilise people, talk to them and sell our agenda to them. 
It is unfortunate that we call Uganda a democracy and yet, we are busy killing the democracy. Democracy is losing meaning. If democracy –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to submit, very painfully, to our colleague, the minister. Good governance presupposes a functional democracy. From independence to date, I think we have walked enough. We have had very painful experiences. If you look at the number of times we have changed Government violently, they are very many as opposed to peaceful change of Government. 

Today, the statement that the minister read brings to our minds what hon. Ibingira did on this Floor of Parliament and this is history repeating itself. Multi-party democracy was fully debated and it was agreed that the Movement system should move on while the other parties were in abeyance. Court moved that multi-party democracy should be re-introduced, a referendum was held and everything was put in place. We are in a multi-party democracy where the Bill of Rights, as enshrined in our Constitution, is being practiced. 

We do not understand to date, how we are selling this multi-party democracy. If you look at IPOD, where we attend as parties, you begin to wonder whether even IPOD should be in place. We are moving to South Africa for one week as parties in Uganda to study proportional representation as opposed to the “winner takes all”. However, if in our behaviour we are doing this, how do we go for benchmarking of proportional representation when other political parties are not being allowed to operate? It is very easy – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for allowing me to seek clarification. When we passed the Public Order Management Act, I was in this House. We provided that the organiser of that kind of public meeting should notify police. Section 6 of the Public Order Management Act talks about notification by authorised officer. It says: 
“(1) Upon receipt of a notice under Section 5, where it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting for reasons that –
 (b) the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere with other lawful business, the authorised officer shall in writing within 48 hours after receipt of the notice notify the organiser or his or her agent that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting and the notice shall be delivered to the organiser’s address as stated in the notice of intention to hold a public meeting.” It has other provisions.

According to the minister’s statement, police wrote to hon. Ssemujju requesting that police be availed with proof of permission from the owner of the venue, which is a requirement of the law advising that the car park is an open space which would not be conducive for holding such a meeting. 

He suggested that the seminar be held indoors instead and further informed hon. Ssemujju that the conduct of the intended activity should be in compliance with the Electoral Commission road map. According to the statement, hon. Ssemujju did not respond to this information. 

My point of clarification is, wouldn’t you think that it was also proper that hon. Ssemujju and the organiser should have responded to the police and maybe, convened a meeting with them to harmonise the issues, because my understanding is that police had not stopped the meeting but had advised that they meet, organise and maybe shift from the car park to indoors so that police can secure this meeting?

Wouldn’t it have been also proper for democracy that the organiser of this meeting also respects police and discusses with them plans to have this meeting? That was the point of clarification I wanted to seek.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I will not give any comment on that clarification. This debate is about common sense, so the most important thing that we need to do is to take stalk whether we are practising multiparty democracy or we are pretending and the only thing we need to do is that we need to proceed to the Constitutional Court for interpretation of this Act because the way experts are beginning to speak leaves a lot to be desired.

This is the course of action that we need to take; we need the Constitutional Court to give us clarity on what it means by what -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, for giving way. I think the minister’s response to the statement you were making was not quite relevant or maybe he was not listening properly. 

When the Public Order Management Act was passed, members of the Opposition had walked out of the House. It was a one sided decision and it is on record. 

Secondly, it is on record that the Public Order Management Act was put in place in order to operationalise Article 269 which prohibited all activities including social events. In other words, if you were to carry out baptism or introduction ceremony, you had to get police orders. Now, a law is in place and therefore, anybody whose action in a gathering is not fully understood by the operatives on the ground particularly security forces; they would go back not to the Public Order Management Act, which was just window dressing but to Article 269.

I would like you to read it because it is there in the first edition of the Constitution. The Public Order Management Act was supposed to perpetuate limitation of the activities of the Opposition and if you have not understood that, then you have not understood the original idea of putting Article 269 in place.

MR KOMAKECH: My last statement is that a functional democracy should seek to protect minorities as opposed to the majoritarian rule.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we asked for answers to this issue. The minister has answered and members have responded. What we want to know from the minister is, how now will the political parties operate?

As the Political Parties and Organisations Act says, give all of them money. I do not know whether we should stop. What is the way forward? We need to conclude this matter. How will they operate henceforth? I am talking about the money, which we give them because we appropriate money for these parties.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, let me lay on the Table the letter which hon. Ssemujju had written as I promised. I managed to get it and the letter is dated 14 October 2019; it was received on 15 October 2019 and it was addressed to the Inspector-General of Police.

As I read earlier, the subject was; “FDC’s 15th anniversary event at Namboole on 15 December 2019.” I had already read the content relating to two subjects.

An event on the 15th December and an event initially scheduled for the 1st but later pushed to the 4th of November; it was copied to FDC President, FDC Secretary General the Kampala Metropolitan Police Commander and the DPC. I beg to lay.

I would like to allay the fears of those who think that the police is there -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you lay a document, you must say when you acted. It is good the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs said that he received the letter on 15th October, and it is written that in less than 15 days, you must reply.

When did you reply? Is he in order to have received a letter on the 15th and he replies on the day the activity is supposed to taken place?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. I have not seen the letters. Honourable minister, can you explain so that we close this matter? 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, this letter was written on 14th October and it was received on the 15th of October. (Interjections) If you want to answer it do, otherwise, allow me to talk. I listened to you in silence.  You know very well that I do not lie. 

In between this letter and the reply, many verbal consultations took place between hon. Ssemujju, the director operations and even later, towards the end of October with me. So, everything relating to that letter and the reply is not necessarily written down here but the important thing is; was the letter replied? The answer is yes.

What were they discussing? They were discussing the very issues, which the Director of Operations wanted to know.

In fact, I can tell you, I asked the Director of Operations to write so that he puts down what he wanted from hon. Ssemujju and hon. Ssemujju responds to it. That is what happened. So, there is absolutely nothing to hide. In answering this, I have fully clarified. (Interjections)

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, stop heckling. 

MR OBIGA: I would like to allay the fears of colleagues here that the police or even this Government is out to stifle the opposition. The people who campaigned in 2004/2005 to make sure that we moved to multipartism were from this Government, led by His Excellency the President. Otherwise, they would have kept the Movement in power. He is at the forefront. That is why every five years, for the last seven elections, the President has never appointed himself or declared himself elected unopposed. He has gone to compete in the electoral process.

Thirdly, the police are in discussion with the Opposition and members of the NRM. Very many meetings have been held. If you want, I can bring the list here of the number of meetings, which have been held in consultation with the police over the years. 

It is very important that you know and hold it that the police are responsible for securing a meeting. That means deployment of personnel and equipment. There is no way you are going to say because you want to hold a meeting because of the freedom of association; whether you are personnel or not, you must hold it. When things go wrong, you will come to this very Parliament to condemn the very police. Therefore, it is absolutely important that in the spirit of multipartism, we cooperate. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to answer your question. How should we operate in this era of multipartism? You discussed the question of how you use the money in IPOD. Police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs were not in IPOD. You have –(Interjections)– Yes; we are not in IPOD. Why you needed the money; it is up to you. Whether you need the money or not, that is entirely up to you –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think the minister is not well informed. The law is here. Under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, it shows how political parties are funded. It says that there will be funding of political parties –(Interjections) No. The formula is even in that law. The formula clearly states how you can do it. When you get the money, it is for political activities of the parties.

Of course, he has just joined Parliament. Is the minister in order to come and say that the issue of political funding is in IPOD, yet it is provided for in the Political Parties and Organisations Act? Is he is order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not a very fundamental point. We have the law. We know what we decided. The money is given from the Consolidated Fund. Honourable minister, please, conclude.

MR OBIGA: I would only like to wish you very good use of that money. (Laughter) I can stand here and make a commitment on behalf of the police. The police have absolutely no commitment to stop any person - whether that person is in the Opposition, the NRM or anywhere - from holding meetings within the law. 

In this particular incident, what the police were only asking for is, since you have notified us, it means you have expressed your intention that we must secure you. To secure you, we are advising that we are the experts in security. For the purpose of the meeting you want to hold, the open park of Mandela will not be appropriate; do it somewhere else. Give us an answer and permission will be granted. That is all the police was asking, nothing else.

I have not found any Member on this floor saying that that default of not answering the police was an error. (Interjections)  It cannot be common sense. Common sense is not common to everybody; that is why you have to reduce it.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, the police are absolutely ready to cooperate and we have had many meetings, including with my colleagues here. I have attended some of their meetings. So, there is no way that we will be able to stop the functioning of multipartism. If there any discrepancies, I ask at the police or ministry level. We discuss them and we shall be able to come out with solutions.

My second response to the debate – and I say it with the heaviest heart – is that the sectarian sentiments expressed in this debate about the Government are unfortunate. Whether you are in Government today or not, you must come from somewhere.

H.E Idi Amin had to come from somewhere. H.E Obote had to come from somewhere. H.E Lule had to come from somewhere. H.E Binaisa and Museveni; somebody had to come from somewhere. If you do not want to talk of national issues, then remain in your village. (Laughter) Remain in your parish or sub-county. Parliament is not a place to express these sectarian sentiments. (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is fundamental and I would like to draw this to the attention of my senior brother. In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice but in practice, there is a difference between practice and theory. 

There are two fundamental things. I would like to believe that the minister is a human being. Honourable minister, we are talking about a violation of a right that almost ended a life of a human being; Dr Kiiza Besigye. It was simply the usual break up of Opposition rallies. I think that would have been different. 

We are talking about an attempted assassination. I did not know that in science, you do not experiment on a human being. If you were to be pounded with that high pressure water – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order? 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the minister, therefore, in order - a conclusion is literally supposed to wrap up and give us a way forward – to leave the Floor without even giving us what the police is specifically going to do to reign in on officers who have made it a habit to brutalise citizens? That is what we expected from the minister as he wrapped up his submission. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are your exact plans for managing those situations?

MR OBIGA: I have said, on the Floor of this Parliament, time and again, both as a minister and as a Member, that these policemen, who are our sons and daughters, our brothers and sisters are human and they may make mistakes. Sometimes, they make horrendous mistakes. 

The way forward is, we must follow the law to discipline them. We must follow the law by reporting their actions to see to it that those who have gone astray are disciplined and brought back to the right path. That is what I said here and I have never denied it. I am making this commitment to colleagues again. Please, do not wait to simply condemn them. Our offices are open. The office of the IGP is open to take action and what we report in Parliament are the actions that we have taken. That is our position. 

What I said about sectarian sentiments is that God has given you an opportunity to be leaders. If there are people who are practising sectarianism elsewhere, it does not mean you should practise the same. You should not do something wrong because someone else is doing it. Tomorrow, you are going to be great leaders and you cannot say, because it was done by so and so, I must do it. 
This is an opportunity for us to fight sectarianism wherever you have seen it rather than to come here and say, “I am leading a national police that makes mistakes. I am prepared to discipline them.” (Interjections) That man has been arrested and he is going through the court processes. Right now, he is in CPS and he will be disciplined according to the law.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to stand here to interpret the law. I was merely reading the law as the police officer applied it on the site where he was, the circumstances under which the commanding officer put him and the pressure. 

In such circumstances, as the Bible says, the responsibility to respect the law is more on you, as a leader, than on the one who is not a leader. If you start fighting with that policeman, he feels pain. If you start abusing that policeman, he will get annoyed just like any other person. He may easily forget the discipline with which he had been trained and he will act out of it. That action will be wrong but by the time he realises that he is wrong, the damage will have been done.

As leaders, whether in this Parliament or elsewhere, it is important that we follow the lawful process. After all, tomorrow if you take over the Government, you do not want a Government, which is in chaos. You would want to follow the law. (Interjections) I do not know the law but I have the forces that implement the law and I am speaking on their behalf. I have already mentioned the Kabowa incident. 

There are allegations about the Police that they collect money around Christmas time and that they are on a rampage. It does not matter whether it is Christmas or not, if they commit crimes, it is still criminal and they are subject to the same procedures of the law.

I would like you to put us to task if we do not discipline these policemen. If we do not take them through the various processes, whether it is the Police Standards Unit or the Criminal Court, challenge us. That is my view and it is the view of the ministry. We issued this statement in good faith and not because we want to condone violence or brutality as it was termed. We stand committed to the rule of law and other guidance from this Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, as we go to item 3 (5), I would like to welcome a delegation from Luuka. They are represented by hon. John Bagoole, hon. Stephen Kisa and hon. Esther Mbayo. They are welcome.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF IMPLEMENTING THE PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE TO PROVIDE SANITARY PADS TO GIRL STUDENTS

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some time back, a concern was raised in the House about the financial implications of implementing the presidential pledge to provide sanitary pads to girl students. This is not something that is very simple to answer without authentic data because it involves the total number of schools, the total number of girl students and the number of sanitary pads required. While you would like to provide sanitary pads for these girls, year in, year out, there are others who will join the numbers and unfortunately, the officer who was assigned to give us this data is not around. I request that we stay this particular question. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the problem is that we have been raising this matter almost every Session and we hoped that by this Fourth Session, your ministry would have come to grips with the situation and at least made some proposals.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like members to be patient before they start heckling. When we are talking about providing sanitary pads, there are those who are entering into the phase and there are those who are continuing. As such, it is not the same figure every year. 

Therefore, I am saying that the concerned officer, who is going to give us the data so that we can now start the process of budgeting for the pledge, is not around for the time being. We are following it up. However, we are going to come with comprehensive data. 

It is not a matter of coming here to please some people that the implementation is like this. We would like to come with authentic figures –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The issue that the minister is supposed to update the House on regards to sanitary pads for girls to stay in school. We know that 42 per cent of girls in Uganda drop out of school because they do not have access to or their parents cannot afford sanitary pads, and this is a big issue.

Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament, in 2015, hon. Franca Akello and I brought a motion to this House and it was overwhelmingly adopted. The motion was for the Government to come up with a ministerial policy regarding the issue of sanitary pads. We were not generally looking at sanitary towels but we were looking at emergency sanitary towels and holistic menstrual health management in a school environment.

Madam Speaker, in the Hansard of 17 November 2017, you directed the ministry, before even the directive of the President in his campaign manifesto, to provide sanitary pads for students in schools. This House directed the ministry concerned to come up with a statement in this House concerning the policy on menstrual health management, including provision of emergency sanitary towels.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to just come and give us figures without addressing the previous issues that this very House addressed to the line ministry? Is the honourable minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is very clear that the Ministry of Education and Sports is not interested in this matter. There was a presidential pledge and it is now four years down the road. We have also been talking about it on the Floor of this House. So, no one is interested. How much time do you want if we are to give you time?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure you that we are interested. If you look at the order, he is talking about financial implications and not policy. I would like us to listen to each other.

In order to come with proper data, I request the Speaker for up to next week, when we shall be ready to bring this on the Floor. After all -(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have been seeing figures every day showing the number of students in UPE, USE or other schools. Even in their policy statement, if you bring it here, you will see these statistics ending with one, two or three. That means that they know the numbers. Therefore, is it guesswork?

Madam Speaker, they have been coming up with figures on how much it costs to fund UPE and USE students and they send the money to UPE and USE schools. Therefore, is it in order for the minister who has data, whichever way it is, right or wrong, not to tell us the number of students who need to be looked after and the average cost per girl and the total? Is he in order to ask for more time, yet he knows this - unless he knows only data for stadiums? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what is inside his head, but I would like a commitment. This is very serious. You are talking about SDGs but you are letting down the children of this country.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, with respect to my colleagues, we have been here for some good time. We know that menstrual periods are not static; there are those who join and those who continue with the system -(Interjections)- I have said-

Madam Speaker, we do not want to lose our tempers here. If a colleague comes here and he does not respect me but he talks like hon. Nandala-Mafabi was talking, I can easily respond like this - However, I would like to respect you, Madam Speaker, by saying that we are going to respond next week. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You will be on the Order Paper on Tuesday without fail.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (ESTABLISHMENT OF NAKAWA VOCATIONAL TRAINING COLLEGE) INSTRUMENT, 2019

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Statutory Instrument No.58 of 2019 - the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Establishment of Nakawa Vocational Training College) Instrument, 2019. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is submitted to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal and report back. 

However, in 2015 we had a resolution of this House to establish three universities - Bunyoro, Rwenzori and Namasagali. This Nakawa College was not there. What you brought was not part of that resolution. We want to know why you have failed to deal with the resolution of 2015 on those three universities and you are now increasing more opportunities in the same region. Where are Bunyoro, Rwenzori and Namasagali universities?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, much as the Nakawa Vocational College is about skilling, the ones that were promised in 2015, as you have mentioned, were also crucial. We shall make sure that we also process them accordingly and quickly.

THE SPEAKER: We need deadlines. We are now going to the budget process, so we want a given time.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, can you give us two weeks? -(Interjections)- You will excuse me, Madam Speaker, but hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not in the kitchen to know how we come up with these instruments. He is good at shouting about other things. I am talking from a political and technical point of view that we need two weeks to come back with those instruments. I beg to request. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your kind indulgence. I did retreat when my honourable colleague was submitting on the issue of sanitary pads. However, I would like to say this on the Floor of this House: I think the Ministry of Education and Sports is facing managerial challenges. There is a lot of backlog on all matters from this ministry. There seems to be no level of migration to try and meet the country’s expectations from this ministry. 

I will give an example. Whereas the minister has submitted on the Floor a statutory instrument for Nakawa Vocational College, we had issues on this Floor debating the independence of Makerere University Business School (MUBS) and it is still a pending matter. It is still a constituent college of Makerere University and there are issues. When they came to the Public Accounts Committee, which my honourable colleague chairs, they had serious issues. You could see that there were issues relating to how the university is constituted and managed. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports is seemingly static on so many fronts. We debated Makerere University here and you could see that there is a problem. Madam Speaker, I am raising to try and invite all stakeholders in education to up their game. There seems to be a big problem at the ministry and it does seem - I wish the Prime Minister was here to educate this House and assure us that the Minister of Education and Sports actually works part time.

There are so many issues, honourable minister, at the ministry and you need to up your game. Otherwise, the ministry is killing education and all matters relating to education. You are busy in so many other things and there are a lot of pending issues at the ministry. You need to wake up and up your game. If you need help, seek it so that you are helped. Otherwise, you are going to come here and perjure yourself and at the end of the day, offer nothing.

Pads were an electoral pledge. Is it that you do not know the number of children in schools or is it that you do not know how many girls we have? Honourable minister, you collect money on behalf of taxpayers. 

Madam Speaker, I thought I should make this statement. The Ministry of Education and Sports has issues; they need to up their game, otherwise we have a problem. There is a very big problem in the ministry and if you offered me time, Madam Speaker, I will come back on the Floor of this House next week and offer this House a catalogue of challenges, failures and inertia at the ministry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item No. 5

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE 74TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY HELD IN NEW YORK, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

6.22
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the report of the delegation to the 74th Session of the United Nations General Assembly held in New York, from 17 to 30 September 2019. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, under rule 33 of our Rules of Procedure, a delegation report like this should present summaries of the recommendations.

Since 1963, Uganda has been participating in the United Nations (UN) General Assembly. The UN has been supporting the activities of the country. This year, the UN General Assembly focused on poverty eradication, education, climate action and inclusion.

The Prime Minister of Uganda led a delegation and 14 Members of Parliament attended. Ninety-one Heads of State, 45 Heads of Government and representatives at all levels, the UN Secretary-General all attended this UN General Assembly, and the Pope gave a message in a televised statement.

The General Assembly was presided over by Prof. Tijjani Muhammad-Bande, a Nigerian who was chosen as the 74th President of the UN General Assembly. In their addresses, many of the representatives urged that in all our actions, we must put people first and we must co-exist. There was a call for countries to declare climate emergency.

Five key themes were discussed. There was a climate action summit. Members, if you may remember, there was a climate strike which held all over the world. It was marked during the climate summit. There was a high level forum on the Sustainable Development Goals. There was a high level meeting on universal health coverage. There was a high level dialogue on financing for development following the Addis Ababa Framework. Finally, there was a high level meeting on the total elimination of nuclear weapons and also consideration for small island countries and adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Recommendations were made and these included the following:

1. 	Those countries that are party to the Paris Agreement and are prepared to sign and ratify the Paris Agreement should reaffirm their commitment to the Paris Agreement as expressed in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 

2. 	Action on the NDCs must be followed and reviewed so that countries can follow the path of green growth, resilient economy and low carbon economy especially nature based solutions because climate disasters like floods, landslides will continue. Therefore, countries must prepare in advance - not just respond only - so that they support that in their budgets.

3. 	There was need to increase clean and reliable energy access from renewable sources.

4. 	There was a call for adequate funds in budget in countries, supplemented by development partners, to address these challenges like disaster, risk reduction response, and countries were called upon to go for zero interest loans which are not costly to them.

5. 	There was also a call for climate-smart agriculture and priority should be given to water for production - irrigation.

6. 	There was a call to ensure quality education and capacity of teachers so that our children can be skilled, so that they can have capacity to generate their own income.

7. 	Focus on the high level meeting on universal health coverage was placed on a call for primary health care to be key. Countries should focus on primary health care because these are preventable issues. Instead of going for infrastructure, it is better to address preventable diseases, especially those related to water, sanitation, hygiene, nutrition and energy especially indoor air pollution.

8. 	There was a call to improve social protection systems especially for the vulnerable people - women, girls, youth, children and the disabled persons.

9. 	There was a call to follow up funding commitments. Many countries made commitments and it is up to each country to make sure we follow these commitments so that in line with climate financing, we can be able to address these challenges.

10. 	Finally, focus should be on peace and security and that should be addressed through dialogue, transparency, disarmament and diplomacy. 

These were some of the key recommendations. I listened carefully when the Minister for Disaster Preparedness made a statement here today and the debate that followed. From my observation, my question is: Now that we have discovered that most of the challenges interrupting our sectors of the economy are related to disaster climate change, in this budget are we going to give it a priority? I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the matter which has been laid on the Table is so critical. Several times we have asked to be given an opportunity in this Parliament to discuss the subject of climate change and the efforts being made to address those challenges.

Madam Speaker, I know that in the international fora, there has been so much green funding released under smart agriculture, to help women facing challenges, youth efforts and other agencies. As Member of Parliaments, we need to know those projects related to addressing disaster in our areas so that we can either support them or bring them to the knowledge of the community so that they know what is going on.

However, right now, all the information concerning activities to address climate disaster is within the ministry and the people who choose to know. For us as legislators, as people who are interested in this matter, we have not been given an opportunity.

The procedural matter I am raising is that this matter is urgent. We are already faced with floods and there are very many issues that we need to address. The Kira industry has just released a climate smart vehicle. We, therefore, need to discuss this. 

I would like to request, as a procedural matter, that Parliament be given an opportunity as soon as possible, maybe next week, to address this matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I have no problem with Parliament addressing it. What I do not know is whether you want the minister to come and respond first and tell us what they are doing on this or we go straight into the debate. We can appoint a date for the debate and distribute the recommendations. Will the minister have an opportunity?

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, now that we have this report, procedurally it would benefit the House if the minister responsible made a statement so that we can debate it together with the report of the chairperson.

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of Environment is directed –

MR BIYIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This was a six in one meeting. Therefore, it may not only concern the minister in charge of environment. For the Climate Action Summit, yes, the Minister for Water and Environment is responsible. However, on the SDGs, that will require the Office of the Prime Minister –(Interruption) 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, hon. Biyika. The information I would like to give is that the 74th UN General Assembly was a build-up from the high level political forum that was hosted in July in regard to the SDGs. It was recommended that every country has an implementing entity in regard to reporting on the SDGs in a holistic manner. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give is that, whereas we have raised the issue of climate change and it was the centre of debate at the UN, I would like to recommend that instead of a one ministry coming to report, we have the Office of the Prime Minister, which is a coordinating entity for Uganda on SDGs. In Uganda, we are particularly following the SDGs from 1 to 14, which are very critical for us.

Wouldn’t it be necessary, therefore, to have the Office of the Prime Minister come here and explain because they coordinate all these entities that are implementing the SDGs, especially environment and water? The UN General Assembly was focusing on all those goals, one by one. 

Therefore, instead of having just the Ministry of Water and Environment coming to report, the Office of the Prime Minister could come and report to this House with a holistic approach, addressing all sectors rather than focusing on only one sector. That is the information I would like to give. 

MR BIYIKA: I would like to highlight once more that this was a six in one event. I would like to thank the Member for the information. We need a comprehensive response to this so that we can be able to track our action as far as the treaties, conventions and protocols we have signed are concerned. 

There was the climate action summit, the SDGs summit, the universal health coverage, follow up on the financing for development in the Addis Ababa Framework, and the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Finally, there was a high level meeting on the total elimination of nuclear weapons on the small island developing countries.

We may not be a small island developing country but we have people who are living on islands in Uganda like the people in Buvuma. They face the same situations as the people in Samoa. As such, we need a comprehensive statement, especially a response on all these things, so that next year when Uganda is reporting to the United Nations during the high level political forum, we shall be able to know our progress as we review our nationally determined contributions. I would like to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister is required to convene an inter-ministerial meeting on all these areas. That will now take longer; we cannot do it next week. He is required to convene all these ministries and give us a comprehensive report on where we stand as a country on those subjects. We have never even had a report on the SDGs and we do not know where we are. The Prime Minister should come back to us within 14 days to give this update so that we can debate it. Thank you.
 
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL, 2019

6.37
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. You can justify it.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Institute of Parliamentary Studies (IPS) is a department within Parliament that was intended to build capacity for parliamentarians to perform better. My colleagues and I were granted leave on 8 November 2018 to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019.”

In compliance with section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development established that this Bill, if passed into law, will have no financial implications since the institute is already funded through the Parliamentary Commission budget. 

The Bill was read for the first time on 30 January 2019. Subsequently, the Parliamentary Commissioners and members of the Steering Committee of IPS were invited by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to clarify on some issues included in the Bill.

It is important to inform the House that benchmarking was done both in Nigeria and Kenya. Therefore, the report of the committee confirms what we are going to submit in this debate. It is further important to note that a training institute for legislators is a common phenomenon in Commonwealth countries. 

This Bill is timely as Uganda, like other Commonwealth parliaments, is faced with capacity challenges. In addition, this year Uganda took over the presidency of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA).

It is not only a necessity but it is mandatory for Parliament to have an institute for continuous training of Members of Parliament and staff. Continuous training of Members of Parliament is modus operandi in Commonwealth parliaments. Members of Parliament have unique functions of legislation and oversight and these functions require deep and broad research for effective participation in policy formulation and scrutiny. 

Aware that Parliament suffers from high turnover of Members due to what is popularly known as “tsunami” or “Masaka” (massacre) every five years, it is imperative that Parliament owns a well-structured system for sustained professional quality of performance in Parliament and among the staff.

It is manifestly clear that of the three arms of Government, it is only Parliament that does not have institutionalised linkage with the lower-level legislatures in the country. The Judiciary has the Law Development Centre while the Executive has the Civil Service Training Institute. 

Furthermore, the Human Resource Policy of the Parliamentary Commission is restricted to an internal operating environment of the Commission service, yet the IPS should ideally deal with both internal and external stakeholders like councillors and other persons that may be interested in specialised training. 

The IPS, being a brainchild of the Parliamentary Commission, must be anchored principally on the needs of legislators and must, therefore, be steered by the legislators through the Commission. Parliament is at the centre of driving democratic development and good governance; hence, its performance must remain robust and adoptable to the dynamic world. Induction alone is not enough to equip Members of Parliament with information. 

The practice in other countries indicates that training institutes are firmly controlled by parliament through its leadership and the senate in countries which have senates. In Nigeria, for example, there are six Members of the Senate and six Members of the lower House. The chairperson of the IPS is the Speaker of the Senate. In Kenya, likewise, the governing body has a good number of Members of Parliament in order to formulate policy that is relevant for its needs. 

Despite being semi-autonomous, IPS will be expected to continue being relevant and committed to its core duty to build capacity for Members of Parliament and adapt to the dynamic and varied needs of MPs and staff. Uganda has been very proud of our institute and particularly the quality of the performance of our Members of Parliament outside the country.

We have been applauded for our quality of deliverance and presentation of papers. Particularly, you have seen how the Speaker of Parliament – Madam Speaker, sorry that you are the one chairing the meeting, but I cannot restrain on this part; the quality of the performance of our Speakers has been noted worldwide. We are proud of that and we do not want it to manifest in our Speakers only, but we also want it to manifest in other legislators.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that in the corporate world, development partners prefer to engage with legally constituted entities that can sue and be sued. In the foreseeable future, the majority of the IPS programmes will be donor-driven and donor-funded, as is the practice in other countries. The practice in other countries is that the donor agencies enter into a lot of partnerships with the training institutes.

Madam Speaker, I beg to end by saying that an Act of Parliament is a bold step in the right direction of broadening the mandate of the institute, improving the quality of its performance and the performance of Members of Parliament and staff, as well as realising the goals that it stands for. 

Therefore, I beg to move that the IPS be granted a legal framework so that it cannot only operate internally but can also embrace the local councils which have been outside our circle of operations. It would also give opportunity to those people who want to join Parliament to have trainings that are relevant to the functions of a Member of Parliament so that when they come or associate with Parliament, whatever happens in Parliament is not strange to them. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ogwal. Can we receive the report from the committee.

6.47
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate and recognise the importance of this Bill. I now take the opportunity to read the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019.

Madam Speaker, the mover of the Bill has ably introduced the Bill. On 30 January 2019, hon. Cecilia Atim Barbara Ogwal moved under rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to introduce the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019 to Parliament. The Bill was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The object of the Bill is to establish the Institute of Parliamentary Studies as a one-stop specialised resource centre for the training and capacity development of both Members and staff of the Parliament of Uganda, local councils and other legislatures within the region; to create an institutional mechanism for delivery of capacity building interventions for Members and staff of Parliament as well as stakeholders; to create a formal framework of engagement between Parliament and local councils throughout the country; and other related matters.

Madam Speaker, the methodology is clear and was ably explained by the mover. The background too was very well explained by the mover. The need for the law was also very well underscored – the law is really needed and maybe it was needed yesterday. Allow me to also skip the analysis of the Institute of Parliamentary Studies because it has been very well explained. 

Let me go to the finance of the institute, which I feel is very important. The Bill proposes to have the funds of the institute to include money appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the institute, grants, gifts or donations from the Government or other sources made with the approval of the Commission. It also proposes funds from externally mobilised grants and revenue earned from activities of the institute under this Act, and any other funds received by the institute in the performance of its functions under this Act. The Bill further proposes that all non-tax revenue raised by the institute is to be remitted to the Consolidated Fund. 

The Bill proposes to grant the institute power to open bank accounts, a duty to operate on sound financial principles, and to obligate the Director to prepare a budget for the institute and submit it to the steering committee which will then submit the same to the Commission. It is proposed that the institute will be audited by the Auditor-General.

The committee observes that the above provisions are all intended to ensure that the institute can raise finances to ensure that it operates efficiently. The committee notes that the Certificate of Financial Implications issued for the Bill indicates that the Bill has no financial burden on the Government since the expenditure will be accommodated within the existing budgetary confines of the Parliamentary Commission.

The committee notes that if the finances of the institute are designed properly, the financial burden on Parliament will lessen. The committee was informed that the Institute of Parliamentary Studies in Kenya is allocated Kshs 40 million on average by Parliament but it usually raises more than double that money in a financial year. The committee was informed that this additional revenue is then put to the disposal of the Parliamentary Service to finance some of its other activities.

The committee, however, observes that although part of the finances of the institute include revenues earned from its activities, the Bill does not specify how the institute will raise this revenue. This begs the question as to whether the institute will be able to charge fees for its services and if so, how will the fees and charges be determined.

The committee also notes that internally generated funds will be deposited on the Consolidated Fund without the institute retaining a portion. It is recommended that the financial status of the institute needs to be strengthened by allowing it to retain a portion of the non-tax revenue collected to finance its activities.

With this proposal, the committee is aware that section 29 (3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 empowers a vote to retain revenue collected or received, where the revenue is in form of levies, licences, fees or fines and the vote is authorised through appropriation by Parliament to retain it. In order to secure the finances of the institute, there is need to specifically grant it the mandate to levy fees and other charges and to allow it retain a percentage of the revenue generated.

The committee is aware that on 29 May 2019, Parliament passed a resolution for the title of the Bill to be changed to “the Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019”. However, it is the considered opinion of the committee that the Bill be passed as it is and the Parliamentary Commission will rename the institute administratively to reflect the motion that was adopted by this House. Madam Speaker, this has since changed but I am reading the report as it is.

Recommendations

The committee, having scrutinised the Bill, proposes that the Bill be read for a second time and recommends as follows:

(a) 	The institute should be granted legal personality as   proposed in the Bill.

(b) 	The Parliamentary Commission to be responsible for the general supervision of the institute.

(c)	The phrase "steering committee" should be substituted with the phrase "management committee".

(d) 	For completeness, the functions of the institute should be expanded.

(e) 	Instead of appointing the members of the steering committee drawn from Parliament, the offices from which they are supposed to be drawn should instead be specified.

(f) 	The other members of the steering committee are to be nominated by the body or institute designating them and appointed by the Parliamentary Commission.

(g) 	The members of the management committee not drawn from Parliament or local government should be appointed by the Parliamentary Commission through a competitive process as in other jurisdictions the committee visited - that is Nigeria and Kenya. 

(h) 	The institute should be allowed to retain and spend at least l0 per cent of the internally generated funds to defray its expenses.

(i) 	The institute should be able to charge fees and to impose other charges as may be determined by the Parliamentary Commission. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson.

MS ERAGU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019 and copies of minutes of the proceedings by the committee on the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I thank the committee. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members; you are free to debate.

7.00
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the private Member who brought the Bill and thank the committee for the report.

It was long overdue especially for us, the Members of Parliament, because we come from different backgrounds. We get the urge to become representatives but sometimes maybe we lack training. Sometimes, we feel ashamed to say that we need to learn more, but learning never ends.

When you go to the local governments, the standards have deteriorated. They only get induction for one to three days. We appropriate funds but they supervise graduates. Even when you are a graduate at the local government level, you need specialised training on legislation and oversight. 

I think the Bill is timely and I would like to thank Parliament for coming up with this Bill. I support the idea of expanding the scope of those who shall get these services. Who will cater for the local governments? These are nurseries. Although many of us came from local governments, the challenge is great.

Colleagues do not take me on when I say that year after year, the level in Parliament has deteriorated. It has even deteriorated in the so-called political parties so much so that if I do not look good before the appointing Chief Whip or the Chief Opposition Whip, I cannot give a service. It has deteriorated overtime and we needed this Bill yesterday.

Tomorrow, we are going to propose another Bill to decide how political parties feed into Parliament. What is the role of the Office of the Speaker and the Parliamentary Commission? That is another Bill that this Parliament needs. I thank you.

7.03
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Member of Parliament who initiated this Bill. I would like to also thank the committee for looking at the Bill and coming up with recommendations.

It is very important for any parliament to get trained and know how to do its job. Parliament is a unique institution. We come from different backgrounds but when we come to Parliament, you find that there is a lot to learn. When you decide to learn from a colleague, sometimes you find that he has also just come to Parliament. When you try to learn from a member of staff, you do not have enough time to interact. When you expect to learn from the induction session, it is simply two weeks. Therefore, you find that every Member of Parliament wants to learn every day and that is why I support this Bill, so that Members of Parliament can have a source of knowledge.

If you have not learnt a lot during the time you are in that institution, you can go back and consult. In this case, I expect that institution to have a very well equipped library, so that any time a Member of Parliament would like to learn new things or remind him or herself about what they have learnt, they can go back and do so.
 
Secondly, I would like to appreciate the recommendation of the committee that this institution should retain some of its own funds. In this case, I would like to suggest that it retains all the money so that when the budget is being prepared, the balance is added on that money which is expected by the institution as funding from students or other sources. 

That will strengthen the institution and at the end of the day, even people in local governments and those interested in knowing how Parliament works will get a chance to learn. They will pay their money and learn before they come to Parliament as MPs or as employees. In any case, people would like to know how Parliament works, even if they do not want to come as employees or Members of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.05
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the many Members in thanking the mover of this private Member’s Bill, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I would also like to thank the committee for their detailed report.

I believe that after passing this Bill into law, this institute will help in building the capacity of legislators, staff of Parliament as well as local councils and their staff. I know that some Members and staff have been training local councillors in different fields. However, I know that we have been lacking the content or what you would call a syllabus to follow; we have been following the needs of the different local councils. Now with this parliamentary institute, I know we are going to have well-developed content with a syllabus and topics, which we shall follow.

I know that the Parliament of Uganda is registered as a parliament that has helped so many legislatures in developing their capacity. At one time when South Sudan had just reinstituted its Parliament, some of us were invited to go and induct the Members of Parliament in their legislative roles, committee work and processes of developing Bills. We were doing all this without a well-established parliamentary institute. I think that is why hon. Cecilia Ogwal came up with this private Member’s Bill.

We have been at the centre of training the Parliament of Somalia and we are appreciated for developing their capacity, including Somaliland. Therefore, this parliamentary institute will help to a great extent, especially within our region. There is no doubt that Parliament of Uganda is known for developing good Bills, passing good laws, training others and building capacity in other parliaments.

During the time I have been in Parliament, I took a short course on legislative drafting, which was organised by a private institution, and this course was very expensive. However, I know that this course is very important for Members of Parliament because when Bills are brought to Parliament, at times one may not have the skills to critically analyse these Bills. Therefore, I believe that this institute will enable Members to critically analyse Bills, look at laws, dissect them and find out whether they are gender-sensitive. 

It will also prepare Members to cope with the world outside. Madam Speaker, I know that the Parliament of South Africa trains their Members of Parliament so that by the time they complete their five-year term, they leave with a certificate, diploma or degree. Let me hope that this parliamentary institute will also give out such certificates. 

If you organise training and I attend it, I expect to get a certificate of completion after my training. I can add this certificate to my CV so that I use it outside Parliament. This is my prayer. I was listening carefully but I did not hear anything in this regard. If this element is not there, we need to introduce this as well because if you train local councillors from Masindi for about three months, they should get certificates. I know that we have been going out of the country - Some of us went to India to train in entrepreneurship. When you finish your three-month or six-month training, you are given a certificate of attendance. 

Therefore, we should introduce this and if possible, the modules should be assessed by the National Council for Higher Education and equated to a certain level. Madam Speaker, this is my prayer because you may start the institute but if you do not award certificates or give everyone the same level certificate, people will take it for granted. It becomes like any other certificate which one can get after attending a one-week workshop.

I would like to thank you and the entire Parliamentary Commission for presenting this Bill to establish the Institute of Parliamentary Studies. I know it will help us a great deal. 

7.11
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for bringing this Bill and the committee for the good job done. 

I support the institute because the justification given is very clear to me. We need to link with local governments because they are our lower legislatures. The model rules of procedure of councils are a replica of what we are doing here in Parliament. It is good to also look at their own capacity and training. 

Twinning arrangements with other parliaments are very important because we are not an island. We have been looking at only Commonwealth parliaments, but how about those others? We need clear well-structured twinning arrangements. 

Capacity building for Members of Parliament and staff has been a bit ad hoc. I think now we are going to have well-structured training and capacity building. The assumption that when you are elected a Member of Parliament, you therefore know what to do in Parliament is very dangerous. The roles of legislating, appropriating, supervising and oversight are technical things. We need a bit of more strengthening in terms of our capacity in these areas.

Other parliaments and organisations, for example the Judiciary and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), have their institutes; why can’t Parliament have one? The challenge is for us to accept the shift from a directorate of Parliament to an autonomous institute of training. This is where I have a real challenge. I see both the mover of the Bill and the committee fearing to take that bold step.

As hon. Bintu said, an institute must be able to award certain certificates. It must have a curriculum. It must have courses. It must be recognised. You cannot talk of an institute, which is running our workshops and seminars here. I would hesitate to have an institute, which takes over the role of the Human Resource Department of Parliament. Let them leave our benchmarking alone. We have our own human resource management for workshops of committees.

I think we are looking at a fully-fledged autonomous training institute on parliamentary studies. I totally agree with the committee that its functions must widen and broaden beyond Members of Parliament and councils. We have journalists who are working in Parliament. We have ministries, departments and agencies of Government that need to understand us a little more. Why can’t they attend a course on our work in Parliament so that they can relate with us better?

I am looking at an institute, which is self-accounting, not one which raises its money and it is left at the disposal of the Parliamentary Service. Let them have an accounting officer with their own accounts. They should be able to grow as an institute and put up their own structures. 

I fear when I look at the independence and autonomy of this institute vis-à-vis their being appointed by the Clerk to Parliament on approval of the Commission. This is an institute which is going to submit their accountabilities to us. Therefore, this is where I found my challenge. 

We seem to agree that we need a fully-fledged autonomous institute for parliamentary studies but we are tending to make it a child of Parliament, to remain as if it is a directorate of this Parliament. We must take that bold step and look into the details of the law. If we do not empower them to have a board that can recruit its staff and trainers, then I think we shall somehow curtail it and it will remain the way it is at the moment. Right now, it is a directorate managed by the Commission.

I thought this Bill was actually trying to look at the Commonwealth Institute for Parliamentary Studies. They award degrees and recruit lecturers. So, how do we do that? I do not see it in the current Bill. I see the proposal and justification but the step to make it a fully autonomous self-accounting institute is not visible –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Magyezi. We must define an institute. Is it for in-house training or outside training? If it is both, the information I would like to give hon. Magyezi is that personally, I have led training – I was given secondment on training - and I know that you must award certificates. If you are awarding certificates, then you must be accredited.

In fact, if it becomes a training institution, then it will stop being under the ambit of Parliament. It must be an institute, which is accredited to deal with parliamentary studies, but outside our control. If we take that bold decision, then we will move.

Maybe if we are saying it should be an in-house training institute, then we do not need to go for a training institute. We just call it a directorate of training, which shall have a training centre. That is the information I would like to give you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable colleague. You see, this is where we need to take a clear decision right from the beginning. The mover of the Bill and the committee should come out clearly on whether we are setting up an autonomous institute, which is self-running. 

How do you make it autonomous when its director is appointed by the Clerk to Parliament? How shall we hold them accountable? How do we make them an autonomous institute that must be competitive with other institutes in the world? 

You are setting up a parliamentary institute that will be led by a steering committee; no, these people need a board and staff! They are going to advertise a course on legislative drafting, for example, and people from the local councils and even law firms are going to apply. So, you will have 100 or 200 people coming to attend a course of three or four months; where are they going to study from? Who is going to handle their fees and so on?

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the committee to help us do a finer job. When you went to the other countries, did you find an institute of parliamentary studies that is a department of internal training in Parliament, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi said? That is different from what the mover is proposing.

I would propose that we support hon. Cecilia Ogwal to move that this country gets a fully-fledged, autonomous and credible international competitive institute of parliamentary studies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Amoding, I would like to know whether the judicial Institute awards certificates. The URA also has a training institute -

7.19
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and thank the committee for the report that they have laid before the House. I would like to also thank the Parliamentary Commission, particularly hon. Cecilia Ogwal who has been doing the training for me in the absence of the parliamentary institute. She has been training me on these issues and mentoring me on many things. I want to thank you, Mama Cecilia, for this work. You continue to do work which doubles the work we do at our age and amazes me as a person.

Madam Speaker, on the issue that is before us, the institute is something that we should have had much earlier. I would like to agree with the movers of the Bill. Indeed, induction is not enough for Members of Parliament, as it has already been said. We come with different experiences, expertise and then you are expected to supervise very strange areas - nuclear power, oil and gas, and many more areas that maybe you have not interfaced with.

We try in many areas to interface with local governments but there are many areas which we may not be familiar with like accounting and all that. Therefore, yes, we agree that this institute is very important and welcome.

I vouch for the independence of the institute. I have interfaced with this institute without the law and they have many challenges in terms of resource mobilisation and utilisation of this money. This is because all the time, they have to go back to the Clerk’s office and other offices and there is a lot of wastage of time and lack of effectiveness in their work. Therefore, if they are to be supported, indeed the biggest need that the institute is looking forward to is perhaps independence and autonomy in terms of resource mobilisation and financing.

This is similar to what is in Kenya. Kenya has that ability. I am not quite sure whether what hon. Magyezi is raising is what the Bill may want to do. I am looking at what we have with the Parliamentary Pension Scheme here; it is an independent entity but still under the Parliamentary Commission’s supervision and monitoring. We have other entities that we work with as Parliament and they are effective even when they are given that autonomy. Therefore, we might want to review that, but the committee will guide. 

I am not quite sure whether we are going to expand beyond what we have anticipated. I believe that the need that we have is strengthening training for Members of Parliament and staff and also the linkage between the local councils or local legislative bodies that we have. I remember my local government legislative body giving me requests as a Member of Parliament to support them in training. I did not manage to get them the training because I was confused on who was going to offer this training, what kind of training they needed and the resources. So, at the end of the day, for all these years I was not able to support them in that kind of training. Therefore, this is a very welcome initiative which will help us be at par with the local governments. 

On the issue of expansion, I see expansion in the sense that the institute is also going to offer training to the public and interested persons outside Parliament. My thinking is that the expansion will be within that enclave of understanding legislative procedures and processes.

Madam Speaker, hon. Bintu noted that Uganda is a very advanced country in many of our policies and laws. When we travel to other countries, they have a lot to learn from us. We also have a lot to give out and support other parliaments. Every month, we receive delegations coming from different parts of the world to learn many things. 

In the area of gender, every month we receive visitors coming to learn from us. The issue of gender and equity compliance, for example, is a very important intervention that this Parliament first came up with globally, and we know that there is going to be increased traffic of people coming into this country to learn. Therefore, Parliament as an entity is seeking through this Bill to expand what it has learnt and also replicate what it has learnt not only for Members of Parliament but also for the public. 

I would like to support the Bill although we need clarity on whether to expand it further to that level of awarding degrees and certificates because that will require a bigger budget, which we are also hesitant to discuss. You know the discussion that would come from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. How can we balance the two things? I thank you.

7.25
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the mover of this Bill, hon. Ogwal, my elder sister. I also thank the committee for the positive recommendations.

Madam Speaker, when you come to Parliament for the first time, you do not know what to do, what to say and how to say it. However, if we put this institute in place, we will be able to build capacity for the new Members of Parliament and maybe those outside. New MPs will come face to face with different ministries and experienced Members of Parliament to tell them what to do. Therefore, by the time they enter Parliament, at least they will know what to do. When you enter Parliament, sometimes you are even nervous. Therefore, there is room for capacity building. 

Madam Speaker, we have been training on the job. Training on the job has its own weaknesses. Sometimes you may not even know the right thing to do or say. I am a teacher and a teacher trainer for that matter. We used to train our students and take them out to do practice and then they would get to know what they were supposed to do under your supervision. Therefore, this is great move to build capacity of the Members of Parliament and the clerks. We can also add the local governments and so on.

Madam Speaker, I can assure you that Members have been complaining about clerks. They say they do not know what they are supposed to do and they dodge work. However, maybe it is because they have been training on the job. If you train on the job, you will not have built your capacity before. Therefore, it will help a lot with our new Members of Parliament, the clerks and others that Members have talked about.

Secondly, if you train before, you build confidence. We have read in the newspapers that there are Members of Parliament who have never even made their maiden speech and so on; it is lack of confidence sometimes. Maybe some of them do not have what to say but I am sure every Member of Parliament who comes here has a lot to say. However, when you do not have confidence and you come here and stand amongst senior Members of Parliament to talk, sometimes you quake and get nervous. I am happy that this will help in building the confidence of new Members of Parliament and even the clerks. I am talking about clerks because this programme is coming up for Parliament. Others can also come up.

Madam Speaker, maybe this is not part of it but the charging of fees, if not done well, might scare some people yet I feel that all Members of Parliament who come here and all clerks should compulsorily undergo training. However, if the fees are too expensive, finally it may end up like a money-generating institution and we shall lose track. Some Members may even hide away and not go there at all. Therefore, we have to plan well so that the fees structure is conducive and affordable.

Finally, we are talking about expanding this institute and even have it award certificates; won’t we need more space to construct structures like classrooms? If we had known this before, maybe in the design of our new chamber and offices, we would have taken this into account and included classrooms somewhere on a certain level or floor. We have to think about that because Members are suggesting expansion so that people from outside can also join and get training. We have to think about space and construction of buildings because you may get big numbers and yet there is the usual work of Parliament going on and you cannot –(Member timed out.)

7.30
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that having a law for this institute is necessary in order to expand it, and this institute will help us as a country and as a Parliament.

As we all know, Uganda has always been a centre for learning and a role model. Many countries send their people to Uganda to learn. Sometimes when they come here, they may be interested in getting to know what happens. What has happened of late is that they are sent to forums like the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and climate change, among others. These people coming to learn would be getting such information from the institute.
 
Secondly, we have always spent a lot of money when it comes to building the capacity of staff and Members of Parliament. One way of cutting such costs is by expanding and building the capacity of this institute. All the time, you hear a Member talking about South Africa, China, India, UK, USA etc. For us to be able to manage our limited resources, we must have a well-established, well-equipped and well-staffed institute in place here.

Madam Speaker, that is why I would like to support my senior colleague who has been in this country for a long time. She was even Miss Uganda at one point. Let us set the pace so that others learn from us. We should not be the ones learning from them. What don’t we have this? Don’t we have the ability? Don’t we have the brains? Let us tell people out there that common sense is not rare in Uganda. It is actually available and one way is through this institute.

Madam Speaker, this institute will also develop expertise. Sometimes we say that we lack experts. You cannot get experts out of the blue. One way of getting them is through some of the trainings that we are going to have in this institute. You can actually learn from there and then come to the gallery and understand what goes on.

Madam Speaker, I remember on 29th of May I moved a motion that we must thank God for restoring your health and Members in this House, from all sides, supported it one hundred per cent. Nobody opposed it. I remember that one of the resolutions therein, after amendments, was that we rename this institute “the Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies”. This is on record in this House. 

That is why I am raising that red flag that as we go to the committee stage, that should be one of the key matters that we must include right there because of the value that Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga has added to this country, especially to this Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we may have to take some time to reflect on the issues raised by hon. Magyezi as to what institute we are setting up.

7.35
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my principal colleague - you are beyond senior, Mama Cecilia.

The NRM party or Government has an institute in Kyankwanzi -(Laughter). It is a Government institute but people call it an NRM institute. The Uganda Police Force has one in Lubowa. The Ministry of Works and Transport has a training institute in Elgon. The Ministry of Water and Environment has a training institute in Entebbe and another in Bugolobi for the whole of Africa. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) has Kimaka in Jinja. There is also a judicial institute in Nakawa.

However, we have Members of Parliament who are not comfortable with Kyankwanzi, so this would be another chance to go where it is not coloured yellow. Maybe if the Opposition comes to power - God forbid - it will be coloured red or blue. This institute will be neutral and I would like to request Members to support it.

Madam Speaker, about the name, I would like to agree entirely with my senior colleague, hon. Abala, that we name it Kadaga. This business of saying “Commission” - There is too much English at the Commission. We would like things done here so that the Clerk and her team are directed that there is no change. Madam Speaker, when it goes there, some other invisible hand may come in and you will not be anywhere. You know, mafias can come from anywhere. When you go to Tanzania, there is the Julius Nyerere Institute. Why are we failing to do that here? Let us put Alitwala Kadaga. We may leave out the name Rebecca because it is common but when somebody says Alitwala Kadaga, that one comes out.

On the issue of retaining, instead of saying 10 per cent, why can’t we retain 25 per cent of the money? We are here to monitor and it is not easy to misuse Parliament money. These technical people will fear because they know that there is “team lethal” around.

Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, this will also help us with training.

Finally, there is the issue of recruitment. The recruitment should reflect a national image. We do not want a scenario where the computer deletes or rejects names from certain regions. I hope the institute will reflect a national image, and this is what we are requesting for. If the people who handle the recruitment and appointments segregate, you will bring this country to shame. Since it is our parliamentary thing, it should reflect a national character. I would like to support the Bill in its entirety.

7.39
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend hon. Cecilia Ogwal for bringing this Bill and hon. Isala for the report that has been read.

I would like to start with the report. First of all, this is the right time for this institute. Actually, it should have started yesterday before I joined this Parliament. I really want to thank the movers for having thought it right to have this in place.

However, as the chairperson of the committee talked about the name of the institute, I remembered when we were debating the motion on one of the ways this country would honour the Rt Hon. Speaker and we unanimously agreed as a House that this institute be renamed Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. I expected that to come out in their presentation. She seemed to say that that would be handled administratively, which I am not comfortable with because it was a resolution of this House. 

Now that we are debating this issue, we have to resolve and include that the institute be named the Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies. In other countries, people who have served very well in their communities and Government, like Madam Speaker has done here, deserve such honour. Therefore, I would like to insist that this comes to pass as we resolved previously, so that it is not an issue of debate. Let us not complicate issues.

When I joined the Eighth Parliament, I was inducted for only three days. You are not going to tell me that I am going to be perfect after those three days, unless had stayed in this House for some time. This institute is going to play a very big role. I am reckoning that there will be a time where this institute will not only look at training Members of Parliament when they come but also continue building the capacity of Members of Parliament in different aspects, including sectoral engagements. 

I am also looking at this institute as being very strategic not only in training and capacity building of Members of Parliament but it would also benefit the local councils. They should know what Parliament is doing so that they are able to fit into our plans and we also fit into their plans. SO, I am looking at this institute in a wider perspective. 

This issue of complicating the English - We are not going to award education certificates as an institute; I do not think so. We are going to award certificates of participation. The most important thing is continuous building of the capacity of leaders who are holding portfolios in Government, so that they are able to deliver on Government services. 

I support the idea of this institute and on behalf of the people of Ngora whom I represent in Parliament, the Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala Institute for Parliamentary Studies is very much welcome. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.43
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for moving this private Member’s Bill and the committee for presenting the report. 

Parliament has been organising orientations for Members of Parliament once after they swear in. This is not enough, considering the roles that Members of Parliament play, ranging from oversight, legislation, representation and appropriation. Senior Members of this House need to refresh their knowledge. I think that is why hon. Ogwal came up with this private Member’s Bill because we need to update our knowledge from time to time.

The Bill is bringing on board the staff of Parliament. If we have to produce good reports in this House or if we have to process Bills well, then staff of Parliament should be brought on board for efficiency and effectiveness. Learning is continuous; as long as we are still alive, we need to learn every time.

Local councils too will benefit from this institute because they also make bylaws. Ministry of Local Government has not been consistent with the training or orientation of these local councillors. Sometimes, they even take five months after swearing in the councillors before they orient them. Therefore, they take long to understand what is expected of them in their roles. 

That is why sometimes you hear that some local councillors have refused to pass the budget because their allowances are not ready. However, if they acquire knowledge during such trainings, they will appreciate the fact that without facilitation, you can still serve your country and at some point that can be handled. As Members of Parliament, that also happens to us. Sometimes we do not get allowances immediately.

Interaction with legislators from other regions is equally very important because we shall acquire new ideas and good practices. I recall in 2017, UWOPA organised training for its Members and they invited a legislator from Kenya called hon. Millie Odhiambo. She came and took the Members through issues of processing Bills, how to come up with private Members’ Bills and how to move motions, and Members really appreciated that training. She encouraged the women not to be intimidated in the House. Sometimes there is some level of intimidation but she really encouraged us and that is why female Members of Parliament are very assertive. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here since 2.10 p.m. I think we need to allow the Hansard team to go. However, I would like to acknowledge the following Members: hon. Balyeku, hon. Ndeezi, hon. Lanyero, hon. Kamuntu, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Muzanira, hon. Katusabe, hon. Eitunganane and hon. Arinda. Those are the names that have been registered. We shall reconvene tomorrow. 

In the meantime, I would like us to think about what type of institute we are setting up so that by the time we go to the committee stage, we know where we are going. Thank you very much for the work done. 

Honourable members, hon. Naome Kibaaju, Member for Sheema County North, has lost her sister, Elizabeth Kanyabubare. She will be buried in Kazo District on 28 November 2019. Let us stand up in honour of the late sister.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.48 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 27 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

