PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6218STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTuesday, 15 November 2022not take action on at least one person, they will not change. Honourable Government Chief Whip, there is a big problem. I do not know whether the frontbench members have informed you that they are not coming. Have they informed you? 2.02THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, first of all, I join you in also condemning the non-appearance of colleague ministers. (Applause) We are all aware that Parliament starts its sittings at 2.00 p.m. and it is three minutes past two o’clock. I have registered only two apologies; one is from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is attending a meeting with His Excellency the President at State House, Nakasero. The second one is from Hon. Margaret Muhanga, the Minister of State for Health, who wrote to you indicating that even the other two colleague ministers from the Ministry of Health will not be able to attend Parliament today. Those are the apologies I have. The rest were duly notified. Today’s Order Paper was sent yesterday by the Government Chief Whip on the forum for Cabinet 2021/2026. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Government Chief Whip. It is really absurd that we can have the Front Bench with only two ministers – [Hon. Peter Ogwang enters the IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 7TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are not a Member of the frontbench, leave the front seats. I want the whole world to see that there is nobody in the front seats.Appointments Committee, I want you to be very vigilant and note this. Next time, when appointing ministers, you must look at some of these things. We have the Appointments Committee in this House and I am the chairperson. We approved 83 ministers but we only have one present today. Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I must say that I am not happy with the frontbench. The whole House is also not happy with the frontbench. We need responses from the ministers on whatever we are going to discuss here, but we do not have ministers in the House. I really do not know why the ministers behave that way. The frontbench members do not listen and I am tired of complaining. I am tired of getting annoyed with them because they will not change whether I get annoyed or not. If we do PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6219THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022Chamber] - there is another hustler entering. (Laughter)Honourable members, last week, I raised a concern over the magnitude and cause of road accidents in Uganda. I informed the House that the Chairperson of the Committee on Health, Dr Charles Ayume, had conducted a study on the magnitude of road traffic accidents and injuries reported in public hospitals.Honourable members, allow me to vary the Order Paper today and accord Hon. Ayume space immediately after my communication, to give us a brief report on the accidents so that we understand what we are going through. I do not know if he is in the House. Last week, we also debated the report on issues of sports and I am happy the minister of state for sports is here. He will be giving us an update because today, he was supposed to bring a Bill. However, he informed me that the Bill is being processed. We will be very grateful to hear from you, honourable minister. I gave the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development 10 days to bring the Bills. We have two Bills: one on legal aid and the other on employment. I put the House on notice that the Bill on legal aid is ready and will be presented tomorrow. The committee has already finished its work. The National Legal Aid Bill, 2022, which is a private Member’s Bill, will be presented on the Floor of this House tomorrow.Honourable members, on a sad note, we lost one of our staff yesterday in a boda boda accident. His name is Mr Bahati. He was a driver in the Office of the Deputy Speaker. He was knocked dead while on a boda boda. May we rise and observe a moment of silence in his honour.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, in the past weeks, this House has raised matters concerning road accidents, especially involving boda bodas. The safety on our roads depends on the road users - that is something we need to note - the vehicles, the cyclists, anybody on the road and the road conditions. These factors influence the safety of our people. Short of that, we have a problem.While the Government continues to devise means of effectively regulating boda boda operations – like you have heard that boda boda riders are supposed to have helmets: a lot of effort has been put on the enforcement of safety standards, especially helmets and reflectors – I wonder whether one cannot cause an accident when wearing a reflector or helmet. The issue would be the behaviour of the boda boda riders: how do they behave? Are they qualified enough to ride motorcycles? Most of our youth come from upcountry – somebody buys a boda boda and in two days, he is riding in Kampala, yet he does not know how to ride. Now, the persons who are supposed to regulate do not do their part. Instead of regulating issuance of licences and riding tests, it is not done. Therefore, somebody gets and rides a boda boda and puts people’s lives at risk. This is very unfortunate.Yesterday, I was with a commissioner and somebody told us a story of who pierced his eye. When he grew up, he asked the father: “What happened to my eye?” The father said: “You got a knife and pierced it.” Then, he asked: “But you had all the powers; couldn’t you stop it?” We have all the powers in this country; can’t we reduce these accidents? Can’t we have the regulations in place? Can’t the people be tested? We are here lamenting day in day out because of accidents, yet we have the power. If we do not use that power - the people who are dying are our voters.Honourable members, while we continue lamenting, I request the Government to have strict regulations on the registration and 6220STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTlicensing of boda bodas, including ensuring riding proficiency, awareness of traffic rules and regulations as well as the general safety considerations.Two, subject the riders to regular riding proficiency tests as a precondition for licence renewal – somebody just goes to renew a licence anytime anywhere and nothing happens, and you do not know whether this person has killed - for example, for the accident that happened yesterday, the boda boda rider is alive. They know how to jump off. We need active enforcement of the traffic plans, laws and regulations. Notably, the Traffic and Road Safety Regulations, 2004 must be enforced. We need enactment of penalties for breach of the traffic regulations, pursuant to the traffic and road safety laws and regulations of 2004. We need to put punitive measures for errant behaviour and misconduct by the road users in general – whether boda boda riders or drivers.The unfortunate bit is that we politicise these things. When we say let us do this to the boda boda riders, we say it is politics. Let us not politicise these things.If we say we need a census of the boda bodas and that we need all the boda bodas to be deregistered and registered after testing, we say it is because we are the Opposition or NRM. Let us remove politics; it is about people’s lives.Given the gravity of what is happening - you will hear from Dr Ayume’s report: many people are dying on a daily basis – this must be handled by us. Actually, people dying daily in accidents are more than those who die of Ebola. We are very careful with Ebola, but not with accidents.I, once again, thank you for coming to the House. I request the Prime Minister – Hajjat, kindly whip your people to be in the House. We approved 83 ministers, but we have only five now. It demoralises the Backbench Members. Let us know that we have three days only – Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday - to come to the House. This is your House. We pay you for being in this House, by the way, unless we are going to stop paying some ministers. Honourable members, thank you.2.15DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am reacting to your communication. Recently, there was an issue on road safety in this House.I rise because we, Members of Parliament, are potential victims of road accidents, just like the boda bodas and the rest are.As a way of protecting our lives from being destroyed in accidents, some of us went ahead and fixed flashlights, but abandoned the sirens because it is a preserve of other authorities. Recently, a list of VIPs was named in this House – in the other report that was presented. We believe that we are equally VIPs.On our roads -THE SPEAKER: Which VIPs were named?DR ISAMAT: For example, the Speaker is a VIP. THE SPEAKER: The Speaker is No. 3 in this country. (Laughter) DR ISAMAT: Yes. The Speaker is a VIP. The Vice-President is a VIP – and others. According to our standards here, people also consider us to be VIPs. (Laughter)We are in a situation where a Member of Parliament has fixed flashlights on his vehicle and the traffic police demand that they be removed yet at night, when those lights are on, it is very clear and easy for other people to see someone. I honestly think there is a bit of unfairness here and we are seeking clarification: are we also entitled to use those flashlights or not? I thank you, Madam Speaker.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Speaker]6221THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, much as I am regarded a VIP, I do not even push away road users when my cars are moving because I consider those people on the road more VIP than I am: they voted me to be in this House.Therefore, everybody, in his or her own right, is a VIP in this country. You are more VIP to me; that is why even when you are passing, I give you space. (Laughter)Honourable members, the issue that we really need to look at is the issues of the boda bodas. How do we help this country? Let us not be mindful of ourselves first. How would we help this country to reduce accidents on the road? What do we need to do?2.18MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember one time, there was a ban on boda bodas from the business centres. We had opted to replace these boda bodas with tuk-tuks. When you see it clearly, you will realise that chances of getting into an accident in a tuk-tuk are minimal than on a boda boda. I do not know where the resolution “died”. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?2.19THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, when you were concluding your remarks, you gave the way forward – that Government should come up with the regulations, the licences, the penalties and many others that I do not need to repeat. I thought you had given your way forward, which Government should put in place to enforce the laws of boda bodas.If we talk about other things like the tuk-tuks – You said here that those people are more or less VIP than any other person; I think we are adding more money to these people to put in their transport system to carry people, because the tuk-tuk is bought at a different price than the boda boda. We just have to enforce the laws; we have to enforce the penalties so that somebody knows when there is something or if he is going to be taken to court, the penalties are in place. That way, others can learn from them. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am aware that KCCA has regulations and rules that have been pushed down awaiting Cabinet approval. When are you taking those regulations to Cabinet? The rules of this House are that when you are in this House, you do not receive or take calls when in the House.MS NAKADAMA: I am going to call the Minister for Kampala to tell us how far she has moved with those regulations, so that they are presented to Cabinet. I am going to call her for an update. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I happened to get the regulations from KCCA; they were brought to my office and they are very good regulations. Can we give you a timeline? Can we have that in the House next Tuesday?MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I request that I consult because I might commit myself here when it will not be ready on Tuesday. That way, I will become a liar. I request that you allow me consult, then we come up with a fixed date when the regulations will be in Cabinet. THE SPEAKER: Can you give us feedback tomorrow after consultation? MS NAKADAMA: I thank you. Much obliged.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues of boda bodas will be discussed when the paper is presented by Dr Ayume. Let us not repeat anything. I have given guidelines on what Government ought to do.MR OSHABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, it was supposed to be Hon. Ssemujju first then you.6222STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssemujju was seated and you gave me the opportunity. THE SPEAKER: Let Hon. Ssemujju go first.2.23MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am making a comment on your communication. You did ask: “What do we need to do?” Madam Speaker, this whole country will need to observe rules. You do not remove them because they are not convenient to you. Parliament will need to learn; we are the ones who removed the term limits when it was time for our President to observe them. We are the ones who removed the age limit when it was time for the President to observe them. So the moment you misbehave, you are inviting boda bodas also to begin violating traffic rules. I think what we need to do is to remove the President, so that we can get a leader who observes rules and then everybody else will follow suit.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 90 per cent of the Members of Parliament who are here are new Members of Parliament. The person who removed term limits was Hon. Ssemujju; He is one of those who was in the 10th Parliament. The rest of you did not remove term limits; it is actually they. Honourable members, before you raise your issue – first, we want to thank the Pan African Parliament Members – Members of PAP Uganda Chapter. They struggled very hard and finally, Uganda is going to host the PAP session; we won the right to host the PAP session. (Applause) Can you tell us when we are hosting it?2.25MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Pan African Parliament is made up of about 53 countries. Currently there are about 50 countries that are participating because of the rules. We often sit in Midrand – that is the seat of the Pan African Parliament. However, Member States are given opportunities to request to host the Pan African Parliament when they think it is good timing for them. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker. We reached out to her and told her about how good it would be for us to host the entire African continent in Uganda. She welcomed the idea and pushed it up to when we were granted the opportunity to host the Pan-African Parliament next year in October. (Applause)Madam Speaker, thank you very much. It was solely your effort that you made all the communication and everything, to make sure that Uganda hosts the Pan African Parliament, come next year.Madam Speaker, allow me one minute on the other matter of boda bodas. Until a time -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, we agreed that let us discuss the issue of boda bodas when the paper is presented. We have a paper on the boda bodas.MR OSHABE: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am just requesting Government-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Patrick, no. 2.27MR SAMUEL OPIO ACUTI (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was reacting to your communication and one of the issues was on the absenteeism of the front bench. I think this is no longer absenteeism but more less a protest or some act of defiance. I think we should not just ask for whipping measures but nuclear measures to ensure that they can be able to attend. I would like to propose that to the Government Chief Whip. Secondly, Madam Speaker, last week, you appointed a team to go and verify the payments for the medical interns. However, as we speak, some of the internship centres have not yet received the payment. I would like to propose, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6223THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022with your indulgence, that we get an update from the team because this matter seems not to have been resolved, as we had expected. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, on the issue of the interns, a report was brought and I asked the team to follow up until the interns are paid. We want an action report, not a lamentation report.However, I would like to find out what has been done, how much has been paid and who has been paid. On the issue of the ministers, we have a very able Government Chief Whip here. MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I will have to engage my honourable colleague on the aspect of using the nuclear whipping system. But all said and done, the front bench as ministers but on your other scientific method of using nuclear system, I will have to consult with you. Thank you. 2.29MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This House has Government ministers but also Shadow ministers. The Shadow ministers are here all the time -(Interjections) - well, you can count the numbers if you want -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the ministers, we have given a strong warning. We have told the Government Chief Whip what to do; we want to see what happens from tomorrow onwards. MR MWIJUKYE: My concern was the fate of the shadow ministers because if I shadow a minister for energy and she is never here; do I now take over the responsibility and do it-(Laughter)MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A shadow minister is a shadow. Secondly, they have these different offices, a cabinet minister or minister from the Government side; they have their offices plus all the responsibilities they normally carry.Is he in order to say that if a shadow minister who is in charge maybe of environment or defence is here, the counterpart should be here?  THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we had a meeting with the President, we agreed that 30 per cent of the ministers will always be in the House. Let us have the ministers in the House.2.31MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am avoiding repeating what you had already guided upon; I had a very good suggestion to bring on boda bodas, but also the traffic management on the roads in general, but I will wait for that opportunity. MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter in line with Article 91 of the Constitution, over the Bills passed by this House. I am aware of your target that this House is supposed to process 60 Bills plus.However, most of the Bills passed by this House have not yet been assented to by the President, in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution. Specifically, subsection three of Article 91-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke, that issue was raised last week and I gave them Thursday to report back to the House. You are raising the same thing which was - I do not know if you were in the House that day. So, Government is reporting back on Thursday. But I am happy that you are reading the Constitution.2.33MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. Last week we had a serious issue here concerning the sports sector and we are glad that you guided us well. The other thing is the Presidential pledges to sportspeople.Last week a former Uganda Cranes -6224STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssolo, you are in that subcommittee - it is a Presidential pledge under sports. So, those are things you should bring up to this House and bring to the attention of the sports minister.I am happy he is your friend; now that you are the Shadow Minister and the other one is the minister, that is one of the issues you should look at in your committee and report back on those Presidential pledges.2.34MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and other ministers from the Office of the Prime Minister. You are aware that the people of Kassanda and Mubende are in a lockdown that was extended for another 21 days. Government gave us some food and some families got 3 kg or 10 and so on.However, I would like to hear from the minister, whether there is any plan to add food to the people because first of all, the food that came in the first 21 days was little. Secondly, the lockdown was extended. Can the Minister of Disaster Preparedness or the minister from the Office of the Prime Minister assure the people of Mubende and Kassanda that more food is coming tomorrow? Thank you, very much.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister -2.35THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I watched my colleague on Zoom the day he was speaking from South Africa about the little food that was taken to Kassanda compared to what was taken to Mubende.I would like to remind the Member that Mubende has a municipality and a district. So, the food that went to Mubende was more because we were giving it to two different administrative units. The one of Kassanda came as a district. The relief items will be taken to both Kassanda and Mubende due to the extension of the lockdown. However, their Chief Administrative Officers should be in position to write back to us showing the people who did not receive the ration last time so that we plan accordingly. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Patrick, the food is going to be delivered; that issue is being handled. It is just unfortunate that you have not been there; you do not know which family got food and which one did not get. Due to the lockdown, you cannot go there, but the food is being delivered. 2.37MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the deployment of UPDF soldiers on a piece of land situated in Namataba Town Council by a one, Brigadier Benkunda Besigye.The said Brigadier claims to own 10 acres of land on that piece of land and he has since got titles for the different plots of land, and at the same time, there are people who own titles on the same piece of land. He deployed soldiers who started beating up people around the area and causing insecurity. My prayer is for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to intervene in the verification of the title of Brig. Benkunda and also, on the ownership of the said land titles of the people people who are staying in the same area. Secondly, the Ministry of Security should interest itself in this matter; as to whether it is right for soldiers to deploy security on people’s land yet they have land titles. Thank you so much. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6225THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 20222.38THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Member for the concern. I have just picked it from here; so, I want you to allow me to link up with the Member to get the facts. We shall then verify issues of ownership of that particular piece of land. On the issue of soldiers, I will link up with the agencies and inform them to take action accordingly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, link up with Hon. Nabakooba, the minister of lands, and have that sorted out. Hon. Kangwagye -2.39MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Indepen-dent, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Madam Speaker, you know how I speak. My voice now is too low because of what is happening in our district of Isingiro –THE SPEAKER: Raise it a little bit. (Laughter)MR KANGWAGYE: The matter is too urgent. As I speak, Madam Speaker, over 700 trucks carrying matooke, cows, beans, coffee, rice, name it, are all stuck because of the nature of the road. The road I am talking about is Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki–Rakai Road. This road has been featuring in all budgets of every financial year. The road has featured in the NRM manifesto since 1986, up to now. (Laughter) Yes, the President has talked about that road.Recently, Madam Speaker, to my surprise, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Vice-President and even the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament were in Isingiro and they talked about the same road. However, as I talk, trucks are stuck and nothing can move because of that problem. Madam Speaker –(Interjections) - the voice has gone up because of the challenge that is affecting our people. I really want you, Members of Parliament, to accept and stand with us and see how this problem can really –Madam Speaker, I have three prayers:1. That Government commits itself on dates for the works to commence and furnish information to this august House on how the road works are going to start;2. That the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) expedite plans for funding the feasibility study;3. That Government prioritises all budgets and manifests the pledges to enable economic development across the country.Madam Speaker, once that road is done, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and even Juba will not have any challenge as far as food is concerned. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. You know he is one of our representatives from Tanzania. Can you sit down, our “Tanzanian MP”? (Laughter) 2.42THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The road that the honourable colleague is talking about is among the roads that are supposed to be worked on. The programme is with UNRA. I am going to call upon UNRA to tell us, through the Minister of Works and Transport, when they will start that programme because it is among the roads that are to be done. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: The issue of that road has come to this House several times, even in the 10th Parliament. Prime Minister, you need to make a follow up. UNRA is now scared of 6226STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTdoing anything because they fear that they are going to be rationalised, but UNRA is there for us. They are going to handle your issue. Please talk to UNRA to ensure that we have that road worked on. Hon. Museveni - 2.44MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning schools that are closing. In Mubende, we are in a lockdown and there is no public or even private transport yet students are supposed to go back home. I thank the ministry because they have organised means to transport students who are studying outside Mubende but are from Mubende. However, how are the parents going to pick them? The ministry will have centres where they are going to drop the students but parents are not supposed to drive or ride. How are they going to take their children home? I would like the ministry to relax the rules and allow private and public means to take these children back home because they are going to be dropped at Kasenyi Secondary School. In Kassanda, I think it is Nkobazambogo Primary School. How are these children going to reach their homes, Madam Speaker?THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you need to convene a meeting with the Ministries of Health and Education to see what you can do. Do you have something to say, minister of education? 2.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is true that the matter Hon. Museveni has raised is being handled in a multi-sectoral manner. As Education, we have a part we are playing – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: This is a very serious matter. Why don’t you leave your colleague to conclude?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, Hon. Ogwang told this Parliament that he represents the senior minister only on Thursdays. This is on the record of Parliament. (Laughter) Is he in order to go against a statement he made here that he comes here to represent the ministry only on Thursdays? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I requested Hon. Ogwang to be in the House today. First, I wanted him to give us a report on the Sports Bill. Now that there is a question on education, he can answer the question. It is not cast in stone that he must be here only on Thursdays. He is a Member of Parliament who is supposed to be in this House every day. Honourable minister?MR OGWANG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My brother, Hon. Ssemujju, let me not get into other things - Let me address myself to the question, which was asked by Hon. Museveni.I was saying that the matter we are discussing is being handled between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports. That is why you see we are talking about how to make sure students and pupils who are studying in Mubende but come from different districts, leave the district. We are also looking at students who were born in Mubende and are studying in different parts of the country, but are meant to return to their respective areas. We want them to get back home and we are handling the matter.Regarding the critical issue he has raised, I want to request the august House to allow us to come back with a statement because it needs to be taken into consideration.THE SPEAKER: Are children getting holidays on Thursday?MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, we shall be able to give a statement on Thursday on the same subject matter. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Speaker]6227THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: No. They are getting holidays on Thursday. (Laughter) MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, with your permission, may I go back to the ministry - (Interruption)THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, honourable minister, for ceding ground and accepting to make this clarification. Now that you have not yet provided the country with a statement and the whole idea of school lockdown and closure is still debatable, is it probable, that in the ministry, that decision is re-debated in the view of the fact that the schools are closing and festivities are going on from different parts gathering thousands of people? Have you looked at the possibility that our children lost a lot under COVID-19? Otherwise, the decision to close schools prematurely was not given enough imagination. Honourable minister, is that the debate you are holding in the corridors of education? Do you still believe that schools can close, yet we can go on with bivulu  everywhere, gathering thousands of people? Is it something you are thinking about?THE SPEAKER: Maybe we need to find out something. Honourable minister, when are our schools closing? Is it on the 25th? Then, you have ample time to give us a plan on what to do. 2.50MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the return of these children to Mubende. The Government decided to quarantine that area. Are we not exposing these children to Ebola by taking them back? Wouldn’t it be right that the Government finds where the students can stay until Uganda is declared free of Ebola? (Laughter) MR OGWANG: First of all, I would like to inform Parliament that a circular was issued by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports. If you permit, I would like to lay on the Table circular No.26 so that it is photocopied and distributed to all Members of Parliament.THE SPEAKER: What is the circular about?MR OGWANG: It is about the safe transportation of primary school learners to and from Mubende and Kassanda. There are also other issues. One, when are we going to reopen the next term? That is what we are going to take a decision on, as a ministry -THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you go there, that circular was for transporting students who were doing exams within that area and those who did exams in a different centre, not in the schools they were registered from.The issue Members are raising is: how do we transfer children, for instance, from Kampala to Mubende? And you have given us an answer on how to transport them. However, from Mubende - the centre where they are being dropped off - how will they go to their homes since you have regulated the transport? That is the issue. Hon. Susan’s issue is that since you are taking children who are not infected to Mubende, is there a way you can take them to their families?MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, let me begin with the question you raised earlier, and I need to reiterate it. One, once children are taken to the designated centre, how are they picked? In my considered opinion, the task forces in Mubende and Kassanda must be able to organise how parents are able to pick up their children from the designated areas. However, as I said, I want to ask Parliament to permit me to go back so we consult and bring a statement here. Otherwise, we are working closely with the Ministry of Health. 6228STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER: Can you have it as a policy? When it is a policy, you are able to tell them, “This is what you are supposed to do”. It becomes a policy from the ministry. Honourable minister, if you just say, “They will do this”, then they will be reluctant. Therefore, you need to issue orders. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, if we are to come up with a policy, it is going to be here for the rest of the time, in case this disease emerges again. This is a short-lived disease and we are working hard as a country to fight it. I do not think we shall have another reoccurrence of it. However, I take your advice, Madam Speaker. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you make a pronouncement from the ministry, it becomes a policy. I am not telling you to make any sort of amendment to any law. It is a communication that can say that when this and that happens, this is what you should do. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I will be able to report back on the matter. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Gorreth. 2.54MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Aware that Uganda has the youngest population, I am concerned about the escalating level of new HIV/AIDS infection rates among adolescents, especially females between the ages of 10-24. According to statistics from the Uganda Aids Commission, it is disclosed that out of 15,000 in a year, 79 per cent are between the age of 10-24 years. It is also saddening to note that we lose 20 children every day to HIV/AIDS-related cases. We have paid much attention to Ebola and COVID-19 but we have forgotten that HIV/AIDS still kills Ugandans.Rt Hon. Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Health should update this House on the implementation of the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, that was presented to this House, which considered that the ministry is underfunded.Secondly, this House should compel the concerned ministries and agencies to submit a comprehensive and urgent report about the budget for the HIV/AIDS prevention campaign. Additionally, as the Shadow Minister of Science, Innovation and Communication Technology in the alternative government, I want to update the House that we had a very important event about the satellite and the National Science Week 2022 that took a whole week, from the 7th to the 10th. Madam Speaker, a lot of taxpayers’ money was spent but the minister did not come to update this House about the importance of this event. Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, as an alternative, I have a statement, with your permission. If the minister has failed, I can bring the alternative as we wait for the Government to prepare. Thank you.  THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Government has not failed. We are only going to ask the minister to bring a paper, updating the House on the National Science Week 2022. I am not sure whether the Government has failed. Can we have Rt Hon. Nakadama respond to the issue of health? THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable colleague for the concern about HIV/AIDS, especially among adolescents. I would like to inform this House that 1st December is World AIDS Day. Among the activities to be done is the continuous sensitisation of adolescents and, of course, the whole nation on how they should protect themselves from HIV/AIDS. The theme concerns the youth. I would also like to inform COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6229THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022the House that HIV drugs are supposed to be given out free to those that are HIV positive.Secondly, I call upon the Members to continue sensitising our people. However, the Ministry of Health will come and give us more information on how they are trying to sensitise people about HIV/AIDS. Lastly, on the science week, the minister has already briefed Cabinet on what they did. I would like to inform this House that we already launched a satellite to space. This is our first time to have it in space. (Applause) The minister will come with a statement to this House to inform you about what it was about, our achievements and what we are going to do with all the technologies that have been innovated. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: We are going to receive a post-mortem report. We ought to have got the report before. Next time, we need the report before - we do not receive post-mortem reports. The clarification I am seeking from you is: did you say that the HIV drugs are free? They are supposed to be free, but are not given out free. MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I thank you. The clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is on the payment, which you have already sought clarification on. In most health centres, there is an amount attached to those drugs. Is that the Government policy or is it done illegally? Secondly, what the honourable member was raising was that the HIV infections have increased suddenly, which means something that is not being done right. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what could be done in the very short run to reduce the rate of this infection, as you wait for the Minister of Health to come and brief this House?THE SPEAKER: I think the competent person to answer that is the Minister of Health.Honourable members, we are running out of time. Can I have Hon. Basil? In the absence of Hon. Basil, can I have an update from the minister of state for sports on the Bill?3.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDU-CATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Pe-ter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to inform Par -liament that the Cabinet did consider the PAS Bill. When I talk about PAS, I mean the Physi-cal Activities and Sports Bill.As of today, I confirm that the second procedure is that we are going ahead to gazette the PAS Bill, and then I will be able to lay it on the Table. Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence that you permit the process to complete its course. Allow me to come back by Tuesday next week with the PAS Bill. Thank you so much, Parliament and Cabinet, for the support given to this Bill. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are you seeking clarification? MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill is on sports. It is very important and the country is waiting for it. Last week or the other week, a Bill was read here for the first time and the House granted permission for a Member to introduce that Bill so that it could be processed. We are now hearing of a similar Bill that is supposed to be gazetted. How about the other one? Have they merged them? If they have merged them, at what level have they done so? Can that information be given to the Members so that we can get to know?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I guided this House last week. We did not want to deprive the private Member of the right to bring a Bill. We allowed the private Member to bring his Bill for first reading. 6230STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTHowever, the Government said that they needed to give an input on the Bill. They also said that their Bill was ready. That is why we gave them permission to bring their Bill. They will go and merge it with that of the private Member at the committee. That is the same thing that happened with the Succession Bill - you asked a question and you are speaking. Please, stop it.Honourable members, for those who have not raised their issues of national importance, we shall handle them first thing tomorrow. Procedural matter?THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My curiosity has been aroused by a matter in the public domain over the last couple of months, relating to a very prominent officer of the UPDF – and by extension, a presidential advisor – who is known for tweeting at every prompting, including on matters capable of causing disaffection and embarrassing the country.Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba, who is a presidential advisor and a general in the army, is on social media, on his twitter handle in particular, tweeting on potentially explosive national and regional matters, Madam Speaker. It does seem that his itching fingers are without abetment - THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I know that you know the law very well. You know that our Rules of Procedure do not allow us to discuss a person who is not in this House to able to respond. (Applause)MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I know the rules very well. My submission is not in any way intended to impeach the guidance of the Speaker. The said general is under command. In this House, we have the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Commander-in-Chief, represented by the Prime Minister and Vice-President. The question of the day is that you and I and the rest of the House are part of a checkered national history of armies and commanders usurping powers and getting this country into anarchy. Madam Speaker, this country sent Members of Parliament to this House to deliberate on matters affecting the country and potentially dangerous to the country. This House has 10 Members of Parliament representing the UPDF. These honourable gentlemen and ladies do not have the same space to speak on brazenly partisan matters, like this general. In today’s newspaper – New Vision – THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, like I have already said - and you are not going to change my ruling - the general you are talking about is not in this House, so, we are not going to discuss him. What you can do is to raise a question to the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs on the same issue and you will be given a response. But, I do not believe in us naming -MR MPUUGA: Thank you. I take your guidance, Madam Speaker, which is why I needed to move procedurally. Because as the LOP, that space can only be for me here, not my Members, because the ministry of defence should be able to come and tell the House whether this General is an outlaw -THE SPEAKER: Can I give you time to give us that information when the minister of defence himself is here?MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, kindly order.THE SPEAKER: Kindly ask the minister of defence to come to the House - Honourable members, I want Hon. Ssempijja himself in the House; he will be the one to respond to that. Tell Hon. Ssempijja to be here on Thursday. MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is twofold; the first one is in a way of a notice that as the defence minister comes, I had earlier [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6231THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022asked a question about the same General, who is undermining the deployment of an African force. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on that, already. MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, that is why I have abandoned it. (Laughter) The second one - because I said it is two-fold - Madam Speaker, I will need guidance. (Hon. Ogwang rose_)THE SPEAKER: But he has dropped the first one.MR SSEMUJJU: I know there are people who, when you speak about Muhoozi, they want to be seen that they are defending him (Laughter) - they are jumping from their chairs -(Interjection) – Hon. Ogwang, you are a senior MP; you cannot be one of those- that you are just jumping because -Madam Speaker, the second issue is procedural, because I said it is in twofold- I have abandoned the one that is making Hon. Ogwang jump from his chair.The second one is that when ministers of state are coming to Parliament, which mandate do they come with? There is a defence minister there; last time I complained about junior ministers - and Madam Speaker, I respect you ruling; you said the senior ministers. Now the junior minister wanted to give an answer but you have called for a senior one; so which mandate do they carry in this House?THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju - honourable members, when you continue making noise I will send you out.Hon. Huda is the Minister in charge of Veterans. The General you are talking about is not a veteran; that is one.Secondly, when you asked for the mandate of the mandate of the state ministers, we are the ones who approved them. If you knew they were junior and they were not relevant to our operation, we should not have approved them; they are here in their positions as ministers and that is why you find - You know, we are living in a state and these are ministers of state (Laughter)Next item.STATEMENT BY MEMBER ON THE MAGNITUDE OF ROAD TRAFFIC INJURIES REPORTING TO PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN UGANDA AND THE COST OF TREATMENTTHE SPEAKER: Doctor. Yes, Chairperson of Committee on Physical Infrastructure?MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Health-THE SPEAKER: You are thanking him for what? He has not presented anything.MR DA VID KARUBANGA: Yes, he is coming. The House gave us that assignment and we met different stakeholders like the Minister of Health. We have a comprehensive report -(Interruption)THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order.MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, our rules do not permit debating in anticipation. The Member holding the Floor is an old MP; is he in order to begin commenting about something we do not even know; is he in order?THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said you have a report on the same matter.MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Yes, Madam Speaker. The House gave the Committee on Physical Infrastructure - THE SPEAKER: Was it presented to the House? MR DA VID KARUBANGA : We met the Ministry of Health - 6232STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER: I am asking; was it presented in the House?MR DA VID KARUBANGA: The draft is ready. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, a report is only a report once it is in this House and approved by this House. You have not brought a report, not even signed it; it is still a draft. Now if it is still a draft and yet we have a report, which is ready, why should we wait? Now you want us to debate in anticipation.MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Madam Speaker, my worry is; when we met the Ministry of Health and we requested them for figures, they told us they do not have figures -THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, just sit down. Dr Ayume, can we hear the report?3.15THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Charles Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay the report on the magnitude – (Interruption)MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter -THE SPEAKER: I did not allow you to speak. Honourable members, the statement that is being given by Hon. Ayume is pursuant to Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure. While the rules require that such statements shall be made on Thursdays, as a presiding officer, using my prerogative, I revoke under, Rule 7(2), 25(1) and (3) of the Rules of Procedure, to cause a statement to be made because of what is happening in the country. That is why I have called Dr Ayume; I know you want to raise procedure that it is not supposed to be. The powers are on the person sitting in this seat. (Applause) Dr Ayume? DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have really guided well. I would like to lay a report titled, “The Magnitude of Road Traffic Injuries Reporting to Public Health Hospitals in Uganda and the Cost of their Treatment.” I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER: Please do. Honourable “lands”, there is still an issue for you; do not go.DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, the motivation to come up with this report is that whenever there are accidents in this country, they are twofold; we have upstream and downstream. Most times the problem is in the Ministry of Works and Transport but it is the health sector that bears the brunt. The shortcomings in the health sector are exposed whenever there is an accident. I think the time is right now, for us to also bring out the statistics so that we can address some of the issues in the transport sector.In the process of conducting this study, we visited Mulago National Referral Hospital and 16 regional referral hospitals. Data collection tools were used to collect information regarding the magnitude of injuries reported to the public health facilities. I also interacted with the Uganda police to give us their accident reports for the last three years.This report, Madam Speaker and Members, covers the last three financial years. I would like to draw your attention to page one. Mr IT, can you please project. Let us move on to page two. Table one shows the change in rank of the 10 leading causes of the global burden of disease. Road traffic injuries in 1990 were number nine. As of 2020, road traffic injuries were number three. In Uganda, road traffic injuries take the position of number 13, with malaria and respiratory tract infections taking number one and two respectively. The objectives of this study were:1. To determine the total admission of accident victims and victims of trauma in regional referral hospitals and the national referral hospital;STATEMENT6233THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 20222. To analyse the type of accidents and the total admissions;3. To conduct an in-depth analysis of the total estimated costs of road traffic accidents and to review challenges in the road safety sector in the country; and4. To develop a policy brief and recommendation in terms of laws, training, monitoring, and specific budget allocations that policymakers can consider in addition to increasing funding. The hospitals whose data we analysed were Arua, Entebbe, Fort Portal, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende, Yumbe, Moroto and Naguru regional referral hospitals, and Mulago National Referral Hospital. When coming up with a cost of treatment, we interfaced with the consultants of Mulago and asked them what it costs to treat a patient who is severely injured, moderately injured or with mild injuries. We came up with the guided figures.We also looked at documents: the Annual Health Sector Performance Report, the police accident reports, reports from regional referral hospitals and so forth. Madam Speaker, let me go to some of the results on page 13. In 2018, the total number of accidents were 12,805. Of these 3,194 were fatal. In 2019, the total number of accidents are 12,858. Of these 3,407 were fatal. In 2020, 12,249 accidents occurred; 3,269 were fatal. In 2021, we had a spike, 17,443 accidents occurred and 3,757 were fatal. Madam Speaker, if I break it down to the magnitude of the injuries, and people killed: in 2018, 3,689 people died from accidents. Those seriously injured were 9,541, and those slightly injured were 1,881. In 2019, those who died were 3,880 and those seriously Injured were 9,635. Those slightly injured were 1,175. In 2020, those who were killed were 3,663, those seriously injured were 8,370, and those slightly injured were 979. Finally, in 2021, those who died were 4,159, the seriously injured were 12,589 and those slightly injured were 1,287. Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to table nine. That is comparison of fatalities by road user groups. From that table - I wish the IT man could flush it - motorcyclists accounted for the biggest number of fatalities in all the four years, followed by passengers on motorcycles, followed by pedestrians. There is clear evidence to show that motorcycles, commonly known as boda bodas, are the biggest cause of injuries but most importantly, deaths from road traffic accidents. Page 15: causes of the crashes. We had reckless or careless driving, over speeding, driving under the influence of alcohol, and cars in dangerous mechanical conditions; the causes are up there.I would like to draw your attention to page 21: total admissions. Table 12 on page 21 shows the highest number of cases of admissions due to motorcycles, commonly known as boda bodas. If we break it down by sex, males were certainly more affected and these were males above five years, compared to females. I think it is quite clear on the table. I would like to draw your attention to table 22: again, the problem is boda bodas. Madam Speaker, on the issue of the costs that we pay, that is page 34 - Mr IT, can you please move to page 34? - We broke it down into the costs based on critical level four, critical level three and critical level one. The overall daily cost that we spend on treating accidents is Shs 877 million monthly. It comes to Shs 26 billion and annually, it comes to Shs 315 billion. That is what the sector needs to be able to treat victims of accidents.As Chairperson of the Committee on Health, I know very well that we do not appropriate this amount of money for accidents and 6234STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTemergencies. That leaves me with three fundamental questions, honourable members. The first one is, we are not appropriating enough; Shs 315 billion is a lot of money. That means people are either dying, people are not getting the service or we have increased out-of-pocket expenditure. This means that a lot of Members of Parliament and the population have to touch into their pockets to meet this shortfall. As I conclude, honourable members, I would just like to compare the problem of accidents to malaria. I have just highlighted that for accidents, we spend Shs 315 billion annually. That should be on page 35. We spent about Shs 315 billion for accidents but our malaria budget is $150 million annually, which is about Shs 550 billion. Of course, that is given mostly by donors and Uganda only contributes 10 per cent of that. Therefore, in terms of what we should be able to appropriate, we are slightly behind malaria by about Shs 200 billion. Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to quickly run through the recommendations.Policy recommendations We need to improve the emergency response assistance to road traffic victims. That means all highways in this country should have accident and emergency units. We are looking at Jinja-Kampala, Kampala-Mubende-Fort Portal, up to Gulu. The only person who moves with an ambulance in this country is the President. Any of us could fall culpable to these accidents and we shall have to wait for our ambulances, which are not yet in full functionality. Second is proper use and enforcement of helmets, speed and regular limit enforcement, heavy fines and punishment for unfair road users, proper and standardised road surface designs - that includes signage. When I drive from here to Koboko, I would like to tell the Minister of Works and Transport that there is hardly any signage and where there used to be, it has been stolen. Therefore, we also need to penalise such people. Coordination of road safety by the National Roads Safety Council, regular on-spot inspections, speed regulation measures, insurance pay-out and claims.Madam Speaker, every vehicle in this country is mandated to pay third party insurance but most times, people do not claim it. In addition, most of the drivers do not know their rights in regard to third party insurance. Therefore, it is an area we have to explore. Are we seeing a cartel of businesspeople conniving with police to ensure that people mandatorily pay third party insurance but the service is not being given?Adherence to pedestrian crossings, enforcement of road hierarchy in urban areas, removing road sign dangers and designs for safety spaces and reduction on gazetting of speed reduction zones on highways – Madam Speaker, it is a very bulky report of about 45 pages but I quickly ran through because I was given 20 minutes to present. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Ayume, for taking time to conduct this study. It is a very enriching report. Your findings will surely help us in making strategic interventions in streamlining road carnage. I know that the lapse of enforcement on the road safety standards is weighing down heavily on the health sector. Just imagine how much money is used on a daily basis, monthly and in a year, which you do not budget for. Even if you budget for it, it is not released because we do not have it. Therefore, we need to discuss and agree on the way forward. As I said before, the enforceability of the regulations that you are going to put in place is very important. The number of people dying are so many and this is terrible for the country. I remember at one time we had speed limits. You would see policemen check on the speed but the speed detectors are no longer there. You now drive the way you want to drive; the pedestrians are not respected. STATEMENT [Dr Ayume]6235THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022You find somebody crossing the road - A Member raised here an issue that they were almost knocked because drivers do not stop where there is a road crossing. I do not know whether road crossings are still effective. All those things need to be taken into consideration. Can we first hear from the minister in charge of roads because as we said, some of these things are either due to negligence of the drivers or the roads are in bad condition. Honourable members, listen.3.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker. First of all, I am impressed by the detailed report that my colleague, Hon. Ayume presented. It ties in very well with what we have just been discussing a few minutes back. A few days ago, we had a dry run at Entebbe to prepare the country in the event of an emergency, for example, something similar to what happened in Tanzania. I was sharing with them what we need to do, precisely similar to what is captured in the report.I beg that a comprehensive report be presented because when you look at this report, three critical elements are very clear: there are the roads, the vessel that is used, the managers of the vessels and maybe the fourth is the general public. We are concerned about the roads, the vessels and also how we tame the managers. We have an array of interventions in terms of laws and regulations that we would be very happy to come and share with this honourable House, and then we see where there might be some gaps and what needs to be done.Yes, we seem to have a community that sometimes does not respect our regulations. Before I went to the Ministry of Works and Transport, I used to think that on the Northern Bypass and on the Entebbe Expressway, one could move even at 131 km/hr or 150 km/hr but in our records, the maximum speed on all our roads, according to the design, is 100 kilometres per hour. This means that even we, honourable colleagues, are breaking the law every day. As such, there is need to come and share with this House and you guide us on how we can proceed.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is why I talked about enforceability. If an honourable member is driving above the required speed limit, arrest. There is nobody who is above the law. The safety of the roads begins with the designs. The designs that you have on most of these roads are wanting.You need to check your designs and also ensure that you strengthen the regulations on road usage. For instance, if there are signs, speeding limits and traffic laws that are available, they should be enforced. If we are not enforcing them then there is a problem. Also look at the regulations on importation of vehicles and vehicle parts. Last week, I was very surprised when we bought a tire and the next day it burst. Those are the things that cause accidents. As a ministry, ensure that you look at all of that and then of course, the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This needs a multi-sectoral approach.The Ministry of Internal Affairs needs to be keen on the issue of speed limits. Arrest everybody, including us because we want to be alive. If you want to reach early, why don’t you leave early? We expect a report from both the internal affairs and the works ministries, on the action taken to reduce accidents on the road. We also need a report from the Prime Minister on the regulations that we talked about earlier on, on the same. Honourable members, I thought the two are going to come up with a report. (Members rose_) One minute each. Hon. Angura and Hon. Enosi Asiimwe?  6236STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.38MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report; they did research. I want to believe it was both qualitative and quantitative and the methods adopted after the findings have given us a correlation, which shows a positive significance as far as these accidents are concerned, and the need to be addressed. I want to go straight to the recommendations. I recommend that whenever we go out, we should benchmark on other issues that may not necessarily relate to the matter being benchmarked out there. In Dubai, the USA  and many other areas, a mistake caused by someone on the road is a benefit to the Government in terms of revenue. Let us start collecting fines from every person who makes a mistake. We shall improve on our revenue and slow down – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there should be high fines slapped on persons who cause accidents on the way. I can tell you that I started implementing it with Parliament. If you drive a Parliament car and you cause an accident due to negligence, you pay for it; you repair the car. We are not going to allow this attitude of thinking that since I work for such an institution, it will cater for this. The fines should be high. Include it in the recommendations. 3.40MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (Indepen-dent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rate of accidents in this country is very worrying and the report has confirmed it. My major concern is the counter-accusations. It kills the gist of the matter on the causes of these accidents. I think the most important thing is, for example, Government first doing what it has to do. Our roads are totally dark everywhere one goes. You wonder what happens. Madam Speaker, one of our former Members of Parliament lost his life on the bypass because it was dark; he drove into a truck. We are talking about fines but if they are not automated, the issue of corruption will still fail us. For example, Multiplex is doing it. (Member timed out.) One minute please. THE SPEAKER: Proceed.MS KINYAMATAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of Multiplex, if you park anyhow, they will fine you. If you do not pay, the fine is increased, so you end up paying. Otherwise, if we do not do that, it will not happen. Thirdly, on the issue of cameras, we need to increase the numbers in all the suburbs. When you look at the police report, those accidents are happening in places even where there are no cameras. So, you start accusing each other, “Who caused the accident?” Therefore, the number of cameras should be increased. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, do not drink and drive. 3.42MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you. I would like to report to you, Madam Speaker, that we need to caution police officers who have turned the operation against boda bodas into an extortion venture. They stop boda bodas and take money from them instead of correcting the errors they find them in. In the same spirit, can we caution the police team, through the Minister of Internal Affairs? Secondly, I want to, first of all, thank the chairperson for the good report, specifically relating to upgrading our hospitals on the highways to handle emergencies. Lyantonde Hospital is always – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, extortion on the roads is too high. It is not hearsay. You need to institute a committee to investigate that countrywide. It is not only in Kampala. STATEMENT6237THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022(Applause) Some people have overstayed in the traffic department and so, they feel that is a bonanza for them.3.44MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. As the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety, I am extremely happy with the report. Madam Speaker, we tasked the economists in this country to calculate, in terms of figures, how much the country loses per year. It was shocking to find out that every year, Uganda loses not less than Shs 5 trillion to accidents. You are only looking at the over Shs 300 billion for the treatment. However, when it comes to the human loss, you cannot replace these experienced people who have invested.People die with their businesses; the goods are destroyed. When you compute all that, we go up to Shs 5 trillion. Madam Speaker, no country can develop with this kind of – (Member timed out.)3.45MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my brother for the report he has presented. I agree with the fines but Madam Speaker, what is the status of our roads? If you are travelling from Kampala to Lira, around Kafu, there are differences in the levelling of the road. You are driving and all of a sudden, you find yourself dropping in a valley. The road has two different levels. (Laughter) So, if an accident occurs around that area, who are we going to fine, the driver or the Government? I thank you.THE SPEAKER: That is why I was talking about the design of the roads. It is very important that the Ministry of Works and Transport looks at it. 3.46MS MARGARET RWEBYAMBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is about the potholes. Before we blame the boda bodas for riding badly, how about the potholes they dodge, which may eventually make them ram into vehicles? I have listened well to the report. The causes were over speeding, overloading, reckless driving but nowhere were it mentioned the poor road network we have. I beg to submit. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, from Parliament to my home here in KCCA, there are over 200 potholes. (Laughter). Hon. Aber has the information; she knows it. MS ABER: Madam Speaker, beside your home, if you take the route going to Industrial Area, you will wonder whether Kampala is a city or not. Money has often been allocated to repair those roads, but they never create a drainage line where water can pass. 3.47MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point is on the unfairness in the cost of acquiring riding and driving permits. Most of our youth are employed in the boda boda industry, but they fear to go and acquire riding permits because they are very expensive. Can the Minister of Works and Transport look into this and reduce the cost of the riding permits for the boda boda cyclists? The other issue is about the theft of the road signs, so there are no signs to guide the drivers. Can we begin installing road signs that are made of plastics – because people are taking the road signs for scrap. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The issue of the cost of driving permits - first of all, before we talk about the cost, people should be tested on whether they can ride. There must be regular 6238STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTtesting. You should not act on the presumption that they can ride. These people come from upcountry; they learn to ride for one day and the next day, they are in town causing accidents.3.49MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the House and those who travel upcountry, especially from Kampala to Gulu, Lira and West Nile. Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the double parking of the big trailers along Migyera on the Kampala-GuluRoad. That road is very narrow, but you find big trailers double-parked and there is no path for the pedestrians and boda bodas. My prayer is that these truck drivers be allocated different space to park so that they leave the road for the drivers. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, I think you have passed a certain place when you go to your area. In Kumi Town, you get double parking of all the trucks that are going to South Sudan. Can we have all those trucks off that road? If they want to park, they should park on one side to avoid double parking. That is what killed one of our colleagues that the Member for Rakai talked about. Hon. Helen?3.50MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we have talked about roads, I represent an area with a lake. We also have accidents on the lake, reason being - (Interjection) - no they are not potholes. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members!MS NAKIMULI: Madam Speaker, there are dangerous spots on the lake: the rocks. When it rains heavily, they are covered. When a boat is moving and it knocks that rock, people will drown in the water. So, the Ministry of Works and Transport should consider the islands because people are dying because of those rocks.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Helen, advise how the Ministry of Works and Transport can be of help? MS NAKIMULI:  Madam Speaker – (Interjections) - I need your protection. THE SPEAKER: We would like to know how we can be of help.MS NAKIMULI: First of all, Madam Speaker, we need flags – there are those red flags that are put at the dangerous spots. For example, where a ship passes when the water level is down, you will see the rock, but when it is up, you will not see it. So, can we have the red flags – those that are raised where the ship passes? (Applause) Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Helen, do you know why I asked you this? The works minister does not even know of any lake. (Laughter) So, he needs to get information from us on how you can be helped.MS NAKIMULI: Madam Speaker, I will be of great help to the minister. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to get information from Hon. Helen. Hon. Komakech?3.52MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (In-dependent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to interest the minister for works that most of these boda boda cyclists are actually drug and alcohol consumers. They issue licences to these cyclists without testing them. Isn’t there a way for the Government to test every motor -bike or vehicle operator before they are issued with licences so that they are tested for drugs and alcohol? On top of that, most of these boda boda -STATEMENT [The Speaker]6239THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christopher, if you drink today, will you still test drunk the next day? MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I am a medical personnel. If a blood sample is taken from you, from the liver, they can detect the amount of alcohol you have taken.  THE SPEAKER: If you say that you are going to take a blood sample for everybody who drinks, then, all of you will not be in this House. (Laughter) Honourable members, let us put regulations on how these people can be retested to know whether they are still competent to ride motorcycles.MR KOMAKECH:  Madam Speaker, there is what is known as a “drug screen card” and they are readily available in Butabika and other rehabilitation centres. They can use a drug screen card, take your urine and test to know whether you are intoxicated or not. THE SPEAKER: As I told you before, the people out there are our VIPs. We should not deprive them a chance to earn a living. However, when they are to earn a living, the responsibility of regulation is on us. Let us do the right thing for those people to do the correct thing.Let us regulate these boda boda cyclists. Let us make sure they are tested and when they make a mistake, the fines are high. Let us make sure that we follow the road and safety regulations. Let us make sure that these people are always educated on accidents. It is not just about enforcing the use of helmets and reflector jackets; that cannot be sufficient. Let us have regulations that help the boda boda cyclists and all the road users because we cannot say it is only boda boda cyclists that cause accidents; even the pedestrians cause accidents. 3.55DR TWAHA KAGABO: (NUP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to emphasise is about the enforcers themselves. Sometimes you wonder what the traffic officers do on these roads. How dare a badly-loaded truck comes from Kabale to Kampala? How dare a smoking truck that dazzles everybody on the road moves up from Kabale to Kampala? How does a car in dangerous mechanical condition (DMC) move on the streets of Kampala, year after year? Therefore, unless the enforcers are up to their task, nothing will be done as far as reducing accidents is concerned.THE SPEAKER: That is what somebody said: extortion is what is making all that happen. How dare you get a DMC car on the road? Doesn’t that amount to corruption? Therefore, the Minister of Internal Affairs really has to do a lot on that. Yes, Hon. Joanne. I am looking at people who have not spoken for some time.3.56MS JOAN ACOM (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to interest our Minister of Works and Transport in investing more in road signage than the road humps because many of our boda bodas tend to dodge the road humps, and end up either falling off the road or ramming into cars. They should also invest more in the rumble strips because we already have an example of Pallisa Road, which has the rumble strips. These rumble strips warn you when you are getting off road and they alert you that your driving speed needs to be reduced. Therefore, I would like to interest you in investing more in the road signs. We have humps whereby today you are passing on this road –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Joan, we are talking about both the boda bodas and cars. Therefore, I do not think it is a good idea to remove the humps. We still need the humps to control the speed of some drivers. 6240STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.58MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Between 9.00 a.m. and midday, you find that the majority of traffic officers in Kampala are on social media along the roads. Then, from 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m., they resume their social media business. I think the authorities concerned should also advise them to not use their smartphones when on deployment. Finally, when SafeBoda brought their operations to Uganda, their work was very good and their riders were disciplined. However, when politics came into play from the bench - the Government side and the Opposition side, especially the Lord Mayor - the whole operation became a problem. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Which Lord Mayor? MR NGOMPEK:  The Lord Mayor of Kampala, Erias Lukwago.  3.59MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the statement. The chairperson did capture and talk about the highways, but excluded the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, which is characterised by very many black spots. One of the recommendations that I would like to put across is to have pedestrian footbridges; for example, along Kitubulu–Nkumba–Kawuku–Kitende–Kajjansi. Al most every week, we have a fatal accident and it is painful to see people die. I thank you.4.00MR STEPHEN SSERUBULA (NUP, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Lugazi on the Kampala-Jinja Highway. Yesterday, we had a serious accident because of the potholes that are at Bulyantente. In a taxi number plate UAZ 061, eight people perished there and then. I would like to bring it to your attention that all of us are candidates of Kawolo Hospital, but there is no functional ambulance in that hospital. Secondly, there are some people who cover their number plates with scary words like “MK Project 2026”. These people drive badly on the roads and even the police officers are afraid of them; they control everything. They knock down boda bodas and are not talked about because they have scary words directed at the police officers. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wish there was a way you could improve Kawolo Hospital because it is on the highway. All accident victims on that road end up in Kawolo. Provide an ambulance to Kawolo Hospital. (Applause)4.02MS SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As they consider Kawolo, even Iganga General Hospital is on the highway. Sometimes, UNRA carries out some works and takes some hotspots lightly; they do not consider them. For example, on that highway, there is a place where we need a flyover. There are very many accidents that always occur. Even last month, a pupil was knocked down as she was going for her Primary Living Examinations. The LCI chairperson and everyone else has written letters but they say they have their plan. Therefore, we are asking them to consider us by putting a flyover. The place is called Kigobere and it is on the highway –(Member timed out.) 4.03MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the report, we put emphasis on the contribution of the boda bodas. What we did not get was what percentage of those were actually victims of reckless users of motor vehicles. He hinted at the accidents caused by the DUI - driving under the influence of alcohol; I would think that it is the people who drive the motor vehicles, especially the middle income class of this country - those ones do not want to support STATEMENT6241THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022the Alcohol Control Bill. They are the ones actually causing the death of boda boda riders. Boda boda riders are victims, but when we speak here, we castigate them as if they were the villains, whereas they are victims. 4.04MR JIMMY LWANGA (NUP, Njeru Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the state of the bad roads, the ministry is always reluctant to maintain these busy roads. Take an example of the road from Njeru to Kampala; when you reach Mabira, it has a thousand potholes and yet this is a busy road that has many trucks crossing from the Kenyan border to Kampala. Therefore, I am calling upon the ministry to at least look into the issue of those busy roads - the cross border roads. I thank you.4.05MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we continue having highways without riding lanes, we will not stop these accidents. If you come to Kampala, most of the roads have two lanes, but you will not find a lane for pedestrians. You will find the boda boda riders as well as the cyclists. If we improve the roads and we give space to each user, we will reduce accidents. Go to Europe and see what happens; it is not very easy for a motorcycle to skid on the side and run into a rider because the roads are well demarcated and there are provisions for each and every road user. Madam Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport, in this era and century, should be planning for such, but you find a newly constructed highway with such –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know of places that have that lane for riders and pedestrians. However, it is the behaviour of these people – let us have a mind-set change. These people should be educated on how they should behave. 4.06MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the chairperson for the good report. I sit on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we complain about road designs in this country all the time. The problems emanate from road designs in this country. The roads are narrow and have sharp corners. You will find that these are the same roads that are causing accidents. Every other time, roads are being made in this country but they are not looking at changing their designs and that is causing many accidents. Secondly is indiscipline; we have a lot of indiscipline on our roads. You cannot believe the way in which the boda bodas ride on our roads. It is about mindset change, Madam Speaker, as you put it. People should know that they have lives to protect -(Member timed out.) 4.07MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of emergency places, I have ferried several people to Mulago National Referral Hospital, but most times, the scans are not available. When you reach there with a patient, they will tell you to go to Nakasero for a CT scan. In addition, all over the country, we still have district hospitals that do not have even a mere X-ray. Therefore, as we think about those on the highway, it is really important that we plan for that equipment because even if we reduce the accident numbers, there will always be accidents, and that is important. Secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue of people carrying many children to school and risking them on one boda boda. If we could promote either taxis or the importation of tuktuks, that would limit the children being -THE SPEAKER: No, we can avoid overloading.6242STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR EDAKASI:  Yes, especially children - very early in the morning; three children, all of them in an accident. It is very sad. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 4.08MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about people being involved in accidents caused by recklessness, we go back to the kind of training that these people go through. What kind of training is the boda boda man required to have before being permitted on the road? Do we have schools? Do we have a standardised academy that trains a boda boda person? Therefore, training is key before a person is given a motorbike or a driving permit. I am advocating for a standardised syllabus and designated academies to train whoever wants to ride on –(Member timed out.)4.09MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to appreciate the chairperson for the good report. My concern is about parking for the boda boda people. While we talk about the speed and so on, on Kampala Road, they are parked left and right. Considering that our roads are narrow, we really need to look into it and maybe get those people parking spaces. Secondly, on the issue of roads in our country - I am happy the honourable minister is here. I have to talk about Rukiga; our roads are in bad condition. Madam Speaker, I need to appreciate the honourable minister. You visited Rukiga, you saw our bridges, and you know what is happening. I am just asking myself after your visit, what - (Member timed out.)4.10MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I also want to join the rest of my colleagues to appreciate Dr Ayume, for presenting a good report. Madam Speaker, my concern is about the overload of vehicles. Karamoja is one of the places that have many heavy trucks because of the minerals that they ferry from Karamoja.Madam Speaker, these heavy trucks are one of the causes of road damages and road accidents due to overload. This overload is because of lack of weighbridges in the region. My prayer is for the Ministry of Works and Transport to purchase weighbridges to ensure that these - (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the improvement of road safety will go beyond lip service to tangible and collective efforts. Let us be each other’s keepers. Let us use these roads responsibly. The irresponsibility and recklessness of the riders and drivers is what is causing problems in this country and causing a lot of deaths. The Ministry of Works and Transport has committed itself to bring a comprehensive paper together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and to give us the action and way forward that they have taken. Let us not just talk; give us the action that you have taken.  Let us have a report from you on what you have done for us to reduce or even eliminate accidents on the road. You have heard all the concerns of the Members of Parliament and this must be addressed. These people are speaking for and on behalf of the people who voted for them, including the boda boda riders. We also want to save the boda boda riders; we are not saying we want them dead, we want to save them also by making sure by the time you ride, you are competent enough to do so. Yes, honourable minister. MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, most obliged. Apart from the Ministry of Works and Transport and then the Ministry of Internal Affairs, I would like to say that another critical ministry is that of health. The Ministry of Health should be able to come with us and indicate to this House how prepared they are along the highways as far as emergency response is concerned. STATEMENT6243THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022I will also work with the ministry of trade to make sure that they talk to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards because the tyres that you are concerned about come through a system that apparently appears to be working and sometimes, they are cleared when they are not supposed to be on the roads.THE SPEAKER: And then the trucks that pass on some roads with a design that is not supposed to accommodate such heavy trucks-MR ECWERU: That is within our mandate. We will come up with solutions that we have tried to prescribe to address this haemorrhage -(Interruption)MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you realise that Government stopped the importation of old vehicles. Currently, we import new cars but the old cars that were within the country are still operating. I would like to find out from you, when are you stopping the operations of those old cars of the 1980s and 1990s; they are still in operation and they are moving within the country freely. I would like to find out from you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will come up with a response to that effect when you bring your document. We need a comprehensive multi-sectoral report on the action that has been taken. Honourable members, when you start talking - Hon. Kahunde, let the Speaker first speak then you can speak. Actually, the next item is for Hon. Kahunde. Next item. 4.16MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the report presented by the Chairperson of the Committee on Health be adopted and the recommendations therein be captured and action taken by the line ministries. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded by Hon. Aogon, Hon. Silwany, Hon. Aber, Budget , Napak, Hon. Kahunde - Honourable Members, I do not think any of you could have made a better report than that. At first, we thought it would be an informative report but since we found out that it is a report that should be adopted by this House and the actions must be taken, I now put the question that the report by Hon. Ayume on the magnitude of road traffic injuries reporting to public hospitals in Uganda and the cost of treatment be adopted with amendments - ( A member rose_)Who was that using the microphone? Hansard, get for me the person who used the microphone and I will take action tomorrow.(Question put and agreed to.)PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS OF THE BUDUDA LANDSLIDE VICTIMS WHO WERE RESETTLED IN KIRYANDONGO DISTRICTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, petitions are one of the avenues for the public to give information and seek for support from the august House. They are very pertinent to us. For avoidance of doubt, the petition was put in writing; it is a formal petition - not verbal - and is usually signed by petitioners. This petition in particular was signed by the petitioners. It was written to the Office of the Speaker and rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure provides for petitions. This afternoon, we shall receive a petition and then we will refer it to a committee. The petition is by Hon. Helen Kahunde. Can we have the petition on the landslide victims of Bududa first? It is unfortunate that Hon. Nambeshe is not here.4.20MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The petition is moved under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 6244STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe humble petition of the Bududa landslide victims of 1 March 2010 who were resettled in Kiryandongo District presented on their behalf by myself, showeth and states, Your humble petitioners are the victims of the landslide events of 1 March 2010 in Namase village, Bududa District, which was recorded as the largest and most severe in terms of casualty numbers in that at least 100 people are believed to have been killed; 94 bodies were recovered and several others displaced.Your humble petitioners state that:a. They were resettled by the Government of Uganda to Kiryandongo district as a humanitarian intervention following displacement and total destruction of their homes, property and sources of livelihood.b. During the resettlement exercise, the Government pledged to issue your humble petitioners with land titles and to construct housing structures for them and their families, a pledge that has not been fulfilled for the past 12 years. c. Out of the 603 housing structures that the Government promised to construct for the humble petitioners, only 289 have been constructed to date and that out of the 289, 114 are incomplete, without windows, doors, water tanks and pit latrines.d. They lack access to secondary education.e. They face insecurity and hostility from host communities with whom they contest ownership of land, especially due to the fact that the Government did not issue them with land titles upon resettlement.f. On 12 December 2018, Parliament adopted the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the status of the resettlement of the landslide victims in the Elgon subregion and resolved that the Government steps up interventions in developing the necessary infrastructure in Kiryandongo and ensure that programmes intended by the Office of the Prime Minister for the resettled victims be mainstreamed into local government structures of Kiryandongo District. The same resolution has not been implemented nor has an action report been filed in Parliament. Your humble petitioners have suffered for the past 12 years to no avail of effective Government intervention and now seek the intervention of Parliament in their plight.Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that: 1. Parliament urges the Government to prioritise the construction of housing structures for the remaining 289 households and the completion of the 114 houses.2. Government issues land titles to your petitioners, as pledged by Government, granting them legal ownership on the land.3. Government should investigate the matter of insecurity and contention over land ownership among the resettled landslide victims with the end goal of granting the victims legal ownership over the land on which they were resettled.Your humble petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray; and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures, Madam Speaker. I want to lay the copy of the petition. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Helen. Pursuant to rule 36 of the Rules of Procedure of this House, I refer this petition to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness for fast action to be taken and report back to this House in two weeks’ time.PETITION [Ms Kahunde]6245THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 20224.25THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my senior colleague, Hon. Helen, for coming to the House with this petition. I also thank you for guiding us to have a response from the field. I will ensure that I am there together with the team from the department. We will get back to the House in two weeks’ time. Thank you.PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS OF THE MEMBERS OF THE PRE-PRIMARY TEACHERS TRAINING INSTITUTIONS ASSOCIATION UGANDA (PPTTIA)4.26MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for the opportunity to have this petition presented. When I met the teachers in July last year, they wanted to stage a protest but I told them to wait and give Parliament a chance. This petition is moved under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The humble petition of the members of the Pre-Primary Teacher Training Institutions Association Uganda (PPTIA), presented by Hon. Nakut, the District Woman MP , Napak, states that:Your humble petitioners are members of the Pre-Primary Teacher Training Institutions Association Uganda (PPTIA), an umbrella body registered under Uganda company laws which brings together all proprietors and principles of pre-primary teacher training institutions, early childhood care and education specialist, representatives of Early Childhood Care Education (ECCE) teachers, researchers and the academia.Established mainly to provide a platform that can offer information support, advocacy, and networking for Early Childhood Care Education (ECCE) teacher training institutions and professionals so that they can make informed decisions and choices to enhance the development of ECCE in Uganda . Your humble petitioners take cognisance of the frustrations faced by the stakeholders in Early Childhood Care Education in Uganda, due to lack of a proper policy and the disregard of available legal frameworks in handling issues arising there from. Your petitioners aver that:a. The Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008 requires children aged three to five years to be enrolled in pre-primary schools, so that by age six, they are prepared to get enrolled into primary one.b. Early childhood care and education in Uganda is not evenly accessed because the subsector is predominantly private-led, and its provision is highly influenced by the income status since it is solely financed by parents. This means that most Early Childhood Care Education (ECCE) centres are established in urban areas where parents can afford paying school fees, thereby leaving the majority of the rural poor without accessibility to ECCE services. c. In 2020, the National Planning Authority, in its thematic report, shows that over 76 per cent of the persons responsible for enforcing Early Childhood Care Education (ECCE) rights from national to local level, have little or no skill in ECCE, thus compromising the quality of ECCE in Uganda. There is completely lack of standardised ECCE teaching learning materials in form of teacher’s guides, resource books, papers, books, students, textbooks and other reference books, which is evident in both learning centers and ECCE teacher training stations, most of which use improvised teaching learning materials.d. Government expenditure on ECCE over the years has always remained consolidated with that primary section, and almost 100 per cent of the entire budget goes to the 6246STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTprimary section, leaving almost nothing to pre-primary, thus grossly affecting the education of the rural poor, who cannot afford paying school fees in the learning centers and training centers owned by private individuals.Your humble petitioners further note that the education policy states, among other things, that for any teacher to teach in any ECCE center, he or she should hold a bachelor’s degree, which is unfair for a subsector like ECCE in Uganda because of the following:a. Government has only one single ECCE training institution - Kyambogo University - that does not even attract a good number of students on its programme and has no single learning ECCE centre throughout the country.b. Government never sponsors any Ugandan to study any ECCE programme at any level, and deliberately does not offer employment opportunities to a few trained ECCE professionals.c. Uganda does not have adequate trainers to train teachers and teacher trainers in ECCE pedagogy at all levels. d. There aren’t enough caregivers even at minimal levels, with certificate qualifications to manage the enormous number of children in need of ECCE, due to low motivation for Ugandans to study and invest in any ECCE programme. e. Your petitioners submit that imposing such a policy on the ECCE subsector, which has very few qualified ECCE professionals even at certificate level, is very dangerous to the education of children between the ages of zero to eight years, as it is likely that in the short or long run, the ECCE subsector will be hit with acute lack of ECCE teachers and caregivers.Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:a. Parliament urges the Ministry of Education and Sports to stay the national teachers’ policy in relation to ECCE until a proper legal regime is put in place to formally regulate the sector. b. The Ministry of Education and Sports establishes a national examination body for ECCE teacher training in Uganda, or direct the Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board (UBTEB) to examine ECCE teacher trainees.c. The Ministry of Education and Sports supports the current ECCE institutions to scale up the training of ECCE teachers and caregivers, through the establishment of a strong public private partnership with all ECCE teacher training institutions. Your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto appended their signatures. I have signed together with Hon. Kateshumbwa Dickson, Member for Sheema Municipality and Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel, Member for Jonam County, on behalf of the petitioners. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nakut. Pursuant to Rule 30(6) of the Rules of Procedure, I am referring the petition to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal, analysis and report back on the recommendations they will have made. Minister, do you have anything or do you want to handle it yourself?4.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS ) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I am of the opinion that you allow us, as a ministry, to handle the matter and report direct to the House, other than going to the committee because -(Interruption)MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, rule 30, under which this petition was made, enjoins you to refer a petition of this matter to either the line minister or committee. In your opinion, you have referred the matter to the committee. [Ms Nakut] PETITION6247THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022Would it be procedurally right for the Minister of State for Education and Sports to try and hijack and take over when you have already guided? THE SPEAKER: I was only asking for an opinion and in his understanding, he thought it would be faster with the ministry, but I am still maintaining the statement that it goes to the committee for us to make further analysis. MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, again, under rule 30, you are enjoined to give timelines. I seek your indulgence that the committee - this referral is not the normal referral of the 45 days given to a committee by the rules. This referral enjoins you to give timelines.I seek your indulgence that the committee be given specific timelines to report back.THE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson of the education committee here? Honourable members, under rule 30(10) - check your rules: “A petition referred to a committee shall be disposed of within 45 days from the date the petition is referred to it.” Just for avoidance of doubt, the rule specifies. Next item?MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE 21ST, 22ND, 23RD AND 24TH ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE YEARS 2018 TO 2021THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the Second Meeting of the Second Session, the House, as we agreed, will prioritise some matters pending annual reports of the constitutional commission. I am glad the Committee on Human Rights concluded its reports. It laid a report on the Table and my imagination is that you read it. We are now going to debate the report. The chairperson will only make a preamble because you have the report with you; it has been laid on the Table. It is already the property of Parliament. Where you want the Government to improve, please, make suggestions for improvement. I had asked for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We do not have either of them. I hope the Government Chief Whip will be able to handle it.4.39THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Janepher Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to pres-ent this report. As you have already commu -nicated, this is the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th annual reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the years 2018 to 2021 and was uploaded on 2 November 2022. It was also laid on the Table on the 9th of November. We, therefore, think that Members have already read this report and we welcome the debate at this time. Thank you so much.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was laid on the Table. You have read the report; debate the report. (Mr Katusabe rose_) Hon. Katusabe, is it on the debate? (Members rose_) Boss, do not shout at me. Please, sit. Hon. Atkins?MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak. I will maybe seek your guidance on whether I should speak on a procedural matter or debate – (Interjections) - I said, “Speaker”, please. We have only one Speaker in the House.THE SPEAKER: Assure them. (Laughter)MR KATUSABE: There is only one Speaker and she is No. 3. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the reports I read, I looked at the recurrent challenges that cut across all the reports. There is the issue of case backlogs and of course you know the effect it has. Hon. Katusabe will stand up and talk about the Rwenzururu – the case backlog. We are all aware that once you delay justice, you will have denied justice. 6248STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTSecondly, I looked at the funding limitations for the Uganda Human Rights Commission – I am now telling you, if you did not read the report. We need to make sure that for them to be able to fast-track the process, we need to improve on the funding. The refugee rights and attendant challenges are also there. There was a petition from the refugees, through Hon. Kahunde. This is a very pertinent issue that we need to handle.There was the issue of lapse in compliance with natural resources and extractive industries, related to activities on human rights. There were issues of rights violations by the law enforcement and security agencies.There is also the issue of the plight of prisoners - I am getting these from the report. There are also food rights and nutrition challenges – where they do not have good food and those problems. The report also talks about sexual and reproductive health rights.Let those who read the report debate on it. If you did not read the report, you can listen. Hon. Aogon? Do you want to debate the report? Okay, let us have Hon. Katusabe and, then, Hon. Aogon.4.41MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have eloquently guided and said it: justice delayed is justice denied. Madam Speaker, this is a country of laws and that is why we have the Constitution. Our Constitution is very clear; nobody is above the law. I am happy, Madam Speaker, you sounded that in your guidance.Our Constitution clearly states that if somebody is arrested:1. The people effecting the arrest must do so in the language that somebody understands;2. There should be clear identification;3. The people arrested should be told or informed of why they are getting arrested, when they are arrested and maybe they should go to a gazetted space or place; you could call it a prison or jail. And even when they get there, they should not go beyond 48 hours - that is two days. Madam Speaker, on 26 November 2016 - it was a Saturday - our people in Kasese were arrested. I will not go through the details because of time. Madam Speaker, they were bundled up and put under incarceration. It is now seven years. The Constitution says 48- And there is a judgement that was put forward by Justice Ralph Ochan and has become part of our laws, that says if somebody is in prison for six months with the no- (Member timed out.)MR KATUSABE: Just to conclude, Madam Speaker; I just beg - they must be released. Our people from Kasese, including our king - who is also your king, Madam Speaker. I know - (Interjection) - Yes, unless the Speaker says otherwise. Seven years down the road, they are still in prison.Madam Speaker, the report is very clear. This is something that is denting this country internationally. It was extremely absurd that the Attorney-General who is supposed to guide the government went before an international audience and said the chamber in violation of human rights does not exist in Uganda. We are getting a lot of negative feedback. We, the people from Kasese, have so far lost 12 people, dying in prison. Their cases are unheard. They are about – THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?MR KATUSABE: I am concluding, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: I said before one minute. I do not know what is wrong with my people.MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Seven of our fellow citizens [The Speaker]6249THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022in prison need urgent medical attention. The prison authorities are saying they do not have the medicine; they have to go to the hospitals. Madam Speaker, I do not know how many lives we must lose as people from the Rwenzori region for this government to act -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, can you conclude? MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you really want or if the government was to continue incarcerating them in prison, at least they should offer them the medicine. That is just a basic request. Also to say that this government gives the Kasese people a Christmas gift so that the king and those that are still incarcerated with him can join the Kasese Community and celebrate the Christmas and festive season with the rest of the community. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker, and I appreciate the opportunity.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Atkins. And as we debate, we should not mix politics with criminality; those are two different things. On the other side, the King of Rwenzururu is my king; all the kings in Uganda are my kings. 4.50MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. On pages 31 and 32, there are issues of human rights under the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs. The concentration was too much on the Karamojong. However, I would like to put it to this House that the women and men who brought this Government in power in 1986, the ones that surrendered their crops and everything, are still demanding this Government to compensate them. And we have over 5,000 people convened in Lwamata and they have been there for some time. And if you look at the living conditions they are in, it is terrible. We have so far lost over 10 elderly people who have died from the tents over there and up to today-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine, you have said that the concentration is on the Karamojong - please switch on. You say the concentration is on the Karamojong? MS KAAYA: Yes.THE SPEAKER: The Karamojong are Ugandans and are part of Uganda. They equally and all of us, including you in the Opposition, equally contributed to this Government being in place. So, let it be for the whole country. Don’t tribalise it. MS KAAYA: I concur with you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: I am also a Karamojong; do not tribalise it. (Laughter)  MS KAAYA: My issue was only to concentrate on Karamoja and no other issues. However, I also -THE SPEAKER: No, do not tribalise the report. It is for- MS KAAYA: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is what I was trying to request - for the report as well to look into the issues of human rights concerning the veterans who really brought this Government in power.THE SPEAKER: You should say that the report should look at human rights of veterans for the whole country not only - no not mentioning Karamoja - remove Karamoja - I do not need an apology but I am saying remove Karamoja. Withdraw.MS KAAYA: I withdraw the statement of Karamoja alone - THE SPEAKER: But it should be for the whole country. MS KAAYA: But it should be for the whole country to concentrate on human rights for the entire country. Thank you. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Gilbert (Member rose_) Hon. Gilbert is nearer.6250STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT4.53MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for bringing out key information in this report. Looking at the issues concerning kidnaps and disappearance of people; as a country, we need to be very careful. Currently, many people are disappearing, many people are being kidnapped and mostly the youthful people. Parents are crying for their children - THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you say many people, I want you to mention for example that “Gilbert has disappeared, Olanya has disappeared.” I want a factual debate, not just saying “many, many”; who are the many? If you do not have the facts do not debate.MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition tabled here names of many Ugandans who disappeared.THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will leave the Leader of the Opposition to conclude with the names. MR OLANYA: Let me leave that, Madam Speaker, but we seriously need that. Secondly, the conduct of the security personnel; I would like to thank the chairperson. The committee brought it out clearly that the security personnel who are involved in unnecessary arrests and misconduct should be brought to book. Madam Speaker, I pray that as you promised the other time, this Parliament should appear different from other Parliaments: Let the committee’s recommendations be implemented. And I know that through you, Madam Speaker, all the recommendations here are going to be implemented for the betterment of this country. Finally, we have people who have been in prison for more than 10 or 20 years, but they have not been taken to court; they are just in the prisons. They do not know what they are doing and many of them were arrested on land matters. They are just there rotting in prisons. Let the committee recommendations be taken very seriously. Let those who have stayed long in prison without being taken to court - let justice be done. And I pray that for the betterment of this country, let our prisons be decongested. Right now we have more than 80,000 people in prisons. Government is feeding them; they are spending a lot of resources on them just because they are not being taken to court. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee. THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. If you want to speak, stand and I will pick you to speak. Do not derail my proceedings while rising on points of procedure.4.56MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your voice. This country needs the rule of law. The entire Chapter Four of our Constitution is about rights. Uganda is a signatory to most of the international conventions on human rights. Continentally, we are bound by these conventions and regionally, at EAC level, we are bound. Nationally, the Constitution is the motherboard of our laws. The question, is do we still respect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda? Those are the issues. I am not putting the question up for a loud answer but it is for all of us to go back and think deeply about what we are doing, as a country. This House passed the Human Rights Enforcement Bill – (Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Conclude. MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I am happy that you have given me additional time. We passed a good law here; the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, which became an Act of Parliament. How far have you gone in implementing this law? Why do we still see 6251THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022acts of impunity in our country? Why do we still have drones picking up people? The ministers are here. Can you tell us today what is wrong? Why do we see some people not getting paid, and yet it is a constitutional right? Those are the sticky questions and they are sticking on us – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR AOGON: I still needed 10 more minutes, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aogon. Honourable minister, the issue is on enforceability of the Act that was passed by this House. DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I realised that we are discussing a very important topic that is pertinent to, largely, the people that we, in the Opposition represent. These people have been subjected to arrests, with drones without number plates -  THE SPEAKER: We are discussing issues pertaining to the people of Uganda, not being represented by the Opposition per se. DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I believe that it is due to your wise stewardship that you decided that we deliberate with the public in participation. I think that is why the public is viewing us on these TVs - THE SPEAKER: Listen. I am saying that we are discussing Ugandans. Have you heard? When the Speaker is speaking, you sit. Let us not deviate from this debate. We are discussing human rights; the rule of law for the people of Uganda. Do not make it a constituency issue. Today, it is you that has been arrested and tomorrow it will be me. Therefore, when you say, “for us in the Opposition…” it is not for you in the Opposition. The report is for the people of Uganda. Do not tell us about your Opposition.DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I follow your guidance. I am concerned that the people of Uganda participating in this debate and watching us on TV with a lot of anxiety - may be the families of Hon. Allan Ssewanyana and Hon. Ssegirinya, have missed the most important part of the report. They did not receive this report on their computers or iPads. If at all it is indeed true that the public is participating - and not only here in Parliament - would it be procedurally right that at least the findings of the report are read? This is in order for us to deliberate while the public is actually following all that we are discussing.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the documents of Parliament are in the public domain; just get onto the website of Parliament and you will have that information.5.01MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As we continue to deliberate on the matters of human rights, may the Ministry of Local Government aid the CAOs to ensure that district human rights committees are fully established countrywide? This is because there is also a gap. We cannot continue to only have matters here. They have to be decentralised.I am part of the Committee of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. Whenever we reach out to the probation officers, as indicated here on page 47, much as it is their mandate, and they are supposed to do all this, many times the facilitation - and the police officers in charge of family units are really incapacitated. I beg that as we consider these matters, let us have the facilitation for the officers concerned so that these issues are always handled. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is why I said there was a funding limitation, which needs to be sorted out. 5.02MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, the High Court, in the case of and Robert Asiimwe Akanga and 6252STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTKalemera Stephen v the Attorney-General and Director of Public Prosecution, made a declaration that any person who has been tortured - the courts can no longer proceed to hear the cases, however strong the evidence is.I think we should uphold this and have it incorporated into the report. Apart from that, the investigations should be carried out and the officers should answer, we should add in - THE SPEAKER: Counsel, repeat that statement on a person that has been tortured. MR KIWANUKA: A person who has been arrested and in the course of being arrested and detained, has been tortured and later aligned before court, what happened before he reached court nullifies the proceedings.THE SPEAKER: Under which law? MR KIWANUKA: This is the case of -THE SPEAKER: I just want you to say that it is in the Human Rights Enforcement Act. I am not saying it is not correct, but I wanted you to help the House. It is in the Act. MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I was quoting a case of the High Court, which is the court of precedent. It is miscellaneous application No.7 and No.8 of 2022. Those applications were consolidated.I beg that this should be added and be made part of the recommendations that whoever has been tortured and arraigned before court, the proceedings are a nullity and can no longer proceed with those proceedings.THE SPEAKER: We cannot add that because it is already in the law. There is already a case ruling to that effect. We cannot add that to the report. We are now looking for information to add to the report. MR KIWANUKA: It was only missed in the recommendation, Madam Speaker. 5.05MS JOYCE BAGALA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for that report. I also note that while the committee met a number of victims of human rights abuse, especially people who were in safe houses, the Attorney-General of this country went to Geneva and made a presentation to the effect that Uganda does not have safe houses yet in that committee, the people who were interviewed clearly indicated where the safe houses were and even the members indicated that. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all ask: can we, as a Parliament, get the report that was presented by the Attorney-General in Geneva to peruse and also make recommendations? However, you also note that, that report was actually not true. It is not a true representation of the human rights situation in Uganda - (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany -THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to disable my comrade, the honourable Commissioner, from debating. However, to pick the issue raised in earnest by Hon. Joyce Bagala that the country’s learned Attorney-General made a misrepresentation of this country on the status of human rights in Geneva - That statement was a departure from what we are debating here. Would it be okay, Madam Speaker, if you ordered the learned Attorney-General to come to the House and share with this honourable House the issues he presented at the international fora in representation of the country so that we can applaud him for a good presentation? It would be good to have the learned Attorney-General on record for our appreciation for that representation and that the same document, [Mr Kiwanuka]6253THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022in the same tone, is presented to the attention of the House. It would be a very good thing; it is also decent that as part of tracking the Government commitment - because I am sure he was tracking and presenting the Government’s commitment on human rights - we share in his document so that we can have it on record as representing the true state of human rights in this country. Otherwise, he might be misconstrued - I do not know what Hon. Ogwang is thinking about in that report because he was not there. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know if safe houses were part of the report and if they were - Was it part of the report? 5.08MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Human Rights. We tried to interrogate, investigate and look for where safe houses are. I want to be on record that there are no safe houses. We tried to ask our witnesses to direct us to where the safe houses were but they could not direct us anywhere. [Several Members rose]THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, silence.5.09MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By the grace of God, I am the substantive Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights.The Committee on Human Rights spent close to two years looking for the safe houses. We tasked the police, we tasked our witnesses, and we did not find any safe house.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will ask the Attorney-General to come and bring the report. Hon. Ogwang.5.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, now that the records have been set clear, can I ask the Leader of the Opposition and Hon. Joyce Bagala to withdraw their statements so that they are expunged from the records of Parliament?THE SPEAKER: Honourable, when the report was made, which people were in that committee? Hon. Joyce, which Members were in that committee? Did you make a minority report? If you did not make a minority report to say that you saw safe houses, what do you expect of us? However, what is important is the Attorney-General will bring the report here so that we can debate it. I said, there was no minority report that said otherwise. 5.11THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Matthias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, at a high risk, let me remove my mask.THE SPEAKER: Put on your mask. I do not want -MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind indulgence. For the record, it is not a contest between the authors of the report to the existence or the non-existence of safe houses versus the complainants. For the record, I have never seen a signpost of a safe house. There has never been a signpost. Therefore, Hon. Fox - I favourably refer to him as old fox - is a very experienced man in this country and knows for the record that denial does not solve the problem we are trying to solve. Two weeks ago, Madam Speaker - and I am glad Gen. David Muhoozi is here - the police on record reported that they had withdrawn from SIU Kireka because they were not in charge and some people were holding people there as safe houses and that they are not in charge of detention centres at Kireka. This was 6254STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTby the police. It is not about the fact that there are no signposts. The tortured people are not moved in broad daylight; they are blindfolded and there are records. THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from Hon. Muhoozi. Can you cool your tempers?5.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, regarding Kireka, it is a gazetted police station. I do not know why the LOP calls it a safe house.THE SPEAKER: No, LOP, I have never known you for that. I am going to give you time to make a statement. He has already said that it is a gazetted area. You have a right to reply. 5.14MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, to put this matter into context, it is true that the committee may not have found evidence on that and let us respect the position of the committee because the committee investigates and is fed with information. If this information was not within their reach then they are right to make that conclusion. Does that take away the existence of safe houses? Madam Speaker, in the 10th Parliament, the late Gen. Elly Tumwine (May his soul rest in peace) confirmed the existence of safe houses and it is on record.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, we agreed in this House that we must have evidence-based debate and if there is no evidence that these safe houses are there, let us not take it that they are there. They are not there. The Government Chief Whip.5.15THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, may I request to put it on record that any Ugandan arrested on reasonable suspicion of having committed a crime or about to commit a crime is detained at a gazetted detention centre. These centres are known to all of us. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Are you done with your statement?5.15MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I want to refer to pages 191 and 192 of the report. These two pages talk about the increasing cases of defilement settled out of court. We passed the Administration of the Judiciary Bill in this Parliament. What is contained in this Bill is an agreement that that was made into law in Parliament, where every subcounty is going to have a magistrate to handle cases of defilement. The question I would like to ask the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is: how far with the subcounty magistrates? Madam Speaker, these cases of defilement need to be sorted out in order to avoid backlog. Otherwise, this involves our children. These are capital offenses and they start from the subcounty magistrate courts. That is the clarification I want to seek from the minister of constitutional affairs.5.17MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for a detailed report. My concern is about discrimination of children with disabilities. The committee recommends that the Persons with Disabilities Act is amended to criminalise discrimination and neglect these children. Madam Speaker, we have a very big challenge in this country. Those children are being neglected and discriminated yet they have brains we could use as a country to develop and prosper. There is an amendment - the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should educate all Ugandans about the plight [Mr Mpuuga]6255THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022of those young children with disabilities such that even when we have not amended the Act, we protect these children because they belong to our society and they have potential, like any other child. Thank you. 5.19MR IGNATIUS MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Constitution says before one is charged, he or she should be proven guilty. I have a case where two people were arrested and charged with murder. After some time, they were sentenced to death.THE SPEAKER: Which Article? Is it 28?MR MUDIMI: 28.THE SPEAKER: Presumption of innocence.MR MUDIMI: These people are still in Luzira Prison but after sentencing them to death - they were sentenced in 1991 but all of a sudden, someone appeared with the clothes of the person who died. Those people are still there. I have been negotiati ng –(Member timed out.) –THE SPEAKER: Conclude. MR MUDIMI: They are in Luzira Upper Prison. They are saying that Government will not manage to handle the issue of compensation. My appeal to the Committee on Human Rights is to go to Luzira and ask for Martha and Gonyu. All the evidence is there. They said they were wrongly prosecuted. We want them to at least be released. We will not ask for anything from Government. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what Hon. Mudimi is saying affects most of us. Because of politics, some of us were sometimes implicated for nothing. Depending on the person investigating your case - how much you are giving that person - we need to be fair in the whole process.5.21MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is that the conditions in our prisons is very appalling to the extent that the level of congestion is beyond control. We call upon the Government to come in and expand the prison. Madam Speaker, people do not have where to sleep. In fact, people sleep on one another in prisons. The issue of the bucket system - people sleep next to the buckets, where they have put – (Interjections)  - that one. When these people are being taken to hospitals, they walk long distances. They are taken to work in people’s gardens and elsewhere, moreover they are beaten. There is torture in these prisons. There are people they call the Katikkiros. These are prisoners but they are put in charge of fellow seniors. They are very dangerous. They beat and kick with impunity; they do everything with impunity. As Government, we should come in and check the conditions in our prisons because we are all potential candidates. We represent even those people in prisons. Human rights must apply to everybody, regardless of whether you are a prisoner or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.5.23MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Members for the deliberation so far. Not to repeat anything, the committee has noted and put for us very good recommendations, which I agree with. One of them, which is a sticky area, is the conditions of the juveniles in the detention centers. We have remand homes for children in various parts of the country but the conditions of those children is very deplorable. We know that things like food or welfare of the children is priority and a basic human right. Therefore, as we work on clearing the case backlog, can we at least ensure there is food? 6256STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTWhen we moved around, most of the centres reported that quarterly, they receive very little portions of food. The children are also complaining. I beg to submit. Thank you. 5.24MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the report and I think the report was done in good faith. However, last year, around October, I did raise in this House the continuous killing of my people from the upper belt of Benet. This is being done by trained officers working under the Uganda Wildlife Authority. I mentioned it here. I talked about the killings, rape, beatings and cutting of food.The minister said he was going to investigate the matter. It beats my understanding when we come up with very serious reports, but do not them follow up. Otherwise, I beg Members here that we should follow up all our reports because it is not a waste time; we do it for a purpose.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Just to put you on notice, on Thursday, we shall have action-taken reports, as per rule 220. It will be on the Order Paper and we will have two items only. Let us discuss the actions taken on all the reports that have been presented to this House. 5.26MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (Indepen-dent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the good effort of the committee. The recommendations are amazing – if well implemented. I have a concern over land con-flicts in this country and the backlog in land cases. The news in this country is full of land conflicts – land issues or land grabbing. The committee cites that there should be strengthening of the area land committees, district land boards and the local councils. When we investigate the issue of land grabbing, it also goes to the regional offices where they just issue titles because the district land boards recommended without going on ground. One of the recommendations should be that the regional land offices should first confirm what the district land committees have signed for. The other concern is that 80 per cent of Ugandans are on customary land. I would like to appreciate the committee for recommending a land fund so that all Ugandans get titles. That will solve the injustice of land grabbing. Thank you. 5.28MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I saw a recommendation for the Public Order Management Act to be reviewed by the Uganda Law Reform Commission. This is very good and has to be done as quickly as possible. I participated in the election especially on -THE SPEAKER: Who is supposed to repeal an Act of Parliament? MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, Parliament repeals, but the recommendation is that there should be a comprehensive review conducted by the Uganda Law Reform Commission, which is the constitutional body that is supposed to review legislation.THE SPEAKER: It is reviewing; the record must be corrected.MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Chairperson Committee on Human Rights, that issue came up during the Constitutional Petition No.56 of 2013. They said that Section 8 of the Public Order Management Act contravened Article 29. The Constitutional Court has already ruled that that section is unconstitutional. Now that it has come to that level, we are the custodians of the Constitution. We should just accept so that we bring an amendment to the Act. Thank you. [Ms Acen]6257THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022MS AOL: Thank you. I participated in the bye-election. Members, we all have to cherish and embrace freedom. At least, I participated in the Soroti East bye-election, where even my vehicle and a lot of our people were imprisoned. (Interjection)  It was not just impounded. They decided to take and keep it and I had to use a motorcycle. I would like us to look at the Electoral Commission issues critically. We are all Ugandans and when we want freedom, we should abide by what – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, former Leader of the Opposition. Sorry about your car which was arrested. At least the car was arrested, but you were not. The question I would ask is: what were you doing in Soroti? 5.31MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is high time we remembered that Ugandans are about 45 or so million and the majority are very religious people. If something is not going on well, we should follow the rule of law. (Interjections) Am I protected? Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this country, we have the rule of law but still, there is a group of people who call themselves mafias. It is to the extent that they threaten the lives of high-profile people in this country.THE SPEAKER: I have never seen anybody calling himself mafia. You are the one calling them mafias.MR AMOS OKOT:  Madam Speaker, the point I am trying to raise is that now that we live under the rule of law and observe human rights, those people who normally depress other people and they move as if they are beyond the rule of law and act with impunity - THE SPEAKER: Hon. Solomon, you are speaking next. Comeback.MR AMOS OKOT: … should know that unless we organise this country and follow the laws, it will not be comfortable for all of us, including themselves. Finally, Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives did not attend the meeting much as they were invited, yet there were issues about externalisation of labour and our traders. Why don’t they respect the committee? This Parliament is a place where Ugandans sit and discuss their issues. I do not know whether the committee could still be given room to ask the questions they wanted to ask the ministry because we also want to hear. I thank you.5.34MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the team for the good report they have presented to us. On page nine, the committee recommends that the Electoral Commission should ensure that polling stations are devoid of any campaign materials, including money that can be used for electioneering and buying votes on the polling day. Through you, I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to help us bring improvements on the electoral laws, specifically, election financing. It is one of the biggest challenges we have and are yet to have. Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask Cabinet, through the Government Chief Whip, to strengthen our policies on getting the military out of civil matters. One of the – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition? Please use two minutes.5.36THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I will be very brief. First of all, to take recognition of the fact that the committee was dealing with backlog of four annual reports; it means that somewhere somehow, the committee of Parliament did not handle these reports with 6258STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe expedience that they deserve as a matter of right and attending to rights. So, we need to take recognition of the fact that the inordinate delay in managing these reports is also injurious to the entire cause of rights. This being a new committee, I would like to applaud them for dealing with backlog and bringing it up to scratch. (Applause)That said, I will briefly deal with four issues. One is on page 16 of the report that refers to the mandate of the Uganda Law Reform Commission in dealing with laws that are either obsolete or require immediate amendment. I have, through Parliament, interacted with this Government agency. We all know its attendant challenges in dealing with regularising legislation.Madam Speaker, one of the issues that this Parliament has failed to deal with is a concept of post-legislative scrutiny. I recollect in the Ninth Parliament, there was a conversation on the Floor of this House to put in place a committee to deal with post-legislative scrutiny; to look at laws and how they work because we legislate and these laws must be functional. Non-functional laws on our statute books that gather dust and fail to get traction are actually a bother to the public. I imagine that the time has come for us to engage with the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to consider this committee. This committee is very critical to our work as legislators - to review and look at the functionality of the laws we make. I was in this House when, for example, the Public Order Management Act being referred to on page 16 was being debated and enacted. We warned about its nature and unconstitutionality; nobody listened because it was political expediency. It is now back to naught - that actually, it was unconstitutional. So, we need that committee, Madam Speaker, to deal with the laws we make, then they consider their efficacy as society evolves.Secondly – (Interjection)  - I will take it from –THE SPEAKER: From the president of JEEMA.MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, my boss, for giving way. The idea you raise goes beyond post-legislative scrutiny, but equally addresses pronouncements of court on various pieces of legislation that this House has passed. Colleagues would want to know that, for example, the issue of seven years that this House passed is still in our law books; it is still there – (Interjections) – the seven-year term.You talk about obsolete laws and they are really very many. You hear things like –THE SPEAKER: So, what to do you want to do with the seven years? (Laughter)MR BASALIRWA: No. The point I make, Madam Speaker, with the few minutes my boss has given me, is on the laxity of the institutions to address changes in laws, arising out of pronouncements of court. Court has pronounced itself on provisions in the Divorce Act. You have mentioned the Public Order Management Act. The other day, the court made a pronouncement on Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Act but all those are still there. Obviously, seven years is still in our law books. I want to inform you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you putting us on notice that you are bringing back the seven years?  (Laughter)MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I intend to bring a Private Member’s Bill to address amendments that have been pronounced by courts of law on seven years –(Laughter)- the Public Order Management Act the Divorce Act, the Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Act and the age limit; all these provisions that have been declared unconstitutional. I will. I am putting you on notice, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I have seen the most popular one is the seven years.[Mr Mpuuga]6259THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, for the record, the Member is putting the House on notice, not the Speaker. That needs to be –THE SPEAKER: He is putting the House on notice, not the Speaker. Not me. (Laughter) MR MPUUGA: The observation is on page 13.THE SPEAKER: Can we summarise?MR MPUUGA: I am actually being very brief, save for the interruption of my senior at the bar. He can deny me audience in court if I do not give him time. I want to invite my brother not to get tired; this is about us.The other is on page 13; it is very brief. It relates to a recommendation and what the Electoral Commission said about the size of a polling station; that for the record, they consider the polling stations to have at least 800 voters in the countryside and 1,200 in the congested urban centres, at the very limit.The law is very clear on how constituencies and polling stations are created. The reason the Electoral Commission is equivocal on all these matters is because it has never pronounced itself on the population quota. It is the basis upon which constituencies are created. Constituencies are created randomly because the guidelines are not followed. Sometimes, out of mere political expediency –THE SPEAKER: By the way, we should not blame anybody for the creation of constituencies; it is political. We are the ones who push for them. This Parliament here is the one which pushes for creation of constituencies. (Applause)MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with you, which is why Parliament is occupying a void - because a designated institution, which is the EC, is not taking up its mandate. After every census, the Electoral Commission is supposed to pronounce a population quota that will be the basis for creating a constituency, but that is not done. So, I would like to invite Parliament to consider this as very serious, now that very soon, we are going to have a census. We should come out after this with a well-known population quota and the agitation to be well considered. The second last is on page 12, relating to, again, the work of the Electoral Commission. I am avoiding the other issues because I know they have been debated. The Government is simply being adamant or scared. THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Government is not adamant. Wait to get a response from Government. MR MPUUGA: Of course, I agree, Madam Speaker. I think it is a question of the words I choose badly to mean the same thing you are referring to. However, I will be careful next time. THE SPEAKER: You know, you and I should not choose bad words. So, that is a very bad word for a Catholic like you.MR MPUUGA: No, Government is just reluctant, not adamant. (Laughter) So, we shall probe what motivates their reluctance in dealing with these serious matters. The committee, on page 12, talks about the recommendation that the Electoral Commission should adequately train electoral officials on basic requirements, procedures and standards. My question to the committee leadership is: Did you probe the Electoral Commission on how it has dealt with verily incompetent officials that have meddled with elections at polling centres and have been dropped on the premise of sheer incompetence or sheer partisanship? If we do not see this being talked about here, it means that the conversation with the EC was casual and customary. However, we would like to see more serious recommendations made at their reluctance.Finally, Madam Speaker and colleagues, on page 10 - I can omit that and look at page nine, finally. On page nine, a matter that refers again to the Electoral Commission, you know, I am 6260STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTconcentrating here because most of the troubles that relate to the violation of rights are based on our political disagreements that have not been settled, then some people choose to settle them with shear might other than reason. That is why I would like the EC -(Interjection) - I hope that is not sabotaging our rights to debate. (Laughter) I am concluding whoever is trying to sabotage, Madam Speaker. The EC is lamenting to the committee about their failure to deal with polling stations and managing polling centres. And on page nine, one of the questions one would raise would be; the Electoral Commission, in some places, recorded 100 per cent turn up, in some other centres 120 per cent turn up, and some places voters have been disenfranchised. Did the committee probe these issues? Because it is violation of the rights of the dead to consider them to have voted when they are actually resting. Did-THE SPEAKER: LOP, are you looking at the district EC or the national EC?MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, the buck stops with the national EC to vet competency, probity and impartiality. Where these are not properly probed, and they simply deploy cadres for a purpose, we end up in this mess. So-  THE SPEAKER: I thought during elections, everybody is mandated to bring an agent. MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, that is the norm. We are now discussing the reality facing us. And it is the invitation I am making here; this is the House of Parliament that must discuss even the improbable and make it impossible because we are all here to legislate for a better Uganda. Madam Speaker, in finality, I want to thank the committee and I am waiting for the learned Attorney-General, as you have ordered. I will bring back the issues I have raised on the illegal detention centres when the learned Attorney-General makes his presentation so that we can be on the same page in understanding; not just the genesis, but including the motivation for some people to be above the law in this fair land. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, maybe as you respond, you need to talk about the EC too because he has said it several times and actually his issues are on the EC.THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I am cognizant of the fact that you have already guided that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will be coming to make specific responses to issues that have been raised in this report.Permit me, therefore, to respond to a few general issues. First of all, let me thank the Committee on Human Rights, for clearing the backlog in terms of reporting for the period 2018 to 2021. We want to thank the committee under the leadership of Hon. Fox Odoi Oywelowo.Madam Speaker and members, I am also alive to the fact that when we talk about fundamental human rights and freedoms in Uganda, we need to credit ourselves as a country because there are three fundamentals in our national Constitution. First of all, in chapter four, we should keep repeating that the Bill of Rights is the longest chapter in our national Constitution and that is a fact.When you move to the preamble of our national Constitution, those who promulgated it made a commitment and that commitment was based on the history of Uganda from Independence. Number three, they made sure that the Human Rights Commission of Uganda becomes a Constitutional Commission. Those are three fundamentals that we pick from our national Constitution.Madam Speaker, you gave a very good summary of the issues contained in the report and I want to start with one; the case backlog. We are all aware as indicated; but honourable members, you are also aware that through the Budget process, we made approvals in terms [Mr Mpuuga]6261THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 15 NOVEMBER 2022of progressively enhancing the Budget of the sector that is in charge of Justice, Law and Order.And as we speak, in a progressive manner, more magistrates are being recruited, leading to the establishment of more magisterial areas; judges are being recruited. As we speak, there are a number of courts that are being constructed in some districts, especially where I come from in Alebtong. There is a court being constructed there because we had a magistrate without a court. So, this is work in progress and in phases, subject to the availability of funds.On the question of funding limitations for Uganda Human Rights Commission, Madam Speaker, we all agree in principle that if funds were available, the Uganda Human Rights Commission would be funded to the dot. But we all know that due to budgetary constraints, we are unable to fund the Uganda Human Rights Commission to its full budget. However, this is an issue that can be handled through checks and balances both between the Cabinet and Parliament to ensure that probably in this consideration of the Budget cycle for the next financial year, we enhance the Budget of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.On the question of the refugee rights and the attendant challenges, Madam Speaker, at regional, continental and international level, it is a fact known to all of us that Uganda has been credited for its refugee policy. But if there are areas that we need to improve on, we will come to them. However, the bottom line is, we all know that even as we speak, more refugees continue to come to Uganda and through our open-door policy, we continue to entertain them because they are fellow Africans. Therefore, if there are challenges, we can be able to handle them.On the question of Hon. Atkins, Madam Speaker, I am constrained to debate a matter in court, because as far as I know, after the arrest, these people were formally charged. If there are issues in delays of justice, I believe this is a matter that we can jointly handle - including yourself - in another forum to avoid acting in breach of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. On the question of the reports that the Attorney-General delivered to Geneva; there was a question asked on whether we can get the report of the Attorney-General? Madam Speaker, I strongly believe that this report is already in Geneva. If it is in Geneva, why would Uganda fail, through the National Assembly, to get it?We shall draw the attention of the Attorney-General to lay it on the Table or to come and present this report on the Floor of Parliament. I do not think there is any rule that it offends for the report to either be laid or presented on the Floor.Madam Speaker, there was a question on subcounty courts. Again, we agreed in principle that we will move in a progressive manner but as I speak, the budget we have – because there are even districts that we created without courts. Now, how do we move to a subcounty when the mother district does not have a court? Therefore, we are progressively starting with the districts and when done with the districts, we will decentralise to that level of the subcounty. This is also anchored and pegged on the budget. On the issue raised by Hon. Mudimi on wrongful prosecution, first of all, I sympathise with you and the two but I want to say that the process, under wrongful prosecution, is very clear. I call upon you, Hon. Mudimi, to seek for some legal advice. There are a number of legal brains here who can help you in the likely event that these two were arrested, charged, convicted and sentenced and now we are saying it is wrongful prosecution. I believe there is a due process under the law that can be followed to have them out. That said, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. I still commit that following your directive and guidance, we will draw the attention of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, represented by the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, 6262STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTto respond to specific issues raised in the report. I beg to thank you and submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip, for standing in for the Prime Minister. To the committee, thank you for your recommendations and observations. Thank you for bringing us up to date. Although we are not fully up to date, you have looked at the backlog, like the Leader of the Opposition said. We thank you so much. Honourable members, that said and done, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th Annual Reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission spanning years 2018 to 2021 be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: I now urge the Executive to prepare a response to the actions that have been taken on the observations made in the report and report back to the House, under rule 220. Where people have not been produced in court, please produce them. If they do not have cases, release them. Let us respect the rule of law. I thank you, honourable members. I, therefore, adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. (The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)[Mr Obua]