

Wednesday, 21 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Join me in welcoming guests in the Public Gallery. They are students from Makerere Business Institute; I think they are here. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Latif Sebaggala and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday I received two important guests: the Ambassador of Hungary to Uganda who is resident in Nairobi, who informed me that the Speaker of the Hungarian Parliament is due to visit us next year. He would be interested in establishing a Uganda-Hungary Parliamentary Friendship Group. In case there are members interested in registering for the Hungary-Uganda Friendship Group, please inform my office.

I also had a visit from the Ambassador of Cuba to Uganda who are old friends of ours, as you know. They are also interested in improving relations between our two parliaments. We had the Uganda-Cuba Parliamentary Group in the 9th Parliament but some of the members are no longer with us so we need to reconstitute it. In case there are members who are interested in the Cuba-Uganda group, please also send your names to my office.

We have a few matters of national concern and we shall use exactly 20 minutes. I will only give two minutes so no meandering and no preambles. Simply go to the point. Hon. Luttamaguzi, two minutes.

2.31
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 17 November, that is last Saturday, a lady called Gloria Nakinobe went to Nakaseke Main Hospital to deliver. When she reached there, they told her that doctors do not work on weekends.

By Sunday, her condition started deteriorating and that is when the doctors decided to operate on her. In the middle of the operation, Yaka went off and there was no fuel in the generator so she died. Fortunately, the baby did not die. Nakinobe was buried in a village called Tweyanze.

In the same spirit, we felt bad, as people of Nakaseke, as to why Government facilities operate on Yaka because it is unreliable. There is no way you can start operating someone yet you are not sure of how much Yaka you have and you do not also have fuel in the generator. We cannot lose lives due to such kind of negligence. We want action now.

Lastly, in the same vein, hon. Mbwatekamwa and I visited National Medical Stores in Entebbe and met the Executive Director. He was complaining as to why medicines are there but are not picked. For example, he told us that Septrin is available but they are soon going to burn it. The same applies to Hepatitis B vaccines and testing kits. He wondered why medicines are not picked from National Medical Stores. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Health. I do not know whether she has something to say on both issues.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, my condolences go to the family of that lady who lost her life due to the carelessness of our health workers. Allow me to inform the House that our hospitals are supposed to operate 24 hours. Over the weekend, doctors may not be available because there are few patients but they are supposed to be available on call.

Those are administrative errors that occur in our health facilities and we are trying to do everything possible to ensure that we end this, and the challenge of moonlighting because some of them leave the public facilities and go to their private health facilities. 

We thought we should come up with a clear law barring public servants from working in private health facilities at the same time because they give in three hours to public health facilities, and then spend most of their time in the private health facilities.

Partially, the reason has been that we could not move in that direction because of poor pay to our health workers. You can imagine that a consultant will earn about Shs 10 million in a private health facility yet we are paying them about Shs 2 million.

Therefore, I am glad that His Excellency the President has given directives. I hope we cover this issue of pay to our health workers in the next financial year so that we can be able to move and bar them from working in private and public health facilities at the same time. That will solve some of these challenges that we are having.

Secondly, on the issue of Yaka, I think we have to discuss this with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I am not able to respond now because this was a decision made some time back. We are supposed to have stand-by generators in the event that power goes off but it is unfortunate that somebody can say there is no fuel. 

We send money to the hospitals and they have an accounting officer and an administrator who is supposed to know that they have fuel on standby in the generators. We will follow up this matter and at an appropriate time, update the House accordingly.

Regarding the issue of drugs at the National Medical Stores, it is the responsibility of the National Medial Stores to procure, store and distribute drugs. However, in distributing these drugs, the districts are supposed to request for them and then take them. Therefore, if there is a problem somewhere, we need to see how to resolve that problem. Just like most people say that there are mama kits stored at the National Medical Stores, why are you not distributing them? National Medical Stores has procured them but you find that the districts do not prioritise these and ask for other drugs.

These are issues that we need to resolve with the District Health Officers (DHOs) and it is something that we have also been saying. District Health Officers (DHOs) have become small kings in their districts. 

Allow me to state that National Medical Stores cannot just take drugs to a district without the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we shall do is to send our Committee on Health to go and visit the National Medical Stores to establish the drugs that are about to expire and why they have not been collected. I think that is a better way for us. The Committee on Health should handle that. 

2.38
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise is on delayed issuing of passports to applicants at the Immigration Department, Ministry of Internal Affairs.

There is a very big crisis in the country that people have been paying for passports for the last three months but the ministry is not issuing any passport under the guise that it is preparing to issue e-passports.

The biggest concern is, we have medical tourism where some people wish to seek treatment abroad. There are business people and those who wish to go and pursue studies abroad but the ministry is saying that Ugandans must wait until January to have passports.

Can the ministry issue temporary passports that can expire in January so that we can access services abroad? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is not here but we shall ask him to come and address the country on the issue of passports and whether it is true that passports are not being distributed, especially for the emergency cases. This is urgent because there are people who need passports to travel. The minister should come to us on Tuesday next week. 

2.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I think what hon. Sarah wanted to inform you is about what the Cabinet passed concerning e-passports on Monday this week. However, what hon. Mbwatekamwa has raised has not just started.

I remember when the Ministry of Internal Affairs was constrained with the budget and they informed the country about the shortage. However, when they got the money, they started issuing passports. 

We have to make sure that Government issues passports to people who are applying for express passports; those going abroad for studies or medication and I am going to inform the ministry.

We still have one year for the entire region to start issuing e-passports and what he is raising is very pertinent. Somebody who has a journey to make must be assisted with a travel document. The Minister of Internal Affairs will inform us on whether they have resolved the issue and whether people are receiving passports.

THE SPEAKER: People would like to hear progress and action. Therefore, the minister should come and update us on Tuesday. 

2.42
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Monday, rains swept away roads including the one used by students from Mende to go and do exams. One student who tried to cross died. I pray that the students who missed their UACE exams be given supplementary exams. 

Secondly, there are power outages in the country. In Gulu for example, there is power for only around three hours -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Gulu was discussed last week. I thought you wanted to talk about West Nile.

MR WALUSWAKA: It is not only in Gulu. When you go to Arua -

THE SPEAKER: Talk about West Nile. Gulu was handled and we got an answer. Go to West Nile.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, when we went to bury hon. Abiriga in Arua, we had power for only two hours. The same issue applies to Kanungu. 

We passed a loan to subsidise power and the minister promised that power tariffs would reduce but instead Umeme, has just increased their rates. Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, why have the tariffs shot up?

THE SPEAKER: Answer about power?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the issue that hon. Waluswaka has raised about the road, which was swept away, was drawn to my attention by hon. Sseggona yesterday. I informed him that I was going to instruct the minister, Gen. Katumba Wamala to go on the ground. 

He told me that he would be in the House at 4 p.m. Now that he is here, we would like to hear from him on what the ministry is planning. However, we made an undertaking that we would improvise a route, which will make the students able to cross. Although it is a long route, they should be able to reach school so that they do not miss their exams.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you ready? I hope you can also assure me that the Mbulamuti ferry will not be washed away again. On Thursday night, that ferry was washed by water to an island. 

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that the recent rains have caused extensive damage on a number of roads, not only in Mende. River Mayanja burst its banks and that is why Mende was cut off.

However, a team from UNRA responded very quickly. They are on the site and are putting back the road. We will temporarily work on the first phase to allow the communities cross but we have a long term plan to have that stretch properly done.

In addition, we have also had a number of roads cut off between Mukono and Luweero at a place called Lwajjali. Lwajjali River burst its banks between Kasawo and Ziroobwe and it has washed away everything.

So far, we have confirmed the loss of two ladies and a child whose bodies have not yet been recovered and we had five survivors. I have been at the site and the situation is demanding. UNRA is responding to that as well and we hope that we will be able to put back a temporary facility for the communities to connect.

Again, River Lwajjali bursts its banks around Namasumbi and Busiika and the two communities have been cut off. There is a temporary lake now but we are going to work on those two places. Really, there is a big challenge because we do not know whether the rains are still coming and they could be still coming and so we are likely to have these kinds of incidences.

However, as a ministry, we have put on stand by a response team and UNRA also has a response team to be able to address this.

Regarding Mbulamuti, I must confess that I only heard about it on the radio and I do not have exact information on this. However, I have heard that Isimba dam is failing to hold but I do not have that information.

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, you will recall that we came here to ask for exemptions for Bujagali for 10 years and Parliament gave us five years.

We informed the House that this would help to reduce on tariffs and the exemption of Income tax was part of the package to negotiate. The other factor was restructuring the date. We have been on this for some time now. Some new conditions came in, including issues that were incorporated in the Environmental Bill and which we are very grateful that you have now passed.

We are concluding the restricting of the date and this, combined with the exemption of Income Tax, we hope will bring down the tariffs. This is what we promised the House and this is what we are working on. It has taken long and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development came here a few months ago on this particular issue and laid down these arguments and explanations.

We hope that the House will bear with us until we conclude the restructuring of the date with the World Bank. One of the conditions has been the issues, which were contained in the Environmental Bill, which we passed recently and we think that we are now ready to finish restructuring of the date and we should start to see the tariffs come down. Thank you.

2.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter of national importance and I believe that what I am going to say in regard to denial of the pension of the former employees of East African Community applies to many of us in our respective constituencies.

Madam Speaker, the former employees of East African Community, which ceased to exist in 1977, have been pleading with the Government and even sent a petition to Parliament to have their terminal benefits and pensions paid.

I am happy to note that when you read through the document, which I am going to lay on the Table, the Government, as far back as when Rt hon. Adriko was Prime Minister, agreed that there is no dispute as far as the payment of benefits are concerned.

What makes you and me suspicious is that The Daily Monitor of 1 November 2012 gave a comprehensive list of people who had already been paid as former employees of the East African Community and among the list were people who never worked in the East African Community. One of them was my own cousin and closer cousin to hon. James Akena, Eng. Herbert Akora who died. As such, there has been a lot of misuse of the funds because they were already given for the payment of these pensions. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Local Government to explain to us how fraudsters on the streets get access to documents and the photographs from their ministries and use them to go and make claims.

Two, can the minister tell us when these people will be paid? There must be modalities of how they will be paid to confirm that the people we are paying are actually alive.

These are the issues that I would like to put before this House and I hope that the Minister of Local Government will give us an answer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that the former workers of the East African Airways actually brought me a petition and I reported to this House that, that issue was outstanding. Which minister is in charge? Is it Ministry of Public Service? Can we ask the Minister of Public Service come on Wednesday and give a response to this issue because it is outstanding? Thank you.

2.54
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This month, the President of the Republic of Uganda launched a bursary scheme for the Albertine region. The perspective of the bursary scheme is to support the youth in the vocational and technical training to support the Oil and Gas Sector within the sub-region.

The Parliament of Uganda passed a loan to that effect and the districts that are supposed to benefit are those that lie within the Albertine region. Of all the districts that lie within the Albertine region, Kasese inclusive, it is only Kasese, which has been intentionally omitted. Over 600 youth are going to benefit and the course areas for the youth include tourism, agro-processing, technical and vocational training.

This Parliament and the country know that Kasese hosts three national parks: Mt Rwenzori National Park, Queen Elizabeth National Park and part of Kibaale National Park.

Two, this Parliament knows that Kasese is one of the agricultural hubs in this country and therefore –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are you saying that you should be part of this as of right or you are asking to be included?

MR NZOGHU: No, as of right. Madam Speaker, even when we were processing that loan, because I am a member of the Committee on National Economy, Kasese was there. However, when the final list was eventually made, Kasese was excluded and I asked hon. Bahati why Kasese was excluded.

This country belongs to all of us and the youth in Kasese would also want to benefit from this. Can the Government explain to us why, intentionally and deliberately, they are leaving Kasese out and yet they know that Kasese has gas and oil? What is your problem, honourable?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is true that hon. Nzoghu reached me yesterday to ask about this issue and I promised him that I was going to cross check the facts about that loan. If the loan was passed by Parliament including Kasese then it will be worked on. If it was not included, that is a different matter and I promised that I would come back to him tomorrow.

Indeed hon. Nzoghu, I will come back to you and give you the facts. If Kasese was part of the loan that was approved by this House then the issue would be maybe slow implementation but it will be worked on.

I beg that we have a bi-lateral engagement with him tomorrow so that I give him the information.

THE SPEAKER: The loan was passed by this House and we have it on the Hansard. Therefore, the Clerk can avail the information and then we can confirm tomorrow. If it was part of it, it must be. If it was not, let us discuss how we can support them.

No, I know you would like to talk about Kanungu -

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, please allow me to seek some clarification. You know Kanungu also has gas for sure. 

THE SPEAKER: I knew that.

MS KARUNGI: And it is not part of this loan. Therefore, I do not know what they used to qualify those who are supposed to benefit from the loan and those who are to be left out. I need to know. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as I said, let the Clerk produce the record of the Hansard because we must have named the districts that are going to benefit. Therefore, if Kanungu was there and it has been abandoned, let the Clerk produce our records. [Members rose] No, let us get the records first then we shall know. If you are officially there from the loan, you must be there. If not then you request.

2.59
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the eviction of 6,000 residents of Kitugutu Parish, Kigwera Sub-County in Mwenge North, Kyenjojo District by someone called Mukwano who is claiming to be the owner of 15 square miles of land where people are living and he wants to evict them. People are panicking yet they have permanent houses, churches, schools and so many other developments. 

My prayer is that Government investigates this matter so that people can live in peace and undertake their developments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands is directed to expeditiously examine this issue and give us a report on Wednesday next week.

In the meantime, join me in welcoming students of Buikwe Self Help ECD Teachers’ College. Please stand up. They are here on both sides, very smart, represented by hon. Ronnie Mutebi and hon. Judith Babirye. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.00
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to restrictions by police. This matter was raised yesterday but there are other matters that continue to perturb some of us.

You remember sometime back when you asked the members of Parliament to go for consultations. The police wrote restricting members of Parliament on how to move and who to invite as a guest.

Recently, Madam Speaker, the FDC wrote to the police about rallies in Teso and the police wrote back saying that they have no problem with the activities of the FDC but that the activities must be restricted to town hall meetings. Therefore, they are saying, you can go ahead but do not hold a rally but a town hall meeting.

I would like to lay on the Table the letter signed by Mr John Nuwagira for Inspector General of Police dated 10 October 2018 where they say the meetings should be restricted to town hall meetings. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, another letter was written on 6 November 2017, signed by Mr Asuman Mugenyi for the Inspector General of Police and it says, “Since your activities are to do with electoral colleges, your campaigns should therefore be done indoors in places such as halls, hotels etc.” The police are now determining what the FDC should do.

Attempts to meet the police so that this is sorted out have failed. You heard yesterday the Leader of the Opposition lamenting that she spent over an hour waiting to meet the Deputy Inspector General of Police (DIGP) and it was not possible.

I also have a letter of the party president of FDC requesting to meet the Inspector General of Police and who has also refused to meet him. Therefore, they do not want to agree to activities and clear them but they also do not want to meet the FDC officials over these activities. 

Finally, there are three activities scheduled for Kasese on 12 December, 25 November for Mbarara and 26 November for Rukungiri. The police have refused to clear all these activities and they do not want to meet the officials so that they discuss.

I therefore beg that you assist and ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify on what the FDC can do so that they can access the police officials and officers but also that our activities can be cleared.

On that note, let me lay on the Table the letter by the Party President of the FDC requesting to meet the IGP. It is dated 17 April and he has been waiting since to meet the IGP. I beg to lay. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we agreed, since 2005, to go multi-party and multi-party means there are many parties. Therefore, there is a minimum that should be allowed to facilitate the political parties to operate. If it is true that the Leader of the Opposition sat for two hours in the Deputy IGP’s office, this is highly discourteous.

The Leader of the Opposition is at the level of a Cabinet minister and that is what our Constitution says. Therefore, she or he should be accorded the minimum. Can we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain the relationship between these letters and the Public Order Management Act? I do not know whether those were the conditions we set but I think they should come and tell us how this relates to the law that we passed. Can you do that on Thursday? Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance, as the minister comes here on Thursday. This Parliament appropriated money for political parties and as a member of the Forum for Democratic Change, we have received close to Shs 1 billion for multi-party activities in Uganda.

Therefore, we would like to be guided by the minister on Thursday on how we can use this money that we were given. It is in our accounts and yet we are not allowed to operate, as if it is an illegal activity. What are you talking about?

MR MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, there are two critical emerging issues, which we clearly articulated in the Public Order Management Act. One of them is the authorising officer. In the law, we said that the Inspector General of Police (IGP) will be the authorising officer or his representative. You were seated in that Chair when we made this law. 

We went ahead to define that the representative of the IGP can be as low as an officer-in-charge of a police station. Any Member of Parliament, a councillor or any other officer who wants to organise a meeting must write to the Inspector General of Police at Naguru. I would like to know how somebody from Kapelebyong, Kamuli or Butambala who wants to organise a simple meeting will seek clearance from the IGP. This is because when you write to the District Police Commander (DPC), they say, please write to the IGP and that is not what we said. 

We also made provision for the ordinary course of doing business. When members of Parliament are conducting their rallies, it is in the course of doing their own business. We exempted this but what the police are doing is simply to disregard all that we did here. We have challenged this in the courts of law and we are asking, can the police obey the Public Order Management Act because we are abiding by it?

THE SPEAKER: I have told the minister to come on Tuesday with answers on how to spend the money and - 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I took a lot of interest in what was happening in Zimbabwe. During Mugabe’s time, Opposition members of Parliament were given respect even by the police. What is happening now is that the police do not respect us.

Concerning the issue of hon. Ssemujju, the Kampala Metropolitan officer, whose name I have forgotten, could not even admit that hon. Ssemujju had written a request. This is a very serious matter. We need to respect our offices and we must be respected. Let me say this –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you had guided well, having noticed that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not in the House and that members want responses from the documents that have been laid on the Table. You directed that the minister comes and informs the House. I know that you will give the rest of us who want to raise further information, an opportunity to do so.

I can see colleagues standing to debate a matter upon which you have guided. Is it in order that colleagues like hon. Ssewungu, who is holding the Floor, continue debating a matter upon which you have ruled?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want answers from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Our talking here will not solve anything so you are out of order to speak like that. The minister will be here with answers on Thursday and you can ask all your questions. We will give you 45 minutes to discuss that issue.

3.10
MR JOHN BOSCO LUBYAYI (NRM, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the National Coffee Bill, which was approved by Cabinet in May 2018. However, it has not been presented here up to now. This sector provides Shs 158 billion to the economy so we need this Bill as soon as possible so that our target of 2020 of producing 20 million bags of coffee is realised.

May I ask the minister in charge to bring the Bill to the House so that we scrutinise it and regulate the coffee sector? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First, can we know from the Government whether the matter was discussed in the Cabinet and whether the Bill is coming?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the Coffee Bill was discussed in Cabinet and it is a pity that this matter comes as a point of national importance regarding laying the Coffee Bill on the Table. This is a matter, which the honourable minister and the members of the committee should have handled. This should not happen again.

The Coffee Bill was handled in Cabinet and the minister must organise for its First Reading, which I am sure, if the Bill is printed out, can be done even tomorrow. First Reading does not require much. 

When a Bill is presented in Cabinet, it is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implication. No Bill is entertained in Cabinet without this certificate. Therefore, I am going to look for the minister to make sure that this Bill is tabled.

3.12
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

We are all aware that LC1 chairpersons are paid Shs 10,000 per month consolidated to Shs 120,000 per year. Unfortunately, as they cry out for enhancement of their allowance or salary, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) have started taxing this money. The LC1 chairpersons are now getting Shs 84,000 so there is a deduction of Shs 36,000 as Pay As You Earn (PAYE). 

This happened in my district and unfortunately, this is the second time it is coming to my knowledge. I brought it to the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Bahati, before I raised it here. I also made a call to an officer in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who made it clear that it is supposed to be taxed. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from hon. Bahati and Government whether it is the position of Government that Shs 120,000 should be taxed. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it cannot be. This House set the threshold of tax exemption for monthly pay at Shs 200,000 and below. Minister, if you are taxing those people illegally, tell us.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that the law provides that the minimum income salary that we tax is Shs 230,000 per month. However, the same law also provides that all allowances are taxed. 

Therefore, it is assumed that when an LC1 person receives this money, he is not receiving it as a salary but as an allowance. However, you know that we make these laws here and we have the power to change them. Let us look at it and we revise it next financial year if you want. As per now, it is taken as an allowance, the same way the councillors who get money for sitting allowance are taxed. We can correct this but when we make the law, we must respect it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that this House could have intended to tax Shs 15,000. I doubt it. It could never have been our intention. You had better bring it for amendment.

3.16
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime around February last year, the Central Bank issued a circular warning Ugandans about the emergence of digital currency of different forms. The premise for warning the country was that there was no law or regulation governing this kind of soft financial trade. 

Right now, even after the warning, there are several agencies posing as crypto-currency dealers in all forms of names: One-coin, Namecoin, Peer Coin, Ripple Bitcoin, Primecoin and they are trading.

I am aware, perhaps like other honourable members are, that there is an emergence of Decentralised Ledger Technology (DLT) that facilitates soft money and that operates in a form where one can trade privately because this is money issued privately and it can facilitate peer to peer transactions.

Madam Speaker, the challenge is that while this is taking place, there is no regulation or law. I have tried to browse through all laws relating to financial transactions and there is nothing talking about this particular form of transaction.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to the country as to whether they are aware of this potential financial time bomb in the country because the Central Bank, as the manager and regulator of our monetary policy, made public denial of knowledge because they have no legal purview for supervising these agencies. I do not know if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of the existence and under what legal framework they are operating or they are sleeping on duty.

We are aware that some time last year or two years ago, there was tele-something where so many people, even members of Parliament, were fleeced. We would like to know what is going on before the bubble bursts.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are you ready or you will come back to us? Okay.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we live in an age of technology, which is coming with a lot of opportunities, including opportunities to expand our financial businesses, including Bitcoin and the rest.

We are aware of what is happening on this space regarding Bitcoin and other currencies that are being traded. We have been studying this and as I said, we are coming next month with a National Payment System Bill, which will cater for all this.

However, as we speak, there is a grey area in terms of this technology and the best way to handle it is through a law, which is coming. Cabinet passed it a month ago and we are processing it to bring it to the House so that we cater for all these technologies that are emerging.

However, as we speak, there is a no law that allows them to operate and there is no law that disallows them to operate.

THE SPEAKER: Since there is no law allowing and no law stopping -

MR MPUUGA: I think the honourable minister is not being helpful to the country. If there is no law and you are aware, who must answer, should a problem arise? How do I tell a fake replica for example? If there are those that you are aware of, in brief can you tell the country of those you are aware of that are operating?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Central Bank issued a statement and said Bitcoin and all those other currencies are not under their control. We advised Ugandans to go slow and be cautious. On your laptop in your bedroom or sitting room, if you open and start trading with this technology, you must be responsible. Therefore, we are cautioning you not to go into areas, which are not - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I think the minister should go beyond cautioning Ugandans. As I speak, I am privy to a case in court of one of the companies called D9 that has defrauded so many Ugandans of their money, including some members of the House that I do not want to mention. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as of now, in Diamond Trust Bank, Bank of Uganda has held US$ 2 million cash; I even know the account number. They froze that account belonging to the D9 company. Therefore, the minister should help this House and go beyond caution because people are entering these deals and they are depositing money. Those who were defrauded are here and there is no legal regime in which they can claim their case back and there is a matter before court. Therefore, you need to come out very clearly to this country, honourable minister. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, why we might not go that extra step - Take an example of the Bitcoin, which is now on the Stock Exchange in New York. In Europe, people are trading in it. Therefore, what we are telling you is, beware that for us here in Uganda, we have not officially approved it. When you go there, go at your own risk and that is why we put it in the papers and we are not going to - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are speculating on a law, which might come. Let us go to hon. Alum. In law there a maxim volenti non fit injuria. If you volunteer the risk, it is up to you. What do you want the minister to do? Do you want the minister to come to your house or grab your laptop? How?

3.24
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Yesterday, the State Minister of Internal Affairs presented a statement before this Parliament concerning the rising tension in Lango sub-region and Lira in particular.

Madam Speaker, as members of Parliament who come from that sub-region, the statement that the minister presented before Parliament left a lot to be desired. It left so many unanswered questions to us as representatives and to our people back home.  A case in point, one Daniel Odongo from Dokolo District was rounded up by police on Wednesday and he died in their custody. Nothing has been explained to our people.

Madam Speaker, even yesterday, we held a meeting, as a parliamentary group and our people stormed us. One of their problems was that they have nothing to look after their patients that are admitted in Mulago Hospital. We had to look into our pockets and give them something.

Madam Speaker, the problems, the tension and the dissatisfaction in Lira and in Lango Sub-Region in general is so big that we feel the minister of state who presented the statement before Parliament left so many unanswered questions.

These issues should be well addressed because there is an element of human rights violations and the issue of closing the only radio that the people knew: Radio Unity, which has been marketing the Government and everybody alike and up to now, the radio is still closed. 

These are some of the many issues that are brewing this tension amongst our people. Therefore, as representatives of the people in this House, we request that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and tell us how he is going to make sure that this tension is reduced among our people.

We also request that the police should not use live bullets on the people because some of the people who were wounded were very innocent; some of them were rounded up as they were moving on the road.

Madam Speaker, we feel that this and many more issues are not being addressed adequately and that is why there is a lot of tension among our people. As such, we request that we be given time, when the minister comes up with a statement and this statement should not be long, to also respond or participate or state issues that we know can help the Government to move forward and to regulate the foreigners who are amidst us.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that we, the people of Lango, are peace loving. We have co-existed with foreigners for a long time and we still co-exist with many tribes. If you go to Lira, Madam Speaker, you will notice that it has all the tribes in Uganda and foreigners, and we have co-existed with them. Why now? Why are the Langi sometimes doing what we are seeing them doing? 

My humble appeal is that we should handle this thing with respect to the citizens of this country. Let us handle this to its logical conclusion. We want dialogue and peaceful co-existence with all Ugandans and foreigners who are doing business with us. Above all, our people must be respected and protected by the state. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to propose that the Lango Parliamentary Group and the Minister of Internal Affairs have a meeting, even before he comes back here. This is because there are things that he might not know, which might help to resolve the situation. Can we, therefore, ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to meet them as quickly as yesterday so that we can have some way to resolve the issue? Thank you very much.

STATEMENT BY DELEGATION ABROAD ON CONFERENCE ON WOMEN MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT OF THE WORLD CONFERENCE HELD ON 8 NOVEMBER 2018, LONDON, UK

3.29
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to read a statement of the Women Members of Parliament of the World Conference held on 8 November 2018, in London, UK.

On 8 November 2018, I was privileged to attend the Women Members of Parliament of the World Conference at the House of Commons in London, UK.

The conference was in commemoration of 100 years of women in the UK being able to stand for elective positions in politics. It was a celebration of votes for women from 1918 to 2018 under the theme, “Strengthening Visibility, Driving change.”

The conference brought together women Members of Parliament from around the world, one from every Parliament, to celebrate their achievements, discuss how to strengthen visibility and further empower women parliamentarians to continue to drive change nationally and internationally.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, probably you could just give us the highlights. Thank you. 

MS KAMATEEKA: There were sessions in the House of Commons and break away sessions that focused on- 

    i) empowering women leaders to be powerful and effective representatives;
    ii) promoting women's economic empowerment;
    iii) ending violence against women and girls, including enhancement of quality girl-child education; and
    iv) championing women's choices. 

Madam Speaker, please allow me to present the communiqué, which was signed at the end of the conference containing the commitment. It reads: 

“We gather here in the House of Commons in London, as elected women parliamentarians from around the world, to recognise the importance of women's contribution to public life and politics, and to inspire the next generation of women leaders. 

Today we celebrate the achievements of women parliamentarians in delivering legislative change to improve the lives of women and girls, in challenging the discrimination that women in politics can face and the negative norms and attitudes about women's political leadership. 

We must redouble our efforts to tackle gender inequalities that hold back women and girls globally and in our respective countries, including working with and influencing men and boys as essential contributors to more rapid and long-lasting change. 

Today we commit to:

    1. Inspire a new generation of women to become social and political leaders in their communities by reaching out to girls, mentoring aspiring women politicians and encouraging women they know to stand for elections. We commit to reducing the disproportionate personal cost of politics for women, creating safe spaces in their communities where women can speak (including online), working with political parties to support more women to stand as candidates for election and, in line with the Dublin Declaration (2018), mobilising support for more gender-responsive practices within parliaments.

    2. End violence against women and girls by championing better legislation to tackle perpetrators and better services to support survivors, campaigning for the recognition of intimate partner violence as the most widespread human rights abuse globally, driving change to end child marriages and achieve a world free from the practice of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) by 2030.


    3. Break the barriers for girls' education, providing the opportunity for at least 12 years of quality education and learning for all girls by 2030 by backing inclusive system reform and targeting the most marginalised girls, including poor rural girls, girls with disabilities and those affected by child marriage, early pregnancy, Female Genital Mutilation and conflict and crisis.

    4. Champion efforts to enable all women to have access to voluntary family planning so they can decide whether, when and how many children to have, enabling them to complete their education, take up economic opportunities and have control over their lives. We will ensure legislation and policies are in place and address barriers, including social norms, which prevent women from using voluntary family planning.

    5. Promote women's economic empowerment by committing to tackling legislation that limits women's ability to work and access as well as control key assets, advocating for the recognition, reduction and redistribution of unpaid care, engaging with the private sector to improve women's opportunities, pay and working conditions and reducing and closing the gender pay gap.

    6. Promote implementation of international commitments to protect and empower women and girls and promote gender equality, including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Sustainable Development Goals (particularly Goal 5.5) and the UN Security Council Resolution 1325, which is on security and peace, and related resolutions on women, peace and security.”

I wish to record our appreciation to you, the Rt Hon. Speaker, for your unwavering support to the women's cause and for allowing me to attend the conference, to the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) for championing all women's issues and all our colleagues for their support.

We also thank those who co-sponsored the conference and also the British Government for organising it and inviting us.  

Last but not least, I wish to recognise the Uganda Government headed by H.E the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for an enabling and supportive legal framework and Government programmes that promote women empowerment. However, we all know that we can do better. 

I beg to lay the statement on the Table, Madam Speaker, and pray that the commitments be adopted by this House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for the statement. The point of procedure I am rising on is, during the Women’s Day celebrations, the House was in a hurry and we never debated the statement by the minister about International Women’s Day and the progress we are making in this line. This statement is very important and the issues that are being raised are very pertinent to the cause of women and also the progress we are making. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that at an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, you give us an opportunity to debate these important issues, remind our country of the progress we are making but also the challenges that remain to be handled, including some of the issues that were raised yesterday about Makerere University? 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you give us an opportunity, maybe next week, so that we again remind ourselves about these issues and have an input?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I welcome your proposal. As hon. Jovah Kamateeka was talking, regarding the last point on International Convention, Uganda is late by seven years. We have not given a report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) for seven years on the status of women. I think that will be an appropriate time to get an answer from the Government about the report and also debate this one.

Yes, I think we need time and this time round, the Government must come. Seven years late, it is not right!

MS KAMATEEKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that hon. David Bahati has suggested that we should debate a statement that came in March. However, if the ministry can prepare and come to present a statement to this House so that we can debate all the three at once - Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for representing us so well.        

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE FOLLOWING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2017

3.40
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda provide that all these account titles must be mentioned for record purposes but they are too many. I do not know whether you can permit me to just lay them on the Table in bulk.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Clerk read them out as you lay them on the Table.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the following local governments for the year ended 30th June 2017. They are too many and cannot fit here. Can I just make a gesture?

THE SPEAKER: You have to lay each report on the Table. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the following local governments for the year ended 30th June 2017.

    1. Masuliita Town Council 
    2. Bulegeni Town Council 
    3. Kiryandongo District Local Government
    4. Kagadi District Local Government
    5. Mugusu Town Council 
    6. Koboko Municipal Council 
    7. Kotido Municipal Council 
    8. Serere District Local Government 
    9. Amuru Town Council 
    10.  Pader Town Council 
    11. Nwoya District Local Government
    12. Oyam District Local Government
    13. Alebtong Town Council 
    14. Nagongera Town Council 
    15. Budaka District Local Government
    16. Pallisa Town Council 
    17. Bunamwaya Division Council 
    18. Namayumba Town Council 
    19. Binyiny Town Council 
    20. Luweero Town Council 
    21. Buliisa Town Council 
    22. Kibuku Town Council 
    23. Kagadi District Local Government
    24. Lwakhakha Town Council 
    25. Pallisa District Local Government
    26. Kapchorwa District Local Government
    27. Kahunge Town Council 
    28. Karago Town Council 
    29. Busiu Town Council 
    30. Budaka Town Council 
    31. Butaleja District Local Government
    32. Tororo Municipal Council 
    33. Busia District Local Government
    34. Budadiri Town Council 
    35. Tororo District Local Government
    36. Kiboga District Local Government
    37. Mateete Town Council – Sembabule District 
    38. Karugutu Town Council
    39. Kijura Town Council 
    40. Kibaale District Local Government
    41. Bududa Town Council 
    42. Kiko Town Council 
    43. Kisinga Town Council 
    44. Kyenjojo Town Council 
    45. Hoima Municipal Council 
    46. Fort Portal Municipal Council 
    47. Kibiito Town Council 
    48. Kanara Town Council 
    49. Kaberamaido Town Council 
    50.      Katwe Kabatoro Town Council 
    51. Masajja Division 
    52. Manafwa Town Council 
    53. Kakumiro District Local Government
    54. Butaleja Town Council 
    55. Kapchorwa Municipal Council 
    56. Mbale Municipal Council 
    57. Mbale District Local Government
    58. Kibuku District Local Government
    59. Rubona Town Council 
    60. Kasese Municipal Council 
    61. Katabi Town Council 
    62. Kigorobya Town Council 
    63. Buliisa District Local Government
    64. Abim District Local Government
    65. Kyazanga Town Council – Lwengo District 
    66. Entebbe Municipal Council Division “A” 
    67. Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council 
    68. Kakooge Town Council 
    69. Busia Municipal Council 
    70. Bukwo Town Council 
    71. Kyamukibwa Town Council – Kalungu District 
    72. Manafwa District Local Government 
    73. Lorengecora Town Council 
    74. Masindi Municipal Council 
    75. Kotido District Local Government
    76. Apac Municipal Council 
    77. Kumi District Local Government
    78. Katakwi Town Council 
    79. Soroti Municipal Council 
    80. Katakwi District Local Government
    81. Kaabong District Local Government
    82. Paidha Town Council 
    83. Nebbi District  Local Government
    84. Adjumani District Local Government
    85. Zombo District Local Government
    86. Nyendo/Ssenyange Division - Masaka Municipal Council 
    87. Napak District Local Government
    88. Moroto District Local Government
    89. Amuru District Local Government
    90. Maracha District Local Government
    91. Abim Town Council 
    92. Kasilo Town Council 
    93. Koboko District Local Government
    94. Nakapiripirit Town Council 
    95. Nebbi Municipal Council
    96. Kaabong Town Council 
    97. Soroti District Local Government
    98. Kitgum District Local Government
    99. Ayer Town Council 
    100. Amuria District Local Government
    101. Serere Town Council 
    102. Moroto Municipal Council 
    103. Arua Municipal Council 
    104. Arua District Local Government
    105. Zombo Town Council 
    106. Yumbe Town Council 
    107. Yumbe District Local Government
    108. Moyo Town Council 
    109. Maracha Town Council 
    110. Amudat District Local Government
    111. Kyotera Town Council, Kyotera District 
    112. Kween District Local Government 
    113. Bulambuli District Local Government 
    114. Bulambuli Town Council 
    115. Rwimi Town Council 
    116. Pakwach Town Council 
    117. Moyo District Local Government 
    118. Amudat Town Council 
    119. Padibe Town Council 
    120. Kalungu Town Council 
    121. Lukaya Town Council 
    122. Namasale Town Council 
    123. Kalungu Local Government 
    124. Bukomero Town Council, Kiboga District 
    125. Bukomansimbi Town Council, Bukomansimbi District 
    126. Lamwo District Local Government 
    127. Busunju Town Council 
    128. Masaka District Local Council 
    129. Dokolo Town Council 
    130. Adjumani Town Council 
    131. Lwamata Town Council 
    132. Kyankwanzi District Local Government 
    133. Sembabule District Local Government 
    134. Mubende Municipal Council 
    135. Masaka Municipal Council 
    136. Lyantonde District Local Government 
    137. Kole District Local Government 
    138. Apac District Local Government
    139. Aduku Town Council 
    140. Amolatar District Local Government 
    141. Mityana Municipal Council
    142. Gulu Municipal Council 
    143. Omoro Town Council 
    144. Kalongo Town Council
    145. Lira District Local Government 
    146. Otuke District Local Government 
    147. Pader District Local Government 
    148. Otuke Town Council 
    149. Anaka Town Council 
    150. Nyendo Ssenyanga Division, Masaka Municipal Council
    151. Rakai District Local Government 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, commissioner Ogwal. All those are sent to the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government for urgent perusal and report back.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. NOELINE KISEMBO BASEMERA ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF TOBACCO FARMERS IN KIBAALE BY CONTINENTAL TOBACCO COMPANY

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has, since the beginning of November 2018, been conducting verification on the status of tobacco payment to farmers in all the tobacco growing districts. The districts that have responded include Kakumiro, Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi, Kiryandongo and Nwoya. 

The Tobacco Control and Marketing Regulations provide that prior to granting of an export license, the sponsor must confirm full payment to farmers before getting written consent from the minister.

Section 11 of Tobacco Regulations; mode of payment to growers provides that: 
“
    1. A sponsor shall promptly pay the grower for the tobacco purchased from him or her, which payment shall be in accordance with terms of the sponsorship agreement and the grade specifications specified in the Third Schedule to these regulations.

    2. Where a sponsor defaults in payment, as provided under sub-regulation (1) of this regulation, he or she shall pay interest on the purchase price in respect of the period of payment, which interest rate shall be calculated at a rate equivalent to the Bank of Uganda minimum commercial lending rate.” 

With the information available on delayed payments, Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited will not be provided with an export license until the ministry is satisfied that all farmers have been paid.

The 2018 tobacco crop season runs up to the end of December this year. The ministry will be in position to prepare a comprehensive report to Parliament on the sub-sector by December 2018. 

I am glad to report that for the last two years, the ministry has put in place stringent measures on non-payment of tobacco, under payment and poaching on the crop. This will be done in collaboration with the Association of Sponsors and Exporters of Tobacco in Uganda as a joint measure to ensure compliance with the law.

I wish to say that tobacco has one of the best laws in the country, “The Tobacco Control and Marketing Act”. This law has enabled us to put in place appropriate incentives for exporting unprocessed tobacco through taxation. This encourages value addition within the country. 

I am glad to report to you that since the closure of BAT, Uganda has attracted three processing companies. These include, Meridian Tobacco Company in Arua, Nilus Group Uganda Limited in Jinja and Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited in Kiwatule. 

We are also consulting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make it compulsory that all the tobacco is processed within the country. 

In addition, I am glad to inform you that we have the tobacco manufacturing plant in Namanve called British American Tobacco Uganda. We also hope to attract two more manufacturing plants in the near future.

The major challenges we face with the tobacco farmers is the concern of afforestation and food security.

With the opening up of the African Continental Free Trade Area, Uganda has identified tobacco as one of the crops that we can export to many African countries. Currently, Uganda exports tobacco to 19 African countries.

With reference to the payment of tobacco farmers in Kibaale, I would like to pledge to this House that by the end of this month, a detailed report that gives the status of payment will be presented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Noeline Kisembo, any supplementary? 

3.58
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the response, although I am a little bit disappointed that it has to take another month for the farmers in my district to be paid. I wish it could be brought sooner.

Yesterday, I received a call from hon. Robinah Nabbanja, the Woman MP for Kakumiro District, which neighbours my district. She was asking for follow-up because she knows that this issue was brought on the Floor last week. The farmers in Kakumiro District have not been paid as well and we are appealing that our farmers be paid because they are finding difficulty yet this is their source of livelihood. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry to keep an eye on that issue so that before we break off, the farmers should be paid? This is Christmas season. They have to pay school fees next year. There is no debate on this.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MUYANJA JOHNSON SSENYONGA ON THE CRACKDOWN ON COUNTERFEIT PRODUCTS IN SOME SHOPPING COMPLEXES IN KAMPALA BY THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (UNBS) AND THE NEED TO STRENGTHEN PRE-SHIPMENT INSPECTION AND IMPORT VERIFICATION

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga, MP Mukono South, wanted to know why Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) had a crackdown on counterfeit products in some shopping complexes in Kampala, specifically Energy Centre.

The Uganda National Bureau of Standards was established by the UNBS Act Cap 327. The mandate of UNBS is standards development, standards promotion and standards enforcement. The bureau also administers the Weights and Measures Act Cap 103 of the Laws of Uganda.

The functions of the bureau, among others, include:

    1. Require certain products to comply with certain standards in manufacture, composition, treatment or performance and to prohibit substandard goods where necessary.

    2. Enforce standards in the protection of the public against harmful ingredients, dangerous components, shoddy materials and poor performance.

Government has a role to protect its citizens. One of the challenges Government is still grappling with is the high level of substandard goods on the market. To understand this better, UNBS commissioned a study in 2017 to assess the extent and prevalence of substandard products on the market.

The findings, though not rosy, point to UNBS’ contribution to reducing the number of substandard products on the market. From the study, it was established that a cross section of products on the Uganda market, both imported and domestically manufactured, are substandard.

On average, 54 per cent of the sampled products failed tests for compliance to Uganda standards. While the proportion of substandard products on the market is quite significant, it has reduced from 73 per cent reported in a baseline study done in 2013.

The most affected categories of products are food and food products including beverages, chemicals including cosmetics; electrical and electronics; building materials and farm implements. The lower prices charged for the substandard products are the main reason why people knowingly buy such products, considering that prices of some genuine products are prohibitively high.

In 2013, Government put in place the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity to Standards (PVoC) as a measure to reduce substandard imported products into Uganda. The programme requires that all goods falling under Uganda mandatory standards, including electricals, are inspected for quality by UNBS appointed inspectors such as Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS), Intertek and Bureau Veritas.

The programme has contributed to the reduction of substandard imports by 30 to 35 per cent. For the locally manufactured goods, Government has put in place mandatory certification through Statutory Instrument 2018 No. 12 and the UNBS Use of Distinctive Mark Regulations, 2018. 

UNBS continues to invest in a sensitisation campaign to empower consumers with knowledge to identify substandard products and subsequently shun them.

Dangers of fake and substandard goods

    a) Affect the health and safety of consumers as they contribute to the high disease burden and at times death. 
    b) These threaten the economy as they provide unfair competition on the market.
    c) Increase poverty as consumers do not get value for money.

Despite the measures put in place, there is more that needs to be done, especially in empowering regulators such as UNBS to deliver on its mandate. This is an issue that Parliament should take interest in, address holistically and prioritise. 

Effects of substandard electrical products

Electrical items are widely used in homesteads and workplaces for various purposes. They therefore expose the users to various risks, if not regulated. Electricals are among those products that must fulfil mandatory standards, as it has a dimension on health and safety. 

Substandard electrical items could cause any of the following:

    a) Electrocution of the user;
    b) Explosion due to the poor composition of electrical components; and
    c) Burning of buildings and loss of households.

We have, of course, laboratory tests and results of electrical products. I may not go into that. We have electrical cables, energy saver bulbs, extension cables and others. 

The operation at Energy Centre

Under the UNBS Act, Section 14 (1), inspectors are empowered to conduct various activities aimed at ensuring that only products that meet the standards are put on the market. Arising from the aforementioned, the UNBS surveillance team, supported by Uganda Police Force as part of the work plan, has drawn a programme aimed at reducing substandard products from the market.

From previous operations, Energy Centre was identified as the main source of substandard electrical products on the market. The objectives of the operation was to-

    1. Identify specific businesses involved in the sale and distribution of substandard electrical products;
    2. Obtain evidence of importation and distribution of the substandard electrical products;
    3. Seize any substandard electrical products found in the business outlet; and
    4. Identify suspected persons involved in the sale and distribution of substandard electrical products for prosecution in accordance with the UNBS Act.

On 14 November 2018, 46 electrical shops were inspected and approximately four tonnes of substandard electrical products worth Shs 35,145,000 were seized. As a follow up of the operation, the affected business owners have been summoned to police for further management of their confiscated products. 

How do substandard imported products enter the country? Traders take advantage of the inadequate capacity of UNBS - which requires additional staff to address this issue. I appeal to Parliament to appropriate Shs 6 billion to recruit additional 100 technical staff. 

Currently, only 40 staff undertake import-inspection and have presence at only 18 entry points out of the 160 entry points where traders clear their goods. This alone creates a gap in the regulatory function of UNBS; unscrupulous importers often use many tricks to circumvent regulatory requirements.
 
They do so by smuggling such products through un-gazetted entry points, mis-declaration of imported products and concealment of substandard products so as to avoid detection during verification.

In conclusion, the operation undertaken by UNBS was done within the law, following the UNBS Act, Cap 327 as amended and as a response measure to reduce substandard goods on the market.

Reducing substandard goods from the current 54 per cent requires a concerted effort more so by us, the honourable members, here in the House. Parliament should further support UNBS request for increased financial resources. I wish to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary from hon. Muyanja? This is his question and it is not for general debate.

4.10
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the honourable minister’s submission. First of all, I am in agreement that fake goods should not be allowed within our society as a developing country but at the same time we should have effective laws and how we apply them.

The UNBS can inspect the quality controls from the countries of origin, from the entry points of Uganda and thirdly from any manufacturing industry of those goods.

However, it is absurd to find that after somebody has paid tax - let us say a wholesaler goes into the market and all of a sudden the traders are ambushed by UNBS and their goods taken away when they had already paid the taxes.

It is not written anywhere that traders pay less or no tax once the goods are fake or below standard. I am of the view that the UNBS should stretch its operations right from the countries of origin and points of entry to avoid losses to the traders.

They pay high rent in dollars in the shops, they pay taxes and then the goods are taken away. That is a double tragedy faced by the traders. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind you that since the Eighth Parliament, the Minister of Trade has pleaded with this House to support her to get inspectors. She only has 40 per cent.

We should save her there first before we go outside and in the last financial year we had nearly made it when the Budget committee -

We should understand our priorities and support the Minister of Trade on this issue. Can I ask the ministers to make brief answers? 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, on the 14 November, 2018, hon. Emmanuel Kigozi Ssempala MP Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality raised a question on rampant accidents at Munyonyo Spur along the Entebbe Express Highway.

The Ministry of Works and Transport treats the issue of road accidents as a matter of national concern; the accidents currently experienced along the Munyonyo Spur are due to increased development that has sprung up following the commencement of works for the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway. 
Its completion increased a number of conflicts – that is accessibility to the road due to the need for direct access to the highway.

In order to address the safety issues along the highway, the Ministry of Works, through its agency, UNRA, has undertaken the following: we have carried out a study audit which has revealed the accident spots along the spur and I will be talking about them in detail later. We have also carried out a redesign study for the required intervention along the spur to minimise vehicles and pedestrian conflict.

Honourable members, the Ministry of Works and Transport, through UNRA, has come up with a proposal to convert the Munyonyo Spur into a free-low road with limited access; that means there will be direct access from the current properties to the road.

Seamlessly, this will be linked to the proposed Kampala Southern Bypass which is to be constructed as part of the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. 

Access for the properties along the Munyonyo Spur Road shall be through service roads and not directly onto the road and those have been proposed in the new design.

The following are the major interventions proposed along the Munyonyo Spur: We have identified six accident-prone spots on which interventions are going to be made. One is Lweza-Lutembe junction where we shall have an overpass, then Lweza-Kigo which will also have an overpass with ramps. 

Ndejje-Kisiko is another accident-prone spot with construct service roads with no direct access for most of the property owners along that road.

We have Kanaba-Kigo where we are going to separate the inter-chain with service roads. Then we have Kanaba-Busabala which is the most notorious accident spot; we shall have an overpass there. Najjanankumbi-Busabala shall also have an overpass.

Madam Speaker, the above proposed interventions are to be implemented as part of the works contract for the Najjanankumbi-Busabala Road which has been notorious for accidents and currently under procurement. It is expected that the works contract shall commence by June 2019.

Once implemented, it is expected that the number of accidents along the highway shall be reduced. In the interim, measures are being put in place to sensitise the motorists to adhere to the speed limits and obey the road signs together with enforcement. 

I would like to make Members aware that the Munyonyo Spur is not an express highway. As you drive along the spur, there are speed limits but unfortunately most of our people do not respect them. We are going to work together with police to enforce that but also to educate the public that the Munyonyo Spur up to Kajjansi is not an express highway. That is why we have traffic lights on that stretch. The express highway starts from Kajjansi; so if you are on the Munyonyo Spur, you are not on an express highway. 

I also appeal to Ugandans to start respecting the laws and reading the road signs as provided on the road. I think that would help us to limit the accidents on that spur.
Madam Speaker, I wish to submit on that matter. 

I also want to say that we exhaustively discussed this matter with the honourable member and with UNRA in my office. I think he is aware of all these interventions.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary?

MR KIGOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am extremely happy that Gen. Katumba Wamala has first of all confirmed that procurement for Najjanankumbi-Busabala Road is on the way. However, at the same time, I have two main problems.

THE SPEAKER: The supplementary should arise from what he has answered. Do not create new things.

MR KIGOZI: I have finished that one. When the minister says that the Jinja Express Highway is going to come and solve part of the problem, I think it is a long way. This is because as we talk, since the time I presented this problem on the Floor, we have had accidents on a daily basis and they are fatal.

Some of the accidents do not involve cars. They involve people who keep crossing. I would expect that in the interim - sensitising the motorists is not enough - they could put some measures to control the traffic. Whereas the honourable minister says that Munyonyo Spur is not an express highway, the design almost resembles that of an express highway. 

As you come from the express highway in Entebbe you don't see any difference except that this one lacks flyovers; that is all. So people who drive along the road take it for granted that it is an express highway. We are suggesting that some temporary measures be put in place, for example, temporary humps so that the speed is reduced. (Interjections) Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, but try to wind up. You asked a question; he has answered and now you are adding. Please conclude.

MR KIGOZI: The most dangerous spot has a sharp corner and we have many accidents there because, first of all, people have just come off the Entebbe Express Highway, at the same time there is a sharp corner and people are not seeing vehicles coming from that end. Therefore, something urgent must be done. Thank you.

GEN KATUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I have said, because of what has been happening on that stretch, we are working with the police to put enforcement on the stretch. Otherwise, putting humps everywhere will not be solving the problem. And many people have been complaining; they do not want to see humps and I think it is high time Ugandans learnt to observe traffic regulations. This is because giving excuses for us not to observe traffic regulations is also not right. 

I think we need to start observing - if the speed limit is 70 or 40 and the traffic police officer gets you disrespecting it, then action should be taken. I think that is how we shall learn. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we spent three and a half hours dealing with 17 clauses because of spontaneous amendments. From now, anyone who has an unwritten amendment will not amend anything. 

If you are interested in the Bill, propose in writing and circulate. So from now, amendments on the Floor -  Now, honourable members, you do not have to make four hundred copies. If you have an amendment, go to the Clerk, leave it there and the Clerk will circulate. Your work is to submit what you want. These spontaneous amendments are a problem.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUGAR BILL, 2016

4.23
Clause 19

THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule Sebunya): Madam Chairperson, we were on clause 19 and we had proposed an amendment as per the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was the issue of the jaggery and the sanctions and the right to work.

MR KASULE: To refresh our minds, Madam Chairperson. Maybe I should read clause 19 “Licensing of mills: (1) A person shall not establish or operate a sugar mill, jaggery mill or plant to process the by-products of sugarcane without a valid licence granted for that purpose by the board.

(2) A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable to pay a fine not exceeding 500 currency points.” 

Five hundred currency points is Shs 10 million.

The committee had proposed that we substitute sub-clause (2) with the following: “A person who establishes and operates a jaggery mill without a valid licence granted under subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 20 years or both.” 

What the Members said here - I remember hon. Nsereko had proposed that since these are business functions, that we remove the imprisonment and we just leave the fines to be paid.

The committee separated the sanctions for the sugar mill away from the sugar jaggery because jaggeries are rudimentary equipment but because they're important in the sector, that they should also be licensed. The proposal is a fine. The first one was for the jaggery mill.

The next is, “A person who establishes or operates a sugar mill or plant to process a by-product of sugarcane without the valid licence under this sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 10,000 currency points or imprisonment for life.” 
We thought imprisonment for life is too excessive. So we remove the imprisonment for life.

Then sub-clause (3) will be that for a – therefore what will follow will be sub-clause (3) which will be sub-clause (4); “Notwithstanding sub-section (2), a mill or plant established or operated in contravention of this section shall be immediately closed by the board.”

Those are the steps. And sub-clause (4), which will be (5);
“The prosecution of a person under this section does not prevent the board from licensing the person in accordance with this Act.” 

Therefore, we have left out the “imprisonment for life” and have only put the fines for the jaggery mill to Shs 10 million and fines for the sugar mill at -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, yesterday, I asked a question; I wanted to know what the rationale for those sanctions is. Was it to stop competition? What is the actual intention behind that law? People have a right to work.

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Chairperson, yes we can look at the penalties but it is important that we regulate the jaggeries because in many areas where sugar mills operate, you find jaggeries even encroaching on some of the farms or estates of these people.

Secondly they – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order. Allow the minister to explain.

MR WERIKHE: Like the picture was shown, they sometimes even operate - in fact first of all, according to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, we have provided for that. Even the East Africans Standards, we have also provided for the jaggeries because they also operate as commercial – (Interjections) We are talking of the commercially viable jaggeries. There are some which are operating in the homes and so on. We are not targeting those ones for their own - but commercial ones must be regulated because some of them even use a lot of cane. We are told in areas like Kinyara and Kakira, you find these people going at night and encroach on the cane and produce juice and go away on private farms. Therefore, this one we must regulate because if we do not do that, we will be affecting farmers who are properly –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as we listen to that, I would like to introduce in the public gallery, for the third day, the out-growers from Masindi, represented by hon. Paddy Kasumba and hon. Jalia Bintu. They are here in big numbers. (Applause)

Yes, then those from Busoga are also represented by the Speaker, hon. Balyeku, -(Laughter)- hon. Wetongola, hon. Katali and in the neighbourhood, hon. Muyanja from Mukono. They are all here. (Applause)

However, honourable members, let us move - yes we need to regulate but to what level of sanction?

MR KASULE: Let me just give one more clarification; as we shall go forward in clause 20, we shall be required - this is just for licensing. You have to be licensed. However, we shall also be required - if you are going to be licensed you must show the premises and location upon which that jaggery is sitting. 

Therefore, it is just to create order and not to refuse you from operating. But as you operate, we know where you are and what you do. This business is not simple. Somebody can put this form of jaggery in the middle of a farm and by morning somebody has consumed 10 acres of cane. Therefore, we have to regulate. That is why -(Interjection)- These are many things. It is not one. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order Members! 

MR KASULE: Some people can organise themselves to bring five jaggeries in somebody’s farm - not only for big millers but even for out-growers. Therefore, poaching cannot be encouraged in this industry. Let us please license these people, know where they are, what business they do and we create harmony in the industry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we had defined maybe the sizes of jaggeries, we would come up with something. However, since we have not defined it, for example, anybody can be in his house, plant his sugarcane and make his own jaggery at his home. If the minister and the chairperson are talking about Kakira and Kinyara - in fact those have already even made money. They don’t need even to be speaking -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, I don’t think we should be naming companies here. We are talking about the entire industry. Do not name any company. Let us talk about the principles.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, why I am raising it is because the minister and the chairman mentioned about those two. The proposal I would like to make is we should come - (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: I thought we should have this on record, Madam Chairperson. We are talking of the farms that some estates have found themselves facing the challenge of having these jaggery mill operators encroaching on their sugarcane because of the rudimentary technology they use. They just go and cut down the sugarcane, squeeze the juice in the night and go away.

Therefore, by the time you come up you have lost a sizeable portion of - and because they are not licensed, you cannot trace them. Therefore we need to license you to know where you operate from so that we can trace whether you are commercially viable or not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister has - (Interjection) - colleagues do not relax. That one is a thief. Even in the national park there are those who encroach on animals and we have rangers to look after them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Therefore, if he is a thief, we should make a law for a thief; that if you get somebody with a jaggery at night, shoot him on the spot. However, you cannot - (Interjection) - yes. What I would like to propose is; let us differentiate this - a person shall not establish or operate a sugar mill or plant to process by-products of sugarcane without a valid licence. We put sanctions for that one.

Then we say, “Anybody operating a jaggery, if found without a valid licence, will also be charged an extra amount of money.” Therefore I would like to move this proposal: “A person shall not establish or operate a sugar mill or a plant to process a by-product of sugarcane without a valid licence granted for the purpose by the board.” 

The sanctions for this - because this is a big one, if you are got, “A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points.” The reason for 5,000 currency points is because we are talking about big entities. Then the rest can follow in the same line.
“Notwithstanding sub-section this and this....”

Now, we go to sub-clause (4) and say a jiggery - now we are establishing a jaggery. Again say, “No person shall establish a jaggery without a valid licence granted for the purpose by the board.”
Now, if that one is found, that is now where we are putting the sanction.

“A person who contravenes sub-clause (4) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points.” 

We can say that these ones either pay one currency point - because they are small or zero but not exceeding 500 currency points.

My justification for that is to segregate big criminals from small ones.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, you are proposing the same thing for the big and small ones; you are proposing 5,000 currency points for both of them. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I have said is that the first one should not exceed 5,000 currency points. That is for the big boys. Then for the jaggery ones they do not exceed 500 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, you have changed; 500 for the small ones and 5,000 currency points for the big ones.
 
MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we are agreeable to this separation but the proposal here has already been made. We will just fit in your figures and we shall flow – (Interjections) – we are saying that the committee has already proposed the separation as you are saying. The missing part is the currency points; so can we agree on this and we proceed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: And remove the sentence of imprisonment?

MR KASULE: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as – what haven’t you agreed upon?

THE HONOURABLE MEMBERS: The currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have said that it is 5,000 for the big ones and 500 for the small ones.

MR SSENGO: Madam Chairperson, what happens if somebody does not have the money to pay the fine? You must provide for the punishment in prison.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Propose.  Prison? What about community service?

MR SSENGO: 1,000 currency points or two years. If he does not have money, do you allow him to go scot-free?
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose it is a corporate personality, what do you do?

MR SSENGO: I have never seen a law of that type, where, if you do not have the money to pay the fine, we let you go.
THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose?

MR SSENGO: That is why I am proposing two years –(Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Ordinarily, where you impose a fine, there must also be a penal sanction. We now need to strike a balance. In this case, if it relates to a jaggery mill, six months imprisonment would be appropriate or both.

Where, it relates to the mills or a plant – you know you have to give the judge some discretion because it is now constitutional; it is for the judge to determine that. When it relates to the sugar mill or plant, we can put it at two years or both. That is my humble suggestion.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of the years, I propose five years for the sugar mills - these are big people - and six months for a jaggery. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like you to differentiate the jaggery for commercial purposes and the subsistence one for the family. When you just indicate a jaggery, they will want a clan leader. Let us consider only the commercial one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there is going to be a definition for “a jaggery.”

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the head note of clause 19, the spirit of this section is about somebody operating without a licence. They are trying to put a sanction that if you operate without a licence, you have to pay a fine.

When you put prison - any other laws in practice like when Uganda Revenue Authority seizes your goods, you pay. You do not put someone in prison because of a licence. 

A thief who steals a goat and the other a chicken are all thieves. It is better the way the sanctions are drafted in the Bill because it will cure somebody. When somebody does not have a licence and they are caught, they pay a fine. Once you do so, it does not mean that I do not come up and open that business. 

We should have the principle of businesses that if you are operating without a licence, you close your shop and we take away your equipment. When Kampala Capital City Authority finds you without a licence, they close your shop until you meet the requirements. They do not arrest anybody.

Therefore, I would like to convince the Members that we go by the way the Bill was drafted because it is preventing somebody from operating without a licence. That is it.
 
MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I am in support of the proposal to do away with the issue of imprisonment because we are assuming that these millers are human beings. However, these are corporate entities. Are you going to take companies to jail?

What is necessary is to maintain the fact that we are not making a penal law. We are making a law to guide and regulate the sugar industry, which is being undertaken by companies, not individuals. You advised that we do not mention but Madhvani and Kakira are not individuals. If they fault in this regard, are you going to take them to prison?

I propose that we go with the issue of the fine and the aspect of imprisonment is completely removed. After all, there is even room for closure in case there is defaulting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to borrow something from our profession. When a lawyer practises without a licence, they close but they do not take you to prison. They take away your licence and issue you with other sanctions.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose an addition to hon. Basalirwa’s idea. Instead of having only a fine, I would propose that even the equipment should be confiscated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether you want this economy to run or collapse. We are just regulating but not destroying the industry.

Chairperson, did you propose 5,000 currency points for the big entity? 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I am not the one who proposed that; it is hon. Nandala-Mafabi who did.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, state your final proposal for the record.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that the fine for the sugar mill or plant attracts a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points and for a commercial jaggery, not exceeding 500 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR KASULE: The head note for clause 20 is: “Application for a licence to operate a mill”. The committee proposes that on this clause, we change the head note to include, “Application for a licence to operate a mill or plant.”
I think that is consequential - they have been moving together. Insert “plant” immediately after the word “mill.”  

The justification is to ensure consistency since licensing applies to mills and plants to process by-products from sugarcane.

In addition, in clause 20(1) insert the words “or plant” between the words “mill” and “shall” in line two. The justification is for consistency.

In addition, in clause 20(4), insert the words “milling or jaggery or processing of sugarcane by-products” between the words “sugar” and “is”, appearing in line three of the provision. 

The justification is for consistency since the licensing applies to sugar mills, jaggery mills and plants to process the by-products of sugarcane.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 21, we do not have to labour so much because it is talking about a typographical error. There is No.1 and No.2 on page 15. Therefore, it was for realignment - 1, 2, and 3. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The drafters will sort that one. I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you are changing numbers - because the minister could have meant 2 - Here we are changing it to read 1, 2, and 3 up to 9. Therefore, I think there is an amendment of numbering. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The draftsperson does that.

Clause 22

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 22, under the head note “Sugar mills to be a certain distance apart.” We have to be very careful with this one. The Bill reads:

”1) 	In licensing sugar mills, the Board shall ensure that there is only one mill in a zone.
    2) For avoidance of doubt, the Board shall not license more than one sugar mill in a zone.
    3) In subs-section (a), a ‘zone’ means an area of a radius of 25 kilometres measured from one mill to another. 
    4) The minister may, with approval of the Cabinet, by certain instrument, amend the specification of the zone.
    5) Section 1 does not apply to a sugar mill existing before the commencement of this Act.”

Substitute clause 22 with the following …“and that is the replacement – “…sugar mills and plants to have a nucleus estate.”

First, they have changed the head note from “sugar mills to be a certain distance apart” to a head note that reads; “sugar mills and plants have a nucleus estate.

“1) 	In licensing a sugar mill or plant, the Board shall ensure that the sugar mill or plant has a nucleus estate of not less than 2,000 hectares.
2) 	For avoidance of doubt, sub-section 1 shall not apply to jaggery mills.”

The justification is that the introduction of the requirement for sugar mills and plants to have a nucleus estate will address problems of scarcity of sugarcane, which zoning of sugar mills was intended to address. (Interjections)

Hon. Waluswaka, let us create order and understand. Let me read the justification again without hon. Waluswaka disrupting. The introduction of the requirement of the sugar mill and plants to have a nucleus estate will address problems of scarcity of sugarcane, which zoning of sugar mills was intended to address. This ultimately will enable sugar factories to financially break even and ensure sustainability. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is bordering on discrimination. I do not know whether you mean that the 2,000 hectares must be together or you can space them.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the nucleus is measured when it is in one place or aggregated plots. It may be in one district and in another district and you are free to move your cane to any mill.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, two issues arise here. First, it is not possible in the Uganda of today to get 2,000 hectares. Even Madhvani in 1924 could not to get the 2,000 hectares. 

Secondly, in whatever form you put this, you will be creating a monopoly around that area. Issues of monopoly now touch on the constitutionality of the country because you are now saying that we have made a nucleus of 2,000 hectares and no other farm can operate there. 

That means you have subjected the out-growers within that area to only sell to that one particular person. This would offend our Constitution, which prohibits creation of monopolies in whatever form. It has a constitutionality that we must not accept to be embedded in a law, which we are trying to create. 

Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that we review this requirement of the 2,000 hectares.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First, I want to thank the committee for discarding the earlier position of that clause. However, having appreciated that, we cannot dictate the scale of operation of any business in a liberalised economy. When you consider what is happening in this country today, in my constituency alone, I am dealing with nearly two issues of land wrangling every week because of scarcity of land.

Secondly, the productivity of any crop is not determined by the size of the garden in this modern economy. There are other factors like irrigation, modern crop science and all that. Therefore, dictating this kind of acreage is not fair in any way. We should leave the millers to operate in a free enterprise economy where the forces of demand and supply dictate the business. We propose to delete this amendment in its entirety.

MS ASINDE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the chairperson of the committee that one, we have some plants that do not have estates. For example GM Sugar Uganda Limited is operating well.

Secondly, this thing of needing bigger land to put a plant – the technology that was there during Madhvani’s time is not the one of today. A person can put an industry in just one room because the technology has changed. Therefore, I am also in support of the people who are proposing to delete this clause. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are running a liberalised economy and we comprehensively discussed this matter the other day. The issue of a nucleus estate should be preferable but not mandatory. Otherwise, we will be offending the Constitution.

We should also learn from the coffee industry; our farmers get together in cooperatives. Those who have coffee factories do not necessarily have nucleus estates. I do not know why we are doing it for the sugar. We should either delete the whole of this section or say that the nucleus estate is preferable, if the factory to be licensed has one. Otherwise, the better alternative is to delete clause 22.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I hope the business people can have sense to know that if you have a mill, you must have supply.

Please, join me in welcoming leaders from Kabale Municipality represented by hon. Andrew Baryayanga and hon. Catheline Ndamira. They are here to observe the proceedings. (Applause)  

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I feel that the amendment being proposed by the committee, as read by the chairperson, is just trying to put zoning in a different language. They are just trying to hide the aspect of zoning in a different way because that issue of the nucleus estate – 2,000 hectares - 

The chairperson has also said that it does not necessarily mean that it should be in one place. Then, what is the meaning of nucleus? It does not make sense to me. They are trying to hide the aspect of zoning. So, I propose, like hon. Kamateeka, that we delete that clause 22. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any contrary position on that? 

MR KASULE: Has the minister run away from me? Honourable members, I read two proposals; the one in the Bill and what the committee considered. The information I have is that honourable members – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 2,000 hectares is 5,000 acres. When you are talking of radius, for you who did mathematics, it is 25 x 25 kilometres. If you convert this very well, it is about 7,500 acres. They are trying to move from 7,500 acres to 5,000 acres indirectly – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the point of order? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The point of order I am trying to raise is; is the chairman in order to come and say that he is looking for the minister, when we have already proposed deletion and this Bill is now a Bill for Parliament? Is he in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the Bill has a mover, who is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

MR WERIKHE: Before we actually decide, I wish to give information. If you are going to be licensed, you must have some minimum amount of land, where you are going to produce seeds because you will be supplying them to the out-growers. You will actually be giving out these cane seeds to the out-growers, who will help you to increase the volume of the supply of the raw materials. 

Two, you must also be able to carry out some minimum research into what is happening around your – because you cannot be licensed in a vacuum. You must have some basis, whether it is one acre or two, you must have some base. Otherwise, how can you have a mill worth the name of a commercial entity, without some minimum amount of land? We are not saying 2,000 but at least, we need to debate and come to some minimum amount of –(Interruption) 

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would have loved the minister to look at the history of the sugar industry in this country. For the record, whatever we do here in the sugar industry has an Indian history. I would like to inform the honourable minister that in 1920, a company known as Vithaldas Haridas & Company owned by the Madhvani Group only acquired 324 hectares and the colonial Government then licensed this factory.

In India today, where I have frequented more than 20 times since 1996, even a factory can be licensed in acreage because of what you are proposing under clause 26, which talks about the establishment of a National Sugar Research Institute. The purpose of any research institute is to enhance productivity and that is what we should be looking at. 

Therefore, all in all, clause 22 has no merit and it should be deleted. 

MR KASUMBA: Madam Chairperson, during plenary last Thursday, we had 56 Members opposing clause 22 on the zoning. The honourable minister and the chairman of the committee are sugar-coating the same and trying to invite this House to support them. Once it is Chloroquine, however much you sugar-coat it, it will remain Chloroquine. 

The honourable minister is trying to convince us – I know all business people have some kind of business connotation and no one goes into business without a feasibility study. No one goes into business without knowing where to get his source of raw materials from. Therefore, if one is to acquire a licence, it is upon that person to reveal or establish where to get his source of raw materials –(Interruption) 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give the colleague is that the very Minister in charge of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has licensed a new cement factory in Tororo and it now has three factories of cement in a radius of one kilometre. The very factories do not have limestone but get it from Karamoja. Why are they targeting sugarcane? This is a genesis and if the minister does not withdraw, the chaos of age limit Bill might come here. I thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are doing all these to empower the out-growers. For example, in Amuru District, it does not warrant somebody to have more than 10,000 acres of land. What we are saying is that we can give about two or three acres of land and you set up your factory. Let the out-growers be empowered and supply your industries.

MR KASUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to request this House that we delete clause 22 as proposed. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We cannot stop those who want to establish a sugar mill from acquiring land. However, the acquisition of land must be agreed upon with the people around. If the sugar miller wants to acquire land, he can acquire from the people who own it. The size will depend on what the people will give him or her.

We cannot say as Government, “Let us give this miller so many acres,” because we would like to leave the out-growers to grow and we also need competition. If we have got more mills around, they will sell at a fair price. At the moment, sugarcane is like tobacco, which we were running away from in West Nile because they were buying from us at a peanut price. 

If there is competition, we shall be able to sell at a higher price and even benefit our people. We do not want monopoly by few people. We should, therefore, delete that clause. Thank you very much.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we enact this law, we are not re-inventing the wheel. The sugar industry has been operating in Uganda and we are just putting a law to make life better for the Ugandans. My good minister and the chairperson, those investors who come to establish sugar factories are not farmers. They have their money and know what it means to do business. 

When we begin to say 2,000 hectares moving to 7,000 acres, if you are told to calculate how long it takes to cultivate 7,000 acres, that may take us three years. Sugarcane takes another two years to mature. Therefore, in five years, the investor will still be thinking and planning on how to make money in Uganda.

If we have the spirit of wooing more investors to come to Uganda, we should not put strict measures and conditions that are too tough for them. The minister said somebody must have some land to begin with; definitely, there is land where he is going to establish the factory.

In our areas, people have their land. The moment they know that this is viable, they will begin to cultivate their land and by the time the sugar factory is set up, sugarcane will be available for crushing. Indirectly, the minister should cease from deceiving us here in Parliament that he has removed the word “zoning” when he has used another terminology. (Interruption) 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, is my colleague in order to say that the minister is the one who came UP with a proposal of 2,000 hectares? It is in the report of the committee. It is not the minister. Is he in order to impute improper motives on the minister who has not proposed the 2,000 hectares? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have two issues before I propose. When you talk about sugar, sugar remains sugar as we all know. We should not waste time talking about how many kilometres and acres. What we need to do is for us to take a decision - not to waste our time in this type of arrangement; we shall not move forward. 

For example, in South Korea, there are very many factories but they do not have raw materials; they just import them.

Why do we waste time talking about the simple things that do not matter? In my view, we should not waste time on clause 22 but delete it right away and we proceed. That is one way we will sort out some of these matters. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are not legislating in a vacuum. Are you saying that we should import canes really to this country? We are looking at import substitution and the farmers having a market. Therefore, that idea of importing sugarcane to be produced here –

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am not saying that we should entirely import sugarcane. I am saying that if they want, they can import. At the same time, we have farmers here –

THE CHAIRPEROSON: Honourable member, our responsibility as leaders is to ensure that our farmers have a market. Therefore, do not talk about importing.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make some clarification. Before, we delete clause 22, there are two proposals. The first one was by the minister, with a policy. This law was empowering the policy. Secondly, the committee, in their wisdom, said at least let a mill – because we are not legislating about out-growers but the mills.

How should mills be licensed by the Board? The committee said at least, let them have a minimum of a nucleus farm but 2,000 hectares is too much. The committee of the whole House can insist and say may be 500 at least to have -(Members rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order. Honourable members, the chairperson is on the Floor. Please, take your seats.

MR KASULE: We can have a minimum such that when you are going to be licensed, you must have a place where you are going to operate known and you must have a location and premise. You must have a small piece of land – 

    1. Where you can grow the seed canes, which you give to the out-growers.
    2.  Where you do research for different varieties.
    3. Where you have a fall-back position just in case the out-growers have disappointed you. 

I beg to move.      

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to begin by making a proposal that we delete clause 22. I 

The justification is that the intention of the framers of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda was that Uganda should run a liberalised economy, having carefully looked into the disadvantages of running a monopoly and an oligopoly.

Article 40(2) of the Constitution is very clear. It is to the effect that every person in Uganda has the right to practise his or her profession and to carry out any lawful occupation, trade or business. 

By enacting a law that will restrict any person in Uganda to establish a business in a given place, it is tantamount to violating and offending this provision.

It is also fair to the Ugandans who are into the business of growing sugarcane that they are left with the freedom to decide to whom they sell their sugarcane. They should be given an opportunity to participate clearly in their economy by not limiting them.

It is not true as it is alleged by the chair that the operators of the mills should have land where they should breed sugarcane to supply to the out-growers.

I come from a sub-region that grows sugarcane. 90 per cent of the out-growers buy the seed canes with their own money; they are not free. This is the only industry that has been marginalised. Whereas they support the coffee growers, the maize growers, those who are into cattle rearing with Government support, those that are into the business of growing sugarcane are not given any support. Why should we marginalise them? I propose that we delete the entire clause. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also concur with the previous speakers who are proposing deletion of clause 22. I can never legislate against Ugandans. This proposal is legislation against the citizens of Uganda. We must create competition. 

Once you have many factories around, it means the farmers are going to ask for a price that is right for them. But when you gazette a big area, that means that the factory can choose how much to give the farmers. You need to create competition so that the citizens can get a good deal. 

It is high time we looked at the agriculturalist. It is high time they started gaining from their produce. People have stopped farming because they do not gain. They would rather buy produce than farm. We need to encourage farming. We need to encourage the farmers to grow more sugarcane and in the long run, we have more factories hence creating more jobs for Ugandans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposals to delete this clause?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, I informed the House that the Bill we are considering was premised on policy. 

For us as a ministry, in the policy, we had an idea of at least having a minimum amount of land. We are not saying 2,000 hectares because that was proposed by the committee. We must have somewhere to operate, even if it is half an acre. The policy stipulates 500 but it is up to the House to come up with a proposal of the minimum amount of space before you get the licence. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we need to take a decision. There are a few proposals: One of 2,000 hectares and one of reduced hectares. (Interjections) Let us go step by step. I would like to put the question to the proposal by the committee of the 2,000 hectares. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now want to put the question to the proposal for reduced acreage. (Interjections)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Chairperson, I know I support the local people but we also have to be mindful of the factories. I am going to speak using the two experiences I have had. I have served as a Minister of State for Industry - I know what goes on.

I would like to give an example. You have a sugar factory supporting the out-growers with the seed cane, the fertilisers and some even take loans. But even those that do not take loans – and then when the canes are maturing, somebody all of a sudden comes and sets up a factory just in the neighbourhood. These farmers who have initially got incentives from factory X, because they want to avoid paying, they rush and sell their sugarcane to the other factory. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, allow the minister to be protected. This place is for speaking. You may not like what she is saying but listen.

MS NAMUYANGU: Supposing the out-growers deny the first factory cane - I wanted us to have a win-win position where we protect the out-growers but also protect the factories. 

You cannot have a sugar factory without a nucleus farm. (Interjections) Colleagues, it may reduce but we need it. I would like to propose.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I am proposing that as enshrined in the national policy, let us at least provide for a minimum of 500 hectares before a mill is licensed to proceed. (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why do you want a miller without any responsibility? (Interjections)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Uganda is a liberalised economy. Uganda has a problem of land fragmentation and land scarcity. Today, it is difficult in some regions to even get ten acres of land that are neighbouring each other.

It should not be Parliament to be putting trade barriers when we are promoting trade for people to establish and create job opportunities in this country. We had a similar problem, by the way, in the tourism sector. Queen Elizabeth National Park and Murchison Falls National Park were zoned and one investor was allowed to establish accommodation facilities in those national parks. We have not yet recovered from that shock, even when Parliament repealed that zoning law on those national parks.

It should not be us again to repeat the same mistake in another sector. We are setting a bad precedent. Tomorrow, the coffee people will come and say they also want zoning. The tea people will come and say they want zoning. Even the milk people will demand for zoning. Let us not set a bad precedent.

Clause 22 comes with a lot of impediments and is a barrier to free trade in this country. Therefore, I propose that we delete it. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 22, deleted.

Clause 23

MR KASULE: Honourable members, we have essentially removed one of the objectives of this Bill - (laughter) – and one of the objectives of the policy and the preceding legislation shall be as empty as this law is concerned. This is an arena for speaking –(Interjections)– Please, let us move forward.

On clause 23, Madam Chairperson, the committee has proposed to substitute for the word “notify” appearing in –(Interjections) Clause 23? I start from the head note. It is about modification of a mill.

It is clause 23(1). Redraft sub-clause (1) to read as follows - I am sorry I am reading ahead yet I am supposed to start at the head note. 

    1. The head note

Insert the words “or plants” immediately after the word “mill” in the head note. I think it has been consistent. Where there is the “mill”, there is also a “plant.”

    2. Clause 23(1). Redraft sub-clause (1) to read as follows; 

“A holder of a licence in respect of a sugar mill, jaggery mill or plant shall not modify the sugar mill, jaggery mill or plant without approval by the Board."
The justification is that the insertion of the words “jaggery mill” and “plant” is consequential. Secondly, the requirement for seeking approval before modification is to ensure that it is done in accordance with this Act.

    3. On Clause 23(3), substitute for the word “notify” appearing in line one, the words “seek approval of”. 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR KASULE: Clause 24 is under the head note of “sugar industry agreements”.

Clause 24 (1), insert the word “out-growers” between the word “growers” and “millers” appearing in line two of the provision. 

The justification is to cater for out-growers as key parties in the sugar industry.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I propose to insert a new sub-clause after clause 24 to read: “An out-grower who sells or otherwise disposes of his or her sugarcane, contrary to his or her duties under the contract to supply sugarcane commits an offence.”

    1. “A miller who buys or otherwise accesses sugarcane from an out-grower other than the one contracted to that miller commits an offence.”

    2. “A person who commits an offence under this section is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 250 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

Here, we would like to ensure that there is order. Once you have been contracted to provide cane to a particular miller - because there is an investment into your sugarcane growing - you should not just be free to sell it. At least this is how we can actually regulate so that once you sign an agreement, you live up to the contractual obligations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you going to police the contract? If I am in breach, I am in breach. Why should it be the work of the Board? I have a contract and I have breached it; why is it the business of the Board?

MR MUGOYA: In addition to what you have just stated, Madam Chairperson, a breach of an agreement does not give rise to criminal liability. That is the position of the law. Unless we amend the law, you cannot criminalise breach of a contract. Therefore, the proposals are good to hear but they are untenable under the provisions of our laws. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had proposals from the chairperson. I put the question that Clause 24 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, under the head note of “sugar pricing”, the committee proposes to insert the word “grower” between the words “out-grower” and “shall” appearing in line one. The justification is to ensure that the pricing formula for sugarcane applies to growers.

In clause 25(3), insert the words “or grower” between the words “out-grower” and “shall” appearing in line one. 
The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with clause 25 about the determination of the price. When the Sugar Policy was put in place in 2010, by that time, the product which was looked at out of sugarcane was purely sugar and it did not take into consideration the by-products, which are coming out now. This formula will disadvantage the out-growers because it was determined according to sugar as the only product out of sugarcane. I propose that a new formula be enacted here -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The formula is in the schedule. Can we look at it later?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are again bringing back pricing. Unless you are going to state that from now onwards, we are setting prices for cotton, coffee and fuel, we cannot apply pricing on only sugar. I have looked at the formula -

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We are trying to do the impossible. When I am doing business, you cannot determine my cost input. Someone can get capital to use at a cheaper price and he makes a product cheaply.

You cannot fix a price on a product I am going to use because you are not the dealer in that business. There are some people who get money at a cheaper cost and when they produce a product, they sell it cheaply. 

Whereas some get it at a higher cost; unless Government makes special intervention of giving out capital to set up businesses and determine the prices. That is why there is no fixed price in the fuel industry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to thank hon. Kakooza for the information. We moved away from setting prices a long time ago. Therefore, even the price of sugarcane should not be set; unless this Board is being put in place to work like the Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board and Produce Marketing Board. I would like to propose that part 4 for sugar pricing be deleted.

MR OTHIENO: The purpose of clause 25 is to bring in price control in the industry. Price control does not work in a liberalised economy. It is the forces of demand and supply that determine the price of an item. 

What killed the cotton industry was price control; the Government set prices, which were not favourable to farmers and they abandoned cotton growing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR OTHIENO: Either we say that the prices should be determined by forces of demand and supply and anything short of that, I propose we delete.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, there are Members in this Parliament who went out there to the out-growers and millers and the information we have is that this formula is agreeable to the out-growers. 

It puts the out-grower at the centre because these millers are very powerful; they can sit in one room and decide to cut the price and yet, the out-grower has put in a lot to grow this cane. They put in money to till the land, spent nine months and they will say that a tonne is Shs 10,000; this formula will help the out-growers not to be under-priced. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For the time I have been in this Parliament, I have never seen us legislating prices in any law. If they are to come, they must be in statutory instrument or in regulation. You cannot set a price in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this is your Bill. What do you say?

MR KASULE: In the policy, they say that sugarcane pricing was based in the formula and subsequently, there were disagreements and questions of rationality in the formula.

The sugarcane associations have contentions but this formula will help the out-growers against the strong millers who may sit in one room and cut the price. 

It is putting into consideration the cost of production by the out-grower and it will be negotiated by the out-growers, the Board and the millers and shall be adjusted on an annual basis.

There have been times of drought in our country and the out-growers have sugarcane hit and for them to have capital to at least grow sugarcane again, they must be paid the minimum and this formula puts -

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like the chairperson to clarify on this. Article 237 is very clear that land belongs to the citizens.

I would have expected for you to bring in the component of the value of the land, which the out-growers voluntarily give to the millers, saying that “This is our land and we shall grow the cane.”

I also know that the chairperson has kept on referring to the policy, which is going to be guided more by this law that we are going to enact.  Why are you making the policy to be bigger than the Act, which we are trying to put in place? What we are doing now is going to be better for the out-grower who is the owner of the land. Therefore, can you tell us in this formula where the out-growers, if I am providing 10 acres of my land to grow the cane and in the formula I am not there, what is it that you are talking about?

MS KAMATEEKA: I feel the pain of the chairperson and I do agree with Hon. Komuhangi but it may be necessary for us to protect the out growers in this industry by setting a minimum standard but that is all that it can be. However, if we say this formula will be used as a minimum standard for setting the minimum prices, we must leave room for the out-growers to negotiate for better prices.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to remind you that in the last several months, we have been on this Floor complaining about the price of maize. – Yes, on behalf of the farmers. Therefore, let us think.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, this formula is not got out of the blue. It is not a Ugandan formula. It is a global cane payment practice, the World Bank and African Development Bank researched on it and it has helped many countries sustain and mediate between the out-growers and the millers.

Honourable members, when we go forward, we shall find out that this formula entails the recovery rate of sugar in the cane. Secondly, when you take the cane to the miller and the man undercuts your price, you go back to the Board and say you have been underpaid.  (Interjections)- I would have expected hon. Mafabi to help me here because he is the one in the cooperatives. They are the ones who are helping farmers in coffee –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Chairperson has asked me to help him. Madam Chairperson, I would like to help the Chairperson of the committee. The formula is say price of sugar cane is equal to C x R x 40 percent.(Interjections) Yes, that is the price. It is there in the schedule.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Let us agree on the principle first.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the one he wants me to help him with is used world over. My brother there did some economics. Forces of supply and demand for sugar will determine the prices. I can tell you, if you implement this formula, the farmers are going to be at a high disadvantage because, if I signed an agreement with you and we agree on the price, you will have nowhere to go.

If I have signed an agreement of supplying you sugar canes, I will come and say, “Sir, according to the prices out there, you should not pay me this Shs 1000. Pay me Shs 1500” but that would be rejected because the formula is already in the law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we stand over this until we reach the formula in the schedule. Let us go to clause 26.

Clause 26

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on “establishment of national sugar research”, insert the word “research” between the words “agricultural and Act” appearing in line two and thus to ensure the citation of the National Agricultural Research Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30
MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on regulations in clause 30 (1), insert the words “in consultation with the Board” between the words “may” and “buy” appearing in that line to cater for the involvement of the Board in formulation of statutory instruments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 32 is about the transition provisions. Substitute for clause 32 with the following- 

    1) “A person who immediately before the commencement of this Act is operating a sugar mill or plant without the required nucleus estate, shall establish it within the three years.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. It is no longer relevant.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, that said, the original transition reads:

    1. A person who immediately before the commencement of this Act and is operating a lawful sugar factory or jaggery mill shall continue to operate such a mill or plant in accordance with this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, you know this relates to clause 22, which is no longer there. Therefore -

MR KASULE: Are they all related to clause 22? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR KASULE: Okay. Madam Chairperson, what I propose is that I read through then you propose. 

"1) A person who immediately before the commencement of this Act and is operating a lawful sugar factory or jaggery mill shall continue to operate such a mill or plant in accordance with this Act.

    2.  12 months after the commencement of this Act, the Board shall inspect all sugar mills and jaggery mills existing before the commencement of this Act to ascertain whether such mills or jaggery mills are complying with this Act.
    3. Where after inspection, under section 2, the Board determines that the sugar mill or jaggery mill comply with this Act, shall issue to that sugar mill or jaggery mill with relevant license under this Act.
    4. Sugar mill or jaggery mill existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall not be denied a license under this Act on the sole basis that there is more than Sugar mill or jaggery mill in a particular zone.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I think you may want to retain (2) and (3). Those are relevant. We do away with i and iv.

MR KASULE: I agree, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we shall then delete 32(1) and 32(4). I, therefore, put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1

MR KASULE: Paragraph 1 of schedule 2 - meeting of the Board-

THE CHAIRPERSONPERSON: No. Do you have any change on schedule 1?

MR KASULE: No.

THE CHAIRPERSONPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, meetings of the Board. Substitute for the word “executive director” with the word “Chairperson.” 
The justification is that the chairperson is the one to convene meetings of the Board and not the executive director.

In paragraph 5, minutes of proceedings sub paragraph (1); Substitute the word “executive director” appearing in line three and four with the word “chairperson” to correct the procedural error since signing of minutes is a preserve of the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that schedule 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the formula for the price of cane shall equal to C x R x D where C is the weight in tonnes of the sugar cane, R is the rudiment that is tonnes of sugar made per every 100 tonnes of sugarcane and D is the percentage to be negotiated by the concerned parties and are decided by the Board and the minimum shall be 50 per cent.

The justification is that the inclusion of D in the sugarcane price formula is for clarity and consistence with the explanation of the formula given in the Bill and the increase of the percentage to be negotiated by concerned parties to 50 per cent is to cater for the sugarcane by-products and price fluctuations.

That is where somebody was saying when we sell our cane to these mills, they get more product than sugar. These are such as electricity, ethanol and many other by-products. Therefore, to help this farmer to at least benefit in the other processes apart from sugar, we have a formula that gives them the minimum price.

We have put the Board in place to sit with the out-growers because they also sit on the Board to make sure those out-growers in the area including independent growers without contracts with these mills; when they take their cane to the mills, they have a scientific formula to determine the price and so they will not be cheated.

In times of bumper, you might find that there is an area, which has grown cane beyond the demand of the mills in the area and the mills will want to take advantage of the bumper harvest in the area. Cane has a period, once it grows and reaches 18 months, it must be harvested. 

Therefore, for you to harvest and then have another round of growing cane in the area, you must go to the mill and the price is negotiated between the out growers and the millers for you not to be cheated.

This will create harmony in the industry where poaching for sugarcane or cane is rampant and where millers may refuse to buy your cane due to over pricing or under-pricing.

Therefore, please, honourable members, I would beg that this formula was – yesterday, I was helped by hon. Nauwat who was with the committee in the field and it seemed fair and maybe, she can give us the basis on which the out-growers agreed with the proposal. I beg to move.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to speak as a person who has personally shared with the out-growers. One of the reasons that have been generating a lot of tension between the out- growers and the millers is that they have been bargaining from a disadvantaged position. It is against that background that they recommended and even submitted in their memorandum the basis for pricing. They requested that that formula will give them the basic minimum from which they will bargain for higher prices. That formula is based on the consideration of other products from sugar including ethanol power and whatever the millers will generate as income from those other products.

If we do not bargain for them for the minimum as Parliament, they may never be in position to bargain for themselves because what has been happening; there has been deliberate steps taken by the millers to bring the prices of the cane lower and if we do not entrench it within the law, they may be in a disadvantaged position and may not get the best out of the industry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Nauwat, the theme in this House has been empowering the out-growers. Let us sustain it.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, madam Chairperson. When we interacted with the out-growers, they were concerned by that formula and they said the millers are the ones benefiting; that from the cane they sell to the millers, the millers get bio-gas, molasses, carbon dioxide and ethanol. So, they said that formula was unfair.

Then we asked them what they would propose. They said that ratio of 40 per cent should be increased to 50 per cent. That is why in the committee report, on page 14, “Further, it is the considered position of the committee that the minimum sharing ratio in the returns be revised to 50 per cent for fairness.” Therefore, that is what the farmers proposed. We captured it in the report.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, when it comes to formulas, I have some knowledge. May I know from the committee chairman; on average, the 100 tonnes of sugarcane, how many kilogrammes does it produce? When you just say D or whatever, we do not know the production. 

At the end of the day, Madam Chairperson, I know our farmers will be happy with the 50 per cent formula when you multiply. Can the minister and the chairman give us the mathematics with the figures and we insert here and see the tonnes? You will see that our people are going to be marginalised; moreover the minister has not put a formula for milk and cement. Therefore, let him bring the formula here and we insert it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The formula is here. The “C” is weight in tonnes of sugarcane.

MR WALUSWAKA: Let us calculate. You will see that our farmers are going to be cheated. Honourable minister, bring the parameters here.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the mathematics?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at this formula, I do not have a problem with having a minimum price for our farmers. When I interacted with some of these out-growers, they complained about the prices they are given. Ideally, it is just that they are given the price that, “We shall buy your sugarcane at this price.”

There is no problem when you look at the “C” in the formula, which is the weight of the cane per tonne. Then “D”, which is 40 per cent that the committee has recommended to be increased to 50 per cent has no problem also. 

The confusion is in “R” because the tonnes of sugar made per every 100 tonnes of sugarcane depend on the technology, which every mill uses. These mills might be using different technologies that may give different outcomes. For example, out of 100 tonnes, one may get around 200 tonnes. The other may also use the same amount of cane and get like 300 tonnes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?
 
MR ONZIMA: This one may not give us a clear picture. Looking at the other products, we could clear this. We cannot determine this in the policy; therefore, I propose that we delete it since –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the farmers to go back where they were?

MR ONZIMA: Since we have a body that is supposed to negotiate on behalf of the millers and the out- growers, I think they can use it to determine prices. When you look at the production itself as somebody had said, it might not be static. It may depend on conditions on the ground, which may be determined by the outcome.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, 1000 kilograms is a 1000 kilogrammes.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose a small adjustment to the schedule. There should be a minimum price for sugarcane in the wording. Thank you.

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with you that we must be able to empower our farmers. I would like to state that in determining cost of production, there is also labour cost. We have not been able to fix a price for labour.

Last time, I submitted that we have people who have worked in these plantations for a long time and they have never benefited. Now, you are moving to say that this should be the minimum we pay for the cane and production and yet, you are not fixing a minimum wage for those who are working there. I do not know how that will be realised. 

I would like the committee chairperson to tell us; how are you going to provide for people who work in the mills? Which cost will then lead to cost of production for us to say we can now pay this? Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at the formula, I feel it is somehow confusing since we have the out-growers who have their association who can bargain and negotiate for the prices. Why not allow them to bargain for the good price than giving the formula to someone who is deep in Amuru? I do not think the person will ever understand. Let us allow the out-growers have their associations and negotiate for good prices.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why have they failed to negotiate? 

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, there are better tools to deal with price volatility in the market. I would expect the chairperson to borrow from operations of commodity exchanges. 

Otherwise, to say that you are going to fix price and yet, there are inflationary measures – the formula attempts to fix the minimum, which may not work.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should be focused on what we want to do for these out -growers. Let us be clear.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I request us to be practical for just a second. I have been calculating some few things here and we are bound to create discrimination. 

We need the reserve price; the minimum price. My worry is that when you take a 100 tonnes, your price will be different from somebody who will take 10 tonnes and that one who will take five according to this formula. The moment we have it out of 100, it means that somebody who has 80 out of 100 is more advantaged than somebody who has five out of 100. This is what this formula is suggesting by price –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kibalya, “C” is the weight of sugar. “R” is tonnes of sugar out of every 100 and so, it can be strengthened.

MR KIBALYA: It is out of every 100. I was giving a simple example. If somebody says, maybe, you have taken 30 tonnes and your “R” has maybe 20 out of 100; the other person has 50, which is a constant while another goes with 50, which is the “C” and the other 80 out of 100 and the constant –

THE CHAIRPERSON: They cannot be the same.

MR KIBALYA: The price will be different.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course, it will be different. 30 tonnes cannot be the same as 20 or 50.

MR KIBALYA: That is what has been happening in the sugar industry. A tonne of sugar has a constant price whether you take 10 tonnes or 100; they just multiply by your quantity. Here, if I take 100 tonnes, my price will be very different from somebody who will take five tonnes, according to this formula.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If the 120 has been satisfactory, why are the out-growers out there complaining? If they are happy, they should not complain.

MR KIBALYA: They could not be happy but maybe we could come back with a formula that gives a constant price.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the wheat farmer, Mr Mangusho.

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The issue is that the complaints from the farmers have been there because of those formulae. These current prices are not created by the formulae. The price of 120 that hon. Kibalya is talking about is not as a result of the formula. 

I also believe that as a consequence of not controlling the production line, we should also not control the pricing end. The complaints arise from this formula rather than the negotiations.
The negotiations have been at the table of the formula and nothing else. Thank you.

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Talking to these people that have been in the sugar industry for a long time, there seems to be a danger of not having the kind of pricing that has caused the complaint. Why are they complaining?

Personally, I would not have a problem with this formula, if we add the word “minimum” before the word “price”- that the minimum price would be that. This way, we let the forces of supply and demand play along with giving of out-growers a safety net below which they cannot go. I beg to submit.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am trying to reflect how OPEC was created. It was almost similar to this question of sugarcane out- growers vis-a-vis the factories. 
Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that let us have the out-growers, put on a Board and that Board determines the price and what to sell so that we can also protect the out-growers to have one voice and one price so that they are not exploited.  I rest my case. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the basis of their proposal? What is the basis of the Board’s proposal?

MR MBABAALI: That would be the one to determine the formula-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Using what formula?

MR MBABAALI: If you go with this formula, it is not for out-growers. Therefore, the out-growers will come out with their own formula so that they determine the price, which will not be constant every time; it will be subject to variation.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, why the Government all the time has been avoiding fixing prices is because of the economic environment. Whatever you want to do in Uganda today will depend on the economic environment and the cost of input.

I am in dairy industry but today, we are producing milk at Shs 400 and selling it at Shs 600. However, when it is a dry season, we sell at Shs 1500. Those people who have made groups have a bargaining power to negotiate for the price to be constant.

Where there is fluctuation of prices in an economy, you cannot fix the prices. It will be very difficult for you to determine. For instance, a dollar is changing today; those who bought goods two weeks ago, when the exchange rate was at Shs 3780 are different from those who bought today when the dollar is at Shs 3720. They cannot sell at the same price.

Why do you try to put in a law a formula that cannot be practically possible? By the way, we have been conscripted in other sectors whereby you go in - what they are doing- these business people lend you money in advance, you produce, they buy your garden. When the prices go high, they tell you, no, we gave you our money in advance we cannot sell you the product.

This is what this formula is trying to do to out- growers.  Leave some room - when the market goes up, if I have my group, I sell at the highest possible price. If it falls down, then I come down. However, the moment you put that law, even out-growers would be conscripted because they would be using the money of this business people who lent it to them in advance. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Honourable members, I think we need to understand the political economy of sugar cane pricing the world over. Immediately after World War II, there was a need to stimulate all the sectors in the global economy. That was the reason	in India in 1961, they encouraged farmers to produce a lot of sugar cane. This resulted into surplus production. 

Therefore, to guard against the middlemen, who were exploiting the sugar cane growers, they had to set a minimum standard. So, one of the benefits of sugar cane pricing is to ensure that a farmer in times of excess production or surplus production is protected- that is a benefit number one for this tool of pricing.

Secondly, each industry is regulated differently no matter whether you are living in a global economy. What you have to understand is that sugar cane pricing is one of the best practices in the world. I will give you an example; a country like Australia, the Australian sugar industry basically does not produce sugar. What they do, because of this formula, it has encouraged exportation of raw sugar cane because you do not make a loss in times of excess production. (Interjections) Let me finish because I am giving you literature, which is available even on your iPad. Yes. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, what we need to do, let us look at this formula critically. Is the 40 per cent relevant or not? Will it help our peasants? Otherwise, we cannot make a law, which is not in consonance with the best international standards. Therefore, I am in support of sugar cane pricing.

MR BWINO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to help colleagues demystify this formula because apparently, our argument is based on what R is. R is the amount of sugar in one cane. Young sugar cane has less content quantity of sugar; it has more water than the sugar. Old cane has more sugar content than the young one. This means that the formula ensures quality. If a grower supplies young cane, then that attracts a lower price and if –(Interjections)– Let me finish mine. 

So, I am explaining that it simply means the sugar content in a cane.  If the sugar content is low, then the price should be low. If the sugar content is high then the price should be high. 

The sugar content of cane is determined by measuring a number of times the amount of sugar is got from a certain quantity of cane. That is why they put 100 tonnes. Therefore, R determines the quality of the cane supplied so that you do not just supply any type of cane and expect the same price. 

Then (d) is a negotiated factor. What we are proposing is just a minimum -  the starting point. We are saying that the starting point should be 50 per cent but the farm associations can negotiate for 60 or 70 per cent. Therefore, this formula is a tool to guide the farmer groups, as they negotiate the price.

MR KUMAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have laboured on this subject for quite some time. We stood over clause 25, which was bringing out the issue of the formula. As a Parliament, we are trying to avoid putting across the price of sugar, like we have actually shied away from pricing other commodities in the country.

I am also made to know that this formula is an international practise, which is acceptable in the sugar industry. If we must adopt the international practise, I think we would put it that this formula be just the minimum of a negotiation, should be given to the sugar farmers. If it is an international practise, we cannot avoid it. We are bound by this practise. That is what I have to say. Thank you.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the industry practice is that you do not just wake up, cut your cane and take it to the mill, just like you are selling beans. You must sit with the miller or the miller sends somebody to your farm, first of all, to ascertain whether the cane is mature. 

When you deliver your cane to the factory, it is tested scientifically, when it is still in the lorry such that they know the rate of the content – what they call the regiment. 

Secondly, the Board is composed of millers and out-growers; so, they sit and help the out-grower to supply at least at the bare minimum - they define the price. Also, since the millers have more by-products in this sugar, they put in the formula -a value- that will help the farmer benefit from the by-products that the sugarcane process – including ethanol, biogas and everything else – (Interruption) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Chairperson, for giving way. I think there is no harm in having a formula that regulates the buying and selling of sugarcane because after all, it is willing seller and willing buyer. 

However, one challenge is that we shall apply that formula today and then the farmers will enter in agreement with the millers over a certain agreeable price - but it might take this miller six months or one year to pay the farmer. How are we going to determine the future value of that money and that agreement that has been entered into at that particular moment using that formula? Is there a way that the minister can come up with regulations?

I would like to propose that that formula be part of the regulations that the minister shall make. This will guide the Board in determining the prices of sugar to avoid a scenario where people will enter into a contract and then in future, the money loses value. Even in the Central Bank, this applies. Today, you may go to the bank, borrow a loan at 9 per cent, however, the Central Bank may change and say that they have increased the interest rate to 11 per cent and that will also apply to the subsisting loans. It is the same practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the regulations flow from the Act; so, they must come from the Act. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We hear the chairman of the committee and the minister loud and clear. According to the formula and what the chairman is saying, R is not constant. It will be determined by the maturity of the canes, which can only be verified by those ones that have received the sugar and crushed it. This means that the supplier has no authority, right or knowledge over which R is going to be. It may be 20, 5 or 4. It is at the discretion of the miller and the buyer to say that this cane was at a certain level. Therefore, R is 4 or 9. What can we do now to protect the supplier using that R? 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform hon. Mugoya on that formula that he says the industry agrees with.  We are looking at the different land tenure systems. In some of the economies he is talking about, the ownership of land is different from the one that subsists here in Uganda. Therefore, when they are putting the formula to the out-growers, they might simply be there as tenants. Though, here we are talking about out-growers, who are even the owners of the land. 

I have been asking what would protect the out-grower, for example, in this context.  Here, we have an out-grower growing 50 acres of cane and we are telling him that we are only going to consider C and R. What about the size and the acreage of my land? Assuming I was renting it, how much would we hire it for? 

When we put the price for cane in this Act - but we are also saying the producer of the cane is the same consumer of the sugar. We are putting the price for the cane but we are not regulating the price for the sugar, which the producer has a significant hand in. Therefore, the formula for the price of the cane - if it favours the producer, then we also protect the consumer – 

Madam Chairperson, that is why we are saying that it would be fair for this not to be reflected in the Act. This can be done by the technical people - the executive director, his team and the Board. They can say, “Here is the law and we should define it.” 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, the reason the minister is attempting to protect the farmers is because there is an arrangement between the millers and the farmers. The millers are giving the farmers some inputs to grow the sugarcane.  

Therefore, there needs to be an arrangement that we are sure that when it comes to negotiating the price of the canes, at least the farmers are protected. That is why there is an attempt to have a minimum pricing. If the farmers were on their own - I grow my sugarcane and wait for the miller to come and buy them, then there would not be any reason we want to enter into this arrangement.

What hon. Henry Kibalya was saying that why should somebody who supplies 50 tonnes gets less than somebody who supplies 100 tonnes - it is true and it should be so because the price we are talking about is the price of canes. If I supply two lorries of canes, I should get more than the person who has – (Interjections)- no, the price we are talking about here from what the Chairperson has told us, is the total cane price because it has to been a function of what you are supplying. It is a total cane price not a price of anything else but about the canes that you have supplied.

Madam Chairperson, the way they formulated -(Interjections)- just a second honourable. Can you allow me to finish my point and then you come in? Madam Chairperson, can I be protected?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are very intolerant. You may not agree but let people speak.

MR BAHATI: This formula, which they have told us that it was set according to the international standards - first, we do not want to encourage immature canes and that is why they have put the recovery.

Secondly, the more the function of the cane is delivered, the more you produce, the more business is done. I think we are safe in terms of setting the minimum price for our farmers than leaving them open. If we leave them open, it will create a crisis. After farming, the person who has given you input will determine the price because he has given fertilisers. If you refuse, then there will be a crisis in this sugar industry and we will again have problems.

Somebody wondered how we will determine the content. That is the reason we are putting in place a Board. A Board will set the minimum quality of sugar that will be determined by having standards of measuring it. I thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, madam Chairperson. I think all of us are concerned that our farmers should not be cheated. However, what we will come up with from here must also be helpful. Let us try to use this example, I was to look at C, R and D. If we put our C at 50; say if somebody has supplied 50 tonnes and then the R is 100. If we take the percentage as they have said it is 50, when you calculate this, it will give you 12.5. 

Now, if another farmer takes 30 tonnes that means your C will be 30, your R will be 100 and D will be 50. When you calculate this, it will give you 4.5. 

This, therefore, means that a farmer who supplies more items will have a better price. Yes, the one who supplies less will have a lower price.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that formula depends on what you have supplied.

MR ONZIMA: It is given here in terms of tonnes not litres. The liquid would be in form of litres but here, we are talking about tonnes.

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I respectfully would like to say that perhaps a formula is being misunderstood. The formula does not give unit prices; it gives prices based on volumes supplied. 

More importantly, the issue I would like to raise is that it is wise for us to create a minimum price if we can. I would like to give the example of what happened recently in maize. What if the price of sugarcane falls without this protection and it goes down like what happened to maize, what would we have done to our sugarcane farmers?

Therefore, we need to have a minimum price, which allows the laws of supply and demand to put the price as higher as it can go but protecting our farmers from price fall. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSENGO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to talk about the rudiment. Rudiment means the amount of sugar you can get from 100 tonnes. For example, in India, the rudiment is 12 per cent. In Uganda, it is only 8 per cent. These people who are trying to use the formula should use the rudiment of 8 per cent in the case of Uganda; do not take the tonnage that this one will supply 30 tonnes and the other will supply 100 tonnes. It is just how much sugar one gets out of 100 tonnes.

In the case of Uganda, you will get 8 per cent and in the case of India and Brazil, you get 12 per cent. That is why we have a problem with our sugarcane growing in Uganda because the sugar content is very low.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to help Members with this formula. The formula is very correct because we are looking at total canes. 

When you look at the total canes, the number of tonnes I have supplied, for example, if I supplied 50 tonnes and assume that R is 50 and 50 per cent brings to 2.5. If I supply, I will get 125. If I supply 30 tonnes, I will get 75 per cent. If I get 75 divide by 30, it is is 2.5 and 125 divide by 50 is 2.5; that is a constant and they are the same.

Therefore, the formula has no problem and the unit price is the same. That is what I would like to tell Members that the formula is okay and we should just accept it. The unit cost does not defer. I thank you.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much. I think hon. Kalule-Ssengo has simplified our business today. I do not want to waste time again on anything. 

At the beginning, we were talking about unfairness and the unit price but the way he has explained, in terms of Brazil and Indian, since he seems to be more knowledgeable in that area, I would like to propose that we just pass this and allow the whole process to continue and the committee to sort out these matters specifically. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 3 be amended as proposed; that is the minimum and the 50 per cent.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we introduce the definition of the word “jaggery” mill because it has been applied in the main body of the Bill yet it is not provided for in the interpretation clause. It should read as follows, “Jaggery” mill means rudimentary or bare minimum technology equipment used to crush sugarcane to produce sugarcane juice which is processed through boiling to produce jaggery”. In the local language it is called sukaali ggulu. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal. 

MR MUGOYA: I would like to propose an addition to his definition also to import before or after the coming into force of this Act -(Interjections)- I entirely agree with the definition given of jaggery mills. Is it before or after the coming into force of such that we protect –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We disposed of that. We did not distinguish between old jaggeries and new jaggeries.

MR MUGOYA: We want protection for our people in this industry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee tried to outline the definition of a board by substituting the words, “by this Act” appearing in the end of the definition of board the expression under section 2.

Definition of out-grower; delete the words “in the zone” appearing in the line.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of 22.

Redraft the definition of “relevant organisation” as follows; “Relevant organisation” means an association or cooperative society of millers or out-growers recognised under this law.

The justification is to avoid ambiguity and broaden the provision by allowing millers and out-growers under a cooperative society to be represented on the board.

Also insert the following definitions in their respective alphabetical order: 
“Grower” means the person who has a sugarcane farm and has no contract with any miller to supply sugarcane.

“Plant” means to process the by-products of sugarcane. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 be amended as proposed, by the minister and by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR KASULE: Commencement of this Act; insert a new clause before clause 1 to provide for the commencement of the Act as follows: 
“Commencement, the Act shall come into force upon the date of publication in the gazette. The justification is for clarity of commencement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sugar Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments of clauses 19 to 32 and schedules 1 to 3 and clause 1. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House will be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUGAR BILL, 2016

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sugar Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Sugar Bill be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUGAR ACT, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

I think it is in order for the minister to say a word but before he does, I have some sad news. Hon. Dick Nyayi, a former Member of the Constituency Assembly, died today in Arua Hospital. I just wanted to let you know that we lost a senior member in the country. 

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): On behalf of my ministry, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, the honourable members of this House, the staff of Parliament, the chairperson of the committee and the members of the committee for having made it possible to have this Bill debated and passed. 

This is the spirit; I know it has been tough but I appreciate the input and the contributions that Members have made and at an appropriate time, we will announce to you how to arrive upstairs (Laughter). 
Thank you for your contribution.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INVESTMENT CODE BILL, 2017

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, we adjourned at the time of debate. The Speaker then, advised that we should go to the committee and reconcile some points.

THE SPEAKER: Is there no an addendum?

MS ANITE: No. The committee chairperson could just report and we continue with the debate.

6.57
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that I present the background before I go to the observations. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill was presented to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 25 April, 2018. We reported back and in the middle of the debate, some issues arose. The Speaker directed that we go back and harmonise with the ministry on a number of issues concerning the inclusion of investment incentives.

There was an issue on whether the investment incentives should be resident in the Investment Code Act or whether they should be resident in the relevant laws, specifically the tax laws. We went back and made a number of observations, which I would like to present.

    1. The incentive regime keeps changing. What may be relevant this year may not be relevant the following year. Most of the investment incentives cut across and should be housed in relevant tax laws of the sector. These investment incentives, in most cases, take the form of tax relief or exemptions and these are best provided for under the relevant tax laws. Non-financial incentives can be provided for in the Investment Code law. Non-financial incentives, for clarity, could include land, among others.

    2. The investment registration requirements are not provided for in the Bill. This will make it difficult for the investors to know what is required during registration. There is need to provide for the investment registration requirements in the Code. At the time of applying for registration, an investor should be in position to submit their business plans, which should contain information like date of commencement of the business, type of business, information on financing of the business, local content, et cetera.

    3. Government has been experiencing a challenge with foreign investors investing in all categories of businesses and driving local investors out of business. This has caused friction between local and foreign investors, as some have invested in businesses like retail trade. There is need to categorically provide for areas where the foreign investors are eligible to invest, separate from the Ugandan investors. This will help to improve the investment climate as well as make it possible to identify genuine investors from those who are not, while making it easy for the Uganda Investment Authority to monitor the growth and compliance of licensed investments in the country.

    4. The current legal regime on investment provides for obligations of investors in the country but they are not exhaustive. They need to clearly spell out the obligations of the investors. The investors, at all times, will be expected to conform to these obligations.

Our recommendation, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, if you could just hold on for a few minutes. Let us suspend the House for five minutes and then you come back and complete the recommendations. Let us suspend for five minutes and then we go to the heart of the matter.

(The House was suspended at 7.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 7.07 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, our recommendation is that some of the investment incentives which can be provided for under the Investment Code be incorporated and those which are cross cutting remain under the relevant tax laws. I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, this House had debated this report thoroughly and I would like to beg that we go to committee stage and sort out the issues. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, there are some issues that are emerging from -

THE SPEAKER: Identify them and let us handle them at committee stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INVESTMENT CODE BILL, 2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we proceed, I would like to raise an issue about discrimination in incentives at the moment. If you look at our URA exemption code, the people who invest in the industrial parks are entitled to 10 years’ tax holiday. If you are like us who are investing elsewhere, you do not qualify.

In the tourism industry, it is only if you have an investment of $8 million that you are freed of excise duty. I do not know who can qualify for that in this House. Please take that into account because sometimes we pass things here that are discriminatory even to us.

Clause 1

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 1 as follows; 

(i) 	The definition of the word “Authority” by deleting the words “continued in existence” under section 2.

The justification is that the words are redundant because the Authority is established under the Act, notwithstanding the fact that it has been in existence.

(ii) 	In the words “foreign capital” by inserting the word “initial” between the words, “no” and “disbursement” and by inserting the word “to” which this Act is applicable.

The justification is to make the provision more specific.

(iii) In the definition of the words “foreign investor” by inserting the words “and holding an investment licence issued in accordance with this Act” immediately following paragraph d.

The justification is to make the provision specific to investors, to which the Act shall be applicable.

(iv) 	In the definition of the word “investment” by deleting the words “and may be categorised as follows” appearing at the end of the phrase and delete a, b, c and d because they do not have them and may be categorised as follows.

The justification is to make the provision consistent with clause 12 which provides for the minimum investment capital requirements for investment registration.

The provision is redundant as the Act does not apply to the categories enumerated in consideration of clause 12 of the Bill.

(v) 	In the definition of the words “domestic investor” by inserting the words “and holding an investment licence issued in accordance with this Act,” immediately after paragraph (c).

The justification is to make the provision more specific.

(vi) 	In the definition of the word “minister” by deleting the words “planning and economic development.”

The justification is that the reference should be made to the ministry as a docket and not the name of the ministry. 

(vii)	In the definition of the words “one stop centre” by inserting the word “evaluation” immediately after the word “facilitation”. 

The justification is to ensure that the one-stop centre is mandated to make evaluation of investments existing in the country. 

(viii) In the definition of the words “secondary permit” by deleting the entire provision and substituting it with the following; “any other approval required for carrying out business in Uganda except an investment licence.”

The justification is to make the provision more encompassing by including all kinds of approvals required under the laws of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have listened to proposals on clause 1.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason the Bill was sent back was that the Speaker then said that the old law was very good and we only needed some additions.

I thought the chairperson would move that we have retained all these and these are the new insertions so that Parliament can understand. The Bill was deleting sections which were empowering local investors and being more favourable to foreign investors. That is what should have been done so that this meeting could end very fast.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I take the concerns of my member of the committee. However, the issues which the Speaker then raised were in relation to clause 10 on incentives of investors, clause 14 on foreign investment and to the schedules.

From our report, we propose to insert a new schedule 3 which defines priority areas for investment. His concerns are addressed in the amendments that we are proposing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I, therefore, put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 3 as follows; 
(a) 	In sub clause 1 by deleting the words “the primary agency of Government for the purpose of” and substituting the words “responsible for”.

(b) 	In sub clause 2(a)(i) by deleting the word “and” in the first line and (ii) inserting the words “and evaluate” immediately after the word “monitor”.

The justification is that the words “responsible for” are not sufficient to be used in the clause to provide for evaluation as one of the objects of the Authority. 

(c) Immediately after sub clause 2(c) insert the following sub clauses and the Bill be renumbered: 
“to publish and avail periodical reports on the state of investment in the country. 

to access for matters of incentives the investment utilisation of local resources and services,”

The justification is to empower the Authority to publish the periodic reports on the state of investment in the country and assess for matters of incentives and investment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 4 as follows;

    1. In sub clause (4) by adding the words “for one further term” at the end of the clause. The justification, is to provide for clarity on the number of times a member of the board is eligible for reappointment.

    2.  By deleting paragraphs iii (d) and iii (e). The justification is to ensure efficiency by reducing the number of board members.

    3. By deleting sub clause 5. The justification is that it is proper that the clause should be housed in a different clause for better drafting, arrangement and flow of the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 4 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 4 to read as follows:
 
“Removal of a member of the board;

    i) A member of the board may, in writing addressed to the minister, resign his or her office.

    ii) A member of the board may be removed by the minister where;
    a) A member is absent without reasonable excuse from three consecutive meetings of the board of which he has had notice.
    b) A member is adjudged bankrupt by a Court of law.
    c) A member fails, omits or neglects to carry out his or her responsibilities as a board member
    d) A member is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty, fraud, or moral turpitude.
    e) A member is incapacitated by reason of prolonged physical or mental illness from performing his or her duties as a member.
    f) A member is otherwise unable or unfit to discharge the functions of his or her office.

    iii) Where a member of the board resigns, dies, is removed from office, ceases to be a member of the institution or body which he or she represents on the board, the chairperson shall notify the minister of the vacancy and the minister shall appoint another person to hold the office within a period not exceeding 30 days.

    iv) A member of the board appointed under sub section (iii) shall hold office for not more than three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one further term.”

The justification is to provide for a provision that enables a member to resign his or her office and the grounds on which the minister may terminate a member from holding office, and for a situation where the terms of office of a board member do not expire at the same time. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know what you said in the debate but it have issues with the 30 days.  I do not know whether the turnaround time for appointing new board members can be done within 30 days. I think it should be 60 days; 30 days is too short, by the day time you send out the nominations, I do not know -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with adjusting our period of appointing another board member from 30 days to 60 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other issue is that in the old Act, the renewal was open but you have made it stop at only two terms. Do you want it to stop at two terms? Okay.

Yesterday, when handling the Sugar Bill, we had some agreements about for instance, a PS is ex-officio, yet they continue in there. However, you are saying that this person who comes in should only stay for two years - we had that debate yesterday.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this board constitutes of private people and representation of some offices. The underlying assumption is that those members of the board who are private expire every three years but the offices continue. Representation on the board by an office is not by individual. The offices are assumed to continue in existence.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I thank you for the proposal to increase the days from 30 to 60. However, I am looking at a situation where a member may be removed from office maliciously. The member should therefore be accorded time to appeal and possibly in the period between 30 and 60 days - considering our courts of law, I propose that we should put it at 90 days. We would then know that a people who may be removed from office maliciously will have room to appeal and once they fail to win the case, then a new member can be appointed to the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you will be creating a vacuum.

MR NZOGHU: Why don’t we possibly say that a person can be appointed in acting position in the meantime because the person may be appointed and the other person wins the appeal; it then would define a cost to the entity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with a situation where one has resigned, died or removed from office. For instance, if I was a worker and I leave that job - I am there because I am a work and now I am no longer a worker so, I can no longer be one because my original office has gone.

MR NZOGHU: I am specifically talking about the one who has been removed from office maliciously so that the boss brings in a person of their choice. Therefore, 90 days would be better to provide room for legal redress.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee, in its wisdom, had thought of 30 days and hon. Nzoghu is proposing 90 days. There is another proposal of 60 days; I would like to persuade him to take the middle ground. If the committee is willing to move from 30 to 60 days, then let him also come from 90 and we meet at 60 days. Hon. Nzoghu, I pray that for purposes of moving in harmony, you take the 60 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 6 as follows; in sub clause 4 by inserting the word “only” immediately after the word “four” in the second line of the clause. 

The justification is to provide for certainty on the number of times one may be appointed as Director General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 6 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 6 to read as follows; 

“Removal or suspension of Director General from office,
    (i) The minister shall, on recommendation of the Board, suspend the Director General from office pending the determination of any inquiry as the existence of any of the grounds in sub section (2)
    (ii) The minister shall, on recommendation of the Board, remove the Director General from office for - 
    a) Misconduct 
    b) Incapacity or
    c) Incompetence.”

The justification is to provide for the procedure and the grounds for removal of a Director General. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that a new clause be inserted as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 8 as follows; 

In sub clause (1);

    a) By deleting the word “and” appearing in the first line and 
    b) Inserting the words “and evaluate” immediately after the word “monitor.”

2) 	By inserting the new paragraph (i) and (j) immediately after paragraph (h) to read as follows and the paragraph be renumbered.

(i) 	To undertake annual evaluation of the progress and state of investment in the country.
(j) 	To maintain a register of all of all investment licenses issued under this Act.
(k) 	To establish and maintain investment incentives inventory which shall be accessible to the public upon payment of a fee prescribed by the minister by statutory instrument and

3) 	In sub clause 3 by substituting for the word “service” the word “sector”, the word “shall” for the word “may” and  the words “the shortest time possible” the word “reasonable time” but in any case with in a period not exceeding 14 days from the time of receipt of the application.

4) 	By inserting a new sub clause (4) to read as follows; “Where a secondary license, permit or approval is denied, the public sector agency shall give reason to the investor.”

The justification is to give the Authority the mandate;
 
    1. To undertake annual evaluation of the investment in the country and to maintain an inventory of all the licenses issued under the Act.

    2. The proper words used is public sector agency as defined in the interpretation clause and not public service agency and to provide a timeline within which the agency to act.

    3. To allow for an opportunity for the public sector agency to offer reason for denial of a secondary license permit or approval. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR NZOGHU: Honourable chairperson, I would like the chairman to tell us how, when the minister has described the statutory instrument, Parliament gets to understand this especially the fee. Sometime back, the Ministry of Works and Transport came up with the rates for vehicle inspection and when we looked at them in the media, they were outrageous. I don’t know at what stage Parliament can come when the minister is defining or prescribing the fee. 

Why don’t we say that the minister will propose but lay the proposal on the Floor of Parliament?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have avoided getting involved in setting those as a House. It is a problem.

MR NZOGHU: We contested it in the Ministry of Works and Transport. We saw the rates of vehicle inspection in the media and they took effect and it has been unfair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they must be laid. It is necessary to include it, please put it there.

MR MUSASIZI: It is the practice that when ministers make some decisions, they inform Parliament. Another point I would like to make is that when you say, “a minister by statutory instrument…” the minister does not work in isolation. There is a procedure through which a statutory instrument comes into force. I am sure the minister gets authorisation of Cabinet to issue a statutory instrument.

Also taking into account that issues that involve figures which are variable - which keep changing as time goes by - may not necessarily need to be put into the law because if you specify a figure here, it means that if a minister is to change it, he must come back to seek an amendment.

This is why we try to guard against becoming too specific to figures. I would – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: The point is that the minister will propose the fees but he need to lay them before Parliament for us to know the rates proposed by the minister. I quoted the example of the Ministry of Works and Transport, which we never received here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we are on clause 8.

MR NZOGHU: My proposal is that the instrument should be laid on the Floor for Parliament to know what the minister has proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are looking at the powers of the Authority. What you are suggesting is important but not under clause 8. 

I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that the entire clause be deleted and be substituted with the following;

“Clause 10: Qualification for incentives

An investor who, in addition to qualification for incentives set out in any other law meets the following qualifications for investment and commences operations after the commencement of this Act qualifies for incentives –

    (a) Meets the minimum investment capital for the investment as required in the relevant Acts of parliament.
    (b) Engages in any of the priority areas specified in Schedule 3 of this Act.
    (c) Exports a minimum of 70 per cent of the goods produced.
    (d) Provides for substitution of 30 per cent of the value of same imported products.
    (e) 70 per cent of the raw materials used are sourced locally subject to their availability.
    (f) Directly employs a minimum of 60 per cent of citizens or
    (g) Introduces advanced technology or upgrading of indigenous technology.”

The justification is to provide for criteria for qualification for incentives.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, are you suggesting that I should qualify all these? The way it is written means I must have all of them.

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with proposal No. 3 of “Exports a minimum of 70 per cent of the goods produced.” The reason is that we want to differentiate between industrial parks and free zones and this is already provided for in the Free Zones Authority Law, which was passed by Parliament. 

If we state it here that 70 per cent of the goods produced should be exported, it means that we only want to encourage our investors to produce for export and not for the domestic market yet we would like to encourage some to also produce for the domestic market.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even (d) is a problem because you are addressing foreign investors not us. In (c) and (d), I hear that industrial parks are not for ordinary Basoga like me who invests in Kamuli. You are tying our hands and locking us out.
 
MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I also have issues with (g), which states, “Introduces advanced technology or upgrading of indigenous technology.”

We know our levels of technology in the country especially for those ones who are locally born. I do not think that if I have adopted some minimum technology that can propel me in production or in whatever I am doing; that I should not be given an opportunity because I have not introduced advanced technology. 

It should be about investment and not advanced technology. In any case, we are not anywhere in the level of technology as a country. I do not agree with (g) because it is not tenable here.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern goes to (f) that states, “Directly employs a minimum of 60 per cent of citizens.” The statement appears wide and vague. 

Are we looking at the local labour force or the entire population as our minimum? This is where we need to be clear and probably state that; “Directly employs a minimum of 60 per cent of the local labour force in that establishment or investment.”

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wanted a provision that tags the contribution of these investors to our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). I do not see anything here, which enables us to get a net reward or what the country benefits from these investors in terms of real contribution.

Secondly, I support the committee position on (c). One of the problems the economy is suffering from is that when these investors come in, they do not bring any foreign exchange but the little that the country earns is what they take away. They repatriate it in form of profits. That is the reason you find that our shilling is doing badly and that explains why the exchange rate always worsens towards the end of the financial years of most of these foreign investors. 

Therefore, when the committee recommends that for you to qualify to get our incentives you should be in position to export at least 70 per cent of what you have produced, in other words, it is saying that these investors should be able to bring into the country some foreign exchange. 

If we have got a number of investments that will do so, it will partly help us to stabilise our currency. The reason we are suffering is that we have got all these investors who simply take away the hard-earned foreign currency that we take. 

Therefore, I support the committee position on (c), which recommends for a minimum of 70 per cent because it will help us to stabilise our macro-economics.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you now disagreeing with the others? You have identified one to support; what do you say about the others?

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, I expected the committee to have categorised the investors into local and foreign. For instance, our local investors may not necessarily be in export trade but they may be in position to help at job creation. I expect us to categorise those who benefit locally from incentives and those foreign investors that would benefit from these incentives.

In my opinion, for the local investors to benefit from incentives would meet these requirements;

    a) Minimum investment capital
    b) Engaging in any of the priority areas. 
    c) They would also qualify if they meet requirement (e) and we set a minimum of the number of people to be employed for one to qualify for this incentive.
 
For advanced technology, not all investors are engaged in technological issues of investment. Therefore, I suggest that (g) be reviewed or deleted.

Then (c) would be for a different categorisation but it should not be an impediment for a local investor to get incentives when he invests here in the country. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, I have an issue on (e). This is an escape route subject to their availability. It is an escape route for investors to import raw materials. On (e), I want it to stop at “sourced locally.” Let us state the subject and they should buy from here. 

MR BAHATI: I think we have to be a bit cautious about the fact that if now somebody wants to produce CCTV cameras and you do not have materials, production of them will help us in import substitution. If we do not have materials locally here and you say 30 per cent, how will you help 30 per cent?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are saying we need to activate the local market by sourcing the material from here and buying them from here not from outside. Where they are not available, this will not apply.

MR SSENGO: I have an issue with (c). As a country, I think we are trying our best to attract as many investors as possible but if you insist on 70 per cent, then that is asking for too much. You are going to discourage so many of these investors. Let us move it down to 50 per cent but 70 is on a higher side - (Interjection) - you cannot say you do not need investors; you need them. How will you grow this economy if you do not get these investors? Let us make it easy for these people to come in. However, if you put it at 70, you are going to scare of so many of them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: (c) would apply in the Export Free Zone Authority Bill not in Gomba there where you are.

MS ANITE: Exactly, Madam Chairperson. You have just raised my point because it is already catered for in the Export Free Zone Authority Bill and I request the chairperson to delete it. 

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I have issues with (g). It does not clarify what advanced technology we are exactly talking about and what indigenous technology we would seek to upgrade.

I think we should be able to define what advanced technology is so that we can then gauge; has this person introduced advanced technology? Otherwise this would be subject to sentiments and we may not arrive at good results.

Secondly, there are industries or priority areas envisaged in sub section (d) and that refers to schedule 3. Under this schedule, we have information technology, which has been designated as one of the priority areas but to the best of my knowledge, ICT may not require raw materials because much of it has to do with the fourth industrial revolution where people may be applying knowledge not necessarily through use of raw materials. 

Therefore, I need to understand how you will help this sector meet requirements like; you must employ, you should be able to use locally sourced raw material and you must have 70 per cent export and all this. How are you going to quantify all those?

My suggestion is that we remove the export requirement, employing 60 per cent citizens for ICT because these are highly scientific, it is knowledge based- many a time, we tend to source for people from different areas and it is not good to have it as a requirement here.

Finally, Madam Chairperson, the first question you asked must be answered. Must an investor meet all these conditions or you must meet one for a particular industry? Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we need to appreciate where our proposal is coming from. The public and Parliament, time and again, have been urging that we are giving incentives to people who do not add value to this economy. This is the reason behind this proposal. 

We want investors who qualify for incentives and must have an output that helps this economy. Who is that investor who has the capacity to help this economy? 

    i. You must employ our people, at least at the level of 60 per cent. 
    ii. You must consume our locally manufactured products.
    iii.  You must have capital; you must not come here to ask for land as a briefcase. We must have proof that you have capital to invest in the defined business which you are going to invest in.
    iv. You must invest in our priority areas, which we shall define in the schedule, among other parameters.

However, the point I am trying to make is that we must have parameters upon which investors qualify for incentives. I agree with the House that we can improve our proposals but along the lines of making -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not spontaneous amendments.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I am not proposing spontaneous amendments but for us to be able to process systematically, why don’t we approve one by one until we get to the lowest because people are coming in with different views. Why don’t we just process from (1) to (g)?

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Uganda has become one of the global promoters of environmental protection and we need to stand out clearly. How I wish we would put a provision that FOR somebody to qualify for our incentives, they must be environmental sensitive. Somebody will come and put a factory in a wetland and then he wants us to support him.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there are other laws which can -

MR CENTENARY: I know that it can happen at licensing; they ask for an Environmental Impact Assessment report but in practice - you know that happened in Kilembe - investors came and setup shop, NEMA closed them and we had given them our incentives. 

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the environmental impact assessment is already provided for in the law. There is no investor who can come and set up a factory without giving us or going through an environmental impact assessment. 

In other words, the first requirement is for you to go to NEMA and get that certificate of environmental impact assessment so there is no need for us to put it here because it is already in our law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go clause by clause. You have seen the opening statement and it reads, “An investor who, in addition to the qualifications for incentives set out in any other laws, meets the following qualifications for incentives and commences operations after the commencement of the act qualifies for incentives;

    a) Meets the minimum investment capital for investment as required in the relevant Acts of Parliament…” Is that okay?  

MS KOMUHANGI: I do not know whether capital also involves land because Government has been giving a lot of land to investors. Sometimes they mortgage that land that they are given to get money. It is an incentive. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: b) Engages in any of the priority areas specified in schedule 3 to this Act. Do you agree with that? 
    c) Exports a minimum of 70 per cent of the goods produced. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete (c) because we cannot say that an investor should have a minimum of 70 per cent of the goods produced exported. 

MS ANITE: In the free zone, it is even higher than – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it the free zone or the industrial parks? What is the condition? 

MS ANITE: In the free zone, it is even higher; it is 80 per cent. You should export a minimum of 80 per cent of the product. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can delete it from here because it is available in the industrial park and the free zone. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, if the fear is that it may affect our local investors, then we can improve it to include or to only apply to foreign investors but we need these provisions. The reason why the likes of Malaysia and Indonesia left us behind is because they achieved macroeconomic stability, which we have failed to achieve here –(Interjection)– but honourable minister, this is an economic principle. 

Madam Chairperson, the other thing is even if a farm was to produce for import substitution; it is only a transitional period. After a while, it should transit into an export promoting industry. Look at Mukwano Group of Companies; it started as an import substituting industry but as we speak, it is a net exporter. They are actually foreign exchange earners. They no longer act as import substituting industries. 

For purposes of achieving macroeconomic stability, we need to ensure that these investors do not come here as parasites. We struggle to earn our foreign currency and then they come and just repatriate it to their country, when they are not adding anything to the economy. Therefore, we need to maintain this. 

I appreciate the minister when she says that she already has something in the free zone. It is even much better if you reinforce it here so that whoever does not qualify in the free zone, does not escape from this so that we catch them in whatever situation. That is what we need for the country. 

COL. KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with hon. Othieno. There is a provision for those who are in the industrial zone. Whereas we understand that the local investors may not manage that threshold of 70 per cent, we need to note that we are the very people who have been complaining about people who come and benefit from these incentives that we give. At the end of the day, the country does not benefit from their investment here. 

We need to have something to hang onto; that if this person is a true investor, what are we looking for from them? It is not only about employment creation but it is also earning the foreign exchange for the economy. Why don’t we put in a clause that does positive discrimination? We should put the threshold for foreign investors but exempt the local investors. We are the ones making the law. That is my proposal, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, the 30 per cent production is capable of meeting the domestic demand. The 70 per cent of export is going to attract foreign currency, which we need here to stabilise our economy. That is why I am not for the deletion of this because if we want our economy to stabilise, then we need foreign currency. We would even increase it to 80 per cent but for this particular case, I agree with them that we maintain the 70 per cent and have it because we need our economy to stabilise. 

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, that section only talks about goods. If I am engaged in giving services, do I qualify? If that is the intention, then, I pray we include services there. 

Two, that clause presupposes you have started producing and you are already exporting. My understanding with some of these incentives is that you may actually need to get them before you start production. How will that work out? Probably the minister needed to help us understand. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: With foreign investments, you do not come with half a million dollars. This is where we say that you are probably looking at “kabalagala” investors. Nevertheless, if we are looking for investors to come into the country and they are going to invest in probably 100 million dollars, then if we produce a 100 million-dollar commodity, do you really assume that Uganda will consume all of it? No. 

The reason we are putting it at 70 per cent – it even helps so that when you are going to invest, you must have the prescribed minimum capital. That minimum capital is what you need first and when you produce 30 per cent or less, it will go for local consumption because you will be producing massively. 

Madam Chairperson, if people are worried about locals, we can say – even the minimum investment capital for locals is very low because it has to be from our local resources. For example, a man comes here, you give him chunks of land and he mortgages it because he has no money. He then makes money, sells the land and runs away. We want to avoid that; this 70 per cent is very good. 

If the Minister of Investment says that in the free zone, we are talking about 80 per cent, she should be happy that there is also something here; that instead of being in the free zone, you can be in Namanve Park but you should produce and make sure that 30 per cent or less is for local investors and the balance is foreign. 

Having said all that, I want to unmerge the – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, let us move. Do we retain paragraph (c)?

MS ANITE: Yes, Madam Chairperson, I would like to retain paragraph (c) but with an amendment. For us to be very consistent - I have heard the arguments from hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. William Nzoghu that we must promote exports. Therefore, let us be consistent since the minimum requirement of export is 80 per cent. Let us also be consistent here at 80 per cent.

MR KAHIMA: Are we qualifying it for foreign investors?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think we shall have to explain that you can qualify with any of these. You may not be able to have all of them. It may not be possible. All of them may be too hard. Okay, we have agreed on paragraph (c). 

Let us now go to paragraph (d) which provides for substitution of 30 per cent of the value of the imported products. What do you say about that? We amended the 70 per cent to 80 per cent. How do you explain paragraph (d)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, paragraph (d) moves with paragraph (e). If you are saying 70 per cent of locally used is locally sourced then it means you have allowed a maximum of 30 per cent as imports. 

MR BAHATI: I would like us not to miss the amendment in paragraph (d) which the Chairperson proposed. That it provides for substitution of 30 per cent of the value of the same imported product. To make it clear, what we are talking about is that if I am producing maybe chairs or laptops, assuming I want to do import substitution, the 30 per cent we are talking about is that product where you are involved and not of the total import bill.

The same imported product is under paragraph (d) and we are referring to the product you are involved in, the 30 per cent not the total import Bill of the economy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, do you agree with paragraph (d)?

MS ANITE: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Fine, then paragraph (e) 70 per cent of the raw materials used are sourced locally. We wanted to remove the subject. Let us stop at “locally” so that we do not give them an escape route.

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, for an investor who has just come and is just reading that 70 per cent of the raw materials used are sourced locally and someone giving the interpretation to the investor may decide to say that you have to have all the 70 per cent of your raw materials sourced locally regardless of whether they are here or not.

Look at the steel industry. When we want to make iron sheets, you have to source for some of the raw materials externally. If you say that 70 per cent have to be sourced locally, what happens to the raw materials from these roof tiles that you have to source externally?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister, I will not invest in an industry where I cannot get raw materials. I cannot bring money here. Also, it does not mean that you have to qualify for all but it is any of them. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Maybe it is the grammar that doesn’t bring out the meaning. For example, supposing we say that where local materials are available, 70 per cent should be sourced locally.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to give you an example. We made the law on oil and we put in just a small part of local content. Within two months, they had gone to State House to complain. The President called me and said, “You people are making it difficult for my people to do investments. They cannot buy things here.” I asked him, “Do you mean that they cannot buy tomatoes, oranges and eggs?” They were looking for a route and they were saying that they wanted to import. I told His Excellency that even if you bring it back, we shall return it as it is. I told him not to bother bringing it back. Yes, that is what they were doing. These are escape routes.

I had to organise for a meeting with the President on the steel issue because the Chinese were importing. I had to take the steel people there and we agreed and said, don’t allow these people to play around with us.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, following your explanation, I really feel you should increase paragraph (e) to 80 per cent. You have explained very well; let us allow money to remain here. Therefore, we should increase to 80 per cent. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us keep it at 70 per cent. Honourable members, paragraph (e) is okay, we remove the subject to their availability. 

Paragraph (f), directly employs the member with 60 per cent of Ugandan citizens -

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, my opinion is that we should have absolute figures if we are to promote investors who help us in job creation. This business of saying 60 per cent of the workforce – I wish this House proposes a minimum number of people employed in such an investment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is very hard because they are not uniform. I think 60 per cent is acceptable. 

MR KAHIMA: Should we improve it and say 60 per cent of the citizens of the total workforce.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the reason we cannot use the absolute numbers is that company (a) will have 100 people, another company will have 300 and another will have 20 people. It is better to use a rate. When you say 60 per cent of the workforce, it loses meaning – “directly employs a minimum of 60 per cent of citizens” and when you say directly employs 60 per cent of the workforce, this one becomes meaningless.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, in the workforce, we may have Burundians and Sudanese; they are part of the workforce.

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, in my view paragraph (f) has no problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us just insert the words “Ugandan citizen”.

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, it has a problem. The wording can be interpreted as one factory employing 60 per cent of Ugandans. It should be that the 60 per cent of the workers of that particular factory should be Ugandans not that it should be able to employ 60 per cent of the citizens. 
The way it is worded is that we are 5 million Ugandans and 60 per cent of us must be employed in that factory. That is what it is now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have agreed on what we want. Just put it in the right language.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, what if we added that directly employs a minimum of 60 per cent of Ugandan citizens? Is that alright?        

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, based on what I understand from this, the principle is known that specifically 60 per cent of the people who are going to be working in these factories must Ugandans.

In essence, I propose that the technical members address it in a systematic and organised manner. Otherwise, we shall spend long on the matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I hereby ask our technical people to reformulate that because the principle is that as many of Ugandans as possible in that industry.

MR OGUZU: We have had a case where a company could meet all the other requirements that we have specified there and they are not registered here. They can employ the people we want; they can do any other thing. An example is a special purpose vehicle like the company which was set up to implement the oil pipe project. This company is set up in Netherlands. That means that they will not be able to pay corporation tax here. All the money will move that side and we may not be able to get those benefits.

In my view, we should make it clear that they employ 60 per cent of our citizens and they must be registered here in Uganda. That will help us get the tax and it will help us meet those other requirements.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, what if we provided that a minimum of 60 per cent of the employees are Ugandans. We replace (f) with “minimum of 60 per cent of employees are Ugandan.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know if it is coming out well. Can we asked our technical people to write it properly in the final draft? I think they have understood what we want.

Then (o) introduces advanced technology upgrading of indigenous technologies.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, the issue is that sometimes you need to get best practices from other people. These fellows may come and employ 60 per cent Ugandans but they could all be casual workers or sweepers and when you look at the management team, you do not find even a single Ugandan.

We need to find a way of ensuring that when these investors come, our people are also on the management team. This is because they will employ the 60 per cent but they are lower cadres and at the higher level, they are not there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t we going to make the local content law? There is an Act coming on that and we will do it then.

Honourable members, apparently everything has qualified. Let us improve the language.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of these qualifications. The clarification I seek, which does not come out here is whether this clause is conjunctive in the sense that all these conditions must be present; or it is disjunctive in the sense that one or two or three must be present to qualify for the incentives. 

I think that should be very clear. IT is worded in a conjunctive manner and I think it can create problems especially in implementation. Therefore, are we taking one, two or all?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any.

MR BASALIRWA: Then that should come out very clearly in the in the draft.

MR WERIKHE: If we say one of them minus maybe capital; how do you really go ahead without capital? I think, to say any of them will be actually creating a problem because capital is important. Maybe capital plus – otherwise, minus capital we will not move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us ask our legal people to ensure that that aspect comes out; that you do not qualify by all of them but you can qualify through any.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, a few minutes ago we passed a clause where we gave powers to the Uganda Investment Authority to do evaluation. 

If I have just come in with my $100 million dollars, I will not immediately have the 60 per cent of the employees. I would be setting up the infrastructure. In the process of evaluation is when the incentives are granted.

You may qualify on all these but there are those which are implemented as soon as you come in and there are those which are implemented as you progress in the – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Propose. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before I make a proposal, (g) is talking about introducing advanced technology. Somebody asked about what it means. It means that if you have come here to invest, the locals must be introduced to that technology so that even if you go, it has been transferred to the locals. That is what I wanted to clarify.

I would like propose that all these qualifications shall be implemented gradually as the project progresses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Obviously you cannot get an incentive for export unless you have completed production.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, if you talk of advanced technology, I think it will depend on the context and it depends on how someone understands what advanced technology is. What maybe advanced to you may not be advanced to me.

We need to understand (g) very well because someone may come with their technology and they may feel that the technology is so advanced but to us, the technology may not be advanced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is not automatic. When you come, you will say what category you qualify for and then they will examine it. Is it really advanced or not? You will have to indicate where you fall.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 10 to read as follows;
“11. Certificate for incentives

    (i) An investor who has been given an incentive shall receive a certificate of incentives issued by the Authority.
    (ii) The certificate shall;
    a) State under what law the investor has been given an incentive. 
    b) Give detailed particulars of the incentives being given.

The justification is to –

    1. Provide for the parameters that qualify an investor to obtain incentives 
    2. Mandate the Authority to issue a certificate of incentives.
    3. Require a public service sector agency to notify the authority of the incentives that have been given so that the Authority establishes and maintains an inventory of incentives given.  

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is actually what we have been discussing. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

(Clause 11, agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 12 and substitute it with the following; 

“Minimum investment capital requirement for investment registration.

(i) 	The minister shall, by statutory instrument, set the minimum investment capital proposed for a domestic and foreign investor to qualify for registration and issuance of an investment license by the Authority under this Act.

(ii) 	Notwithstanding sub-section (i), the minimum threshold for portfolio investment for domestic and foreign investors shall be governed by the laws of Uganda.

The justification is that the details of the capital requirement should be details that are to be spelt out by a statutory instrument and not in the principle law because our economy keeps fluctuating. There will always be need to amend the Act to take care of those changes in the – (Interjection) – why don’t you let me first make my case then you seek clarification. 

There will always be need to amend the Act to take care of those changes in the requirements of the minimum investment capital requirements.

Sub-clause (4) is deleted for the reason that a provision in the principle law cannot be amended by a statutory instrument.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, it is not clear to me what the capital requirement in this case is. Will I be, as an investor, required to produce cash or if I come with a patent from somewhere, will that amount to capital? If I get technology from somewhere, can I qualify that as capital? You may need to clarify this?

MR MUSASIZI: How I wish you had looked at the proposal in the Bill. However, for clarity, the proposal in the Bill – if I could read (i) – is that the minimum investment value proposed by domestic investor to qualify for registration and issuance of an investment license by the Authority under this Act shall be not less than $50,000 or the equivalent in Shillings. Without going into details, this clearly tells you that it is cash, not anything else.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

(Clause 13, agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 13 to read as follows;

“Investment registration requirement

An application for investment registration shall be accompanied by the following -
    1. Certificate of registration of the business company
    2. Business plan which shall include:
    (a) Name of the investment and detailed information on the type of investment;
    (b) Action plan;
    (c) The date of commencement of operations;
    (d) Detailed information on raw material source in the country or in the locality where the investment is to operate; 
    (e) Detailed information on any financing and assets to be sourced from outside Uganda, including the timeframe in which these finances and assets shall be invested;
    (f) Land requirement for the investment;
    (g) Location of the investment;
    (h) Utilities required for the investment;
    (i) A market survey;
    (j) Details of the projected technology and 
    (k) Knowledge transfer

    3. The environmental impact assessment certificate issued in accordance with the relevant laws

    4.  Projected number of employees

    5. License granted by the business sector in which he or she intends to operate.

The justification is to provide for particulars that should accompany the application. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete it and replace it with the following; 

“Regulation for foreign investment

    1. A foreign investor shall not operate a business enterprise in Uganda, otherwise than in accordance with an investment license issued under this code.

    2. A foreign investor shall not own a business of crop production, animal production or acquire or be granted or lease land for the purpose of crop production or animal production but a foreign investor may;
    (a) Provide material or other assistance to Ugandan farmers in crop production and animal production or 
    (b) Lease land for purposes of manufacturing or carrying out the activities set out in the Third Schedule to this Act.

    3. This section shall not be construed so as to deprive a foreign investor of any land acquired by or granted to him or her or by any interest in land accrued to him or her before the commencement of this Act. 

    4. The minister may, on the advice of the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet by statutory instrument, exempt any business enterprise or class of business activity from the provisions of this section where, in the opinion of the minister, it is necessary that for the purposes of ensuring a regular supply of raw materials, the enterprise should lease land.

    5. A foreign investor who is intending to engage in trade only shall not be required to comply with sub-section (1) but shall -
    (a) Incorporate a company with the Registrar-General as is required by law.
    (b) Deposit a sum of money as may be prescribed by the minister by regulation in Bank of Uganda, which shall be specifically used for importation or direct purchase of goods for the businesses.

    6. Upon compliance with sub-section (5), the Bank of Uganda shall issue a Certificate of Remittance to the foreign investor.

    7. A foreign investor who obtains a Certificate of Remittance under sub-section (6) shall lodge an application in writing to the immigration department, which shall contain the Certificate of Remittance and other information that may be required by the department.

    8. Subject to compliance with the provisions of this section and immigration laws, the immigration department may issue an entry permit to the foreign investor.

    9. A foreign investor who obtains an entry permit under sub-section (8) shall lodge an application in writing to the local authority where the business will principally be carried out for a trade licence.”

The justification; is to restrict foreign investors from carrying on the business of crop and animal production, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before you go, in our neighbourhood, in order for you to become an investor in the country you must get a local partner. Here, in Ethiopia, in the UAE. I do not know whether you would not like to say something like that. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, at the time of consideration of the Bill, your idea did not come into our minds but at this stage we welcome it. 

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from our brother here. What would happen to foreign investors like the one we have in Bugiri? The Kibimba Rice Company which was renamed Tilda, what will then happen to it because they are already in that business that is being proposed as a prohibition under the new law?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, honourable colleagues, restricting foreign investors from entering into the business of crop and animal production when almost 78 per cent of our economy is on agriculture will be hurting our economy.

We have just passed the Sugar Bill a few minutes ago and most of this business is done by foreigners; we want to transform one of the important crops we have in this country – cassava - that has almost over 10 products.

You cannot convert cassava into starch if you do not produce it in a certain way, we are looking at automation in the agricultural sector and some of it might require a lot of money which probably our local investors and farmers do not have.  

We are talking about tea, coffee; I think the way it was structured in the Bill is better than this one. I propose that this restriction of investors for crop and animal production be reviewed and maybe we take what is already in the Bill because it will certainly hurt the economy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for your information. First of all there, is leeway for you in sub clause 4; you can have it on the advice of the authority.

However, this was brought from the old law to protect the farmers; for example if someone would like to grow coffee, he will come and buy all the farmers in that area to grow coffee and farmers become workers of that person.

However, if the investor wants coffee, he can invest in the farmer by giving them inputs so that they produce for him and he takes the coffee. That applies even to animals but if the minister is talking about big investors coming, he can do it by statutory instrument.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the mover.

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, if we leave it as it is and as hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed, clearly we are going to scare aware the investors beginning with the Egyptian investor whom we already have who is in large scale beef processing.

We have an investor in Zombo who is in tea processing, which is labour and capital intensive. It means that we have to start by deregistering those two and even send away other people who are supposed to come and invest. In as much as we want to protect our people, they do not have the required investment to do large scale farming. You cannot attract these people if you want to do modern farming. 

Our people produce in small one or two acres and the maximum a big farmer produces in acreage is four. We can possibly go into modern farming by attracting foreign investors. 

MR OTHIENO: I would like to give information to the honourable minister that there are some Israeli investors who at one time wanted to come and transform Karamoja into an agricultural hub; such investors should not be blocked from coming to invest in an area which we ourselves are failing or do not have the capacity to tap the potential. I support the minister that we should not close these investors in agricultural areas. 

MR NGABIRANO: We are talking about agriculture, crops and animals but I would like us to add forestry in investment. There is a lot of money in this area and it is attracting many investors.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, currently we have an investor in Amuru who is engaged in cereal farming and is employing more than 200 youth.

If we block the investors in crop production it means that we are cutting off very many people who can bring a lot of resources to this country. Let us specify the type of crops which are not supposed to be – (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, having listened to the arguments from various colleagues and having been convinced by the same arguments, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we revert to the old position. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause 15 immediately after clause 14 to read as follows;  ”Obligations of a registered investor; 

A registered investor shall – 

(a) 	observe and adhere to the laws of Uganda.
(b) 	implement his or her proposal in accordance with his business funds submitted in the application for an investment license.
(c) 	properly keep financial and accounting records of the investments and submit a copy of a certified financial report to the board within three months following the preceding financial years.
(d) 	keep data relating to operation of the investment enterprise for the period of seven years.
(e) 	respond in a period prescribed by written notice to any query from the board in connection with operations of the investment enterprise.
(f) 	periodically avail his or her books of accounts to the body responsible for taxation.
(g) 	register with the tax administration and file timely tax returns even in case of entitlement to tax exemption.
(h) 	permit the Authority or its employees or agents reasonable access to monitor operations of the business enterprise.

The justification is to provide for priority areas for investment and obligations of the registered investor. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know; do we actually need this? Because these are in the Companies Act- filing returns. 

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to find out from the chairperson; how do we determine the accounting period for an investor within when to file returns because ordinarily, those are matters that can be handled under the statutory instruments that the minister may make.

MR MUSASIZI: I think international practices define the accounting period to be a period of 12 months. In addition, filing returns is in accordance with the tax laws, which this Parliament makes every year. However, Madam Chairperson, if it does no harm, we could retain these proposals in this Bill much as some of them could appear elsewhere but if it does no harm, for easy reference, we could have them in this Bill.

MR OTHIENO: I may not have much on the obligations here but I have a concern, which I want the committee to take note of. Very often, we have registration requirements and so on but we have investors who come here and enjoy our incentives. The moment the incentives end, they relocate. A very good example is a company here called Leaf tobacco or something like that and as soon as the incentive period ended, they relocated to Kenya. We had another company -(Interjection)– BAT but you know it happened.

We had another company - Nile Breweries - which was producing a drink called Kibuku. This Kibuku had been exempted from taxes and when other companies complained about the exemption, the company immediately stopped producing Kibuku. 

That shows you that there are companies and investors here who are only taking advantage of our incentives but not ready to contribute to the economy. Remember during the incentive period, there is actually not much. We assume that they are still in the growing period and they are supposed to mature so that they also start contributing but when they mature, they run away. 

Therefore, I would like something in the Investment law we are enacting to put some sanctions so that the country does not just lose resources to these investors who just simply come to enjoy our good gesture.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose something? Your arguments are sound but can you propose as you think?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to submit that this particular proposal is redundant in the sense that whatever is proposed here is actually captured in other legal regimes.

When talking about observing and adhering to the laws of Uganda, that goes without mention. Any registered investor has to adhere to the laws of Uganda. On keeping financial and accounting records, our tax laws require everybody to keep books - actually failure to keep books is a crime under our tax laws. 

However, there is also another fundament flaw especially in the wording of this proposal because it assumes that an investor is an individual - a human being. It flaws – “periodically avail his or her books” - you are personifying investors but these are registered entities; they are companies. 

There is also another fundamental flaw. Are you calling a company masculine or feminine when you talk about it availing his or her books of accounts? This proposal is well captured in other laws and I think including it here in the Bill will be redundant. 

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have similar sentiments except that (b) which is implementing, if we can correct the grammar there - to implement the proposal in accordance with his or her business plan submitted. We do not have any law covering that (d), (e) and (h) can be retained if we correct the grammar. The rest are covered in other laws. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still strong on retaining them?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, even in the Sugar Bill, we referred to the Public Finance Management Act. Therefore, it does no harm to refer to an Act which is already in existence. I need guidance on that but having these proposals, to me, does no harm –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think it does not hurt the Bill. For emphasis, it helps us. These are foreign companies and maybe they keep books in their mother countries. However, it is important that when they are here, they conform to the laws here; including drawing their books of accounts from here even for proper taxation. 

You remember Heritage or Tullow who sold our oil interests and they refused to adhere to our payment of taxes; so, we must emphasize that they must keep books here for purposes of taxation and for purposes of knowing what they are doing. Therefore, I think this clause is innocent and does not hurt the bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Investment Code Bill, 2017” from clauses 1 to 14 and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had hoped that we can finish this Bill so that we allow the accountability committees to take over the second meeting but we are not moving as fast as we should. However, tomorrow we must finish this Bill and the next Bill and after that we allow the accountability committees to do their work.

Therefore, I appeal to you and also to thank you. We have done a lot but we could do better. Thank you for staying. 
Who is going to organise upstairs? Is it trade or is it –(Laughter). 

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 9.02 p.m. and adjourned until, Thursday, 22 November 2018 at 2.00 O’clock.) 

