PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5991Minister of Health, asking her to guide us on how we should behave and how the House should resume because of the outbreak of Ebola.The minister guided on the need for strict observance of the following SOPs:1. Temperature monitoring of all persons entering Parliament - and I think that has started;  2. Consistent and regular hand-washing and sanitising;3. Restriction of physical presence of Members in the Chamber, and we agreed to limit the number to 100 Members of Parliament in the House so that we are able to keep social distance;4. Those who exhibit symptoms similar to that of Ebola should be responsible enough not to come to the House – and I know my Members are very responsible;5. Restrictions of visitors to the premise of Parliament - unwanted visitors - unless you are coming to a committee. However, even when coming as a witness to the committee, you should be subjected to the temperature checks and all those things of hand-washing, and;6. Wearing masks at all times. I get surprised when I see Members who do not wear masks in the House.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 1ST SITTING - SECOND MEETINGTuesday, 1 November 2022Parliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the one-month recess. Welcome back and thank you for going to your constituencies – that is if you went. (Laughter)As you recall, we ended the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament on 29 September 2022, at which point I adjourned the House sine die. That is what paved the recess period. I hope you effectively used your recess period to interact with your constituents and to do your oversight role. As I also said, I had requested you to make a follow up on the Parish Development Model. At an appropriate time, I will allot you time to report to this House on what you found out about the Parish Development Model and how we should correct or improve it.The recess period coincided with the outbreak of the Ebola virus in some areas of Kassanda and Mubende. In the interest of safety and wellbeing of Members – in exercise of responsible leadership – I did write to the 5992 [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRClerk, I left a box of masks there. Can I have masks given to Members if they did not carry them? Please, can I have the masks?Premised on the advisory from the minister, the Clerk to Parliament issued the standard operating procedures to mitigate the threat of Ebola in the House – that was limiting the physical presence of Members. The way I see my Members this side, kindly, it is free sitting. Do not squeeze yourselves.The whips have been notified on how many people they should be calling to the House and the utilisation of the virtual platform. Department of ICT, we need the virtual platform to be on so that we are able to have debates online. So, from today, we can do that as well as the hand-washing and sanitising all the time. On restriction of visitors coming in, kindly, tell your visitors to wait for you in the constituency. I am told I should help to tell the voters. V oters, wait for my Members of Parliament in the constituency because of Ebola. Do not over move. Wait for them; they will be there and answer your queries.Additionally, during recess, I received a communication from His Excellency the President, returning two Bills. The first Bill is your own Bill: The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2022. The second one is the Public Health (Amendment) Bill, 2022. Pursuant to Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure, I am obliged to read the letter that has sent back the Bill, explaining why the Bill has been returned.The letter on the first Bill is dated 13 October 2022 and addressed to none other than Anita Among, the Speaker to Parliament. The reference is “Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2022.“The above matter refers.I have received the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2022 for my assent. However, I have been advised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Bill, which was presented to them for assessment of its financial implications, did not include the amendment of increase of the contribution to the Government fund from 30 to 40 per cent. The Bill that has been presented to me for assent provides for that increment.I have also been informed that the appropriate quantum for contribution can only be determined by actuarialisation evaluation of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme.In view of the above, I am returning the Bill to Parliament for reconsideration, as per Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution.”It is signed by President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.This is one of the returned Bills. There was a headline in the Daily Monitor newspaper, saying that “Parliament secretly increases its salaries by 40 per cent.”  Daily Monitor, if you have nothing to write, do not write about this Parliament. (Applause) Do not write about what you do not know. That was opaque reporting. You cannot report on what you do not know. Pension is different from salaries. The next Bill is the Public Health (Amendment) Bill 2022. “The above refers. 1. I have received the Public Health (Amendment) Bill, 2022 for assent. However, I have been advised, there are provisions in the Bill that need to be reconsidered, to enable the law to respond better to public health issues as listed below: Section 1 - that is the definition. A new definition of vaccination should be inserted immediately after the paragraph (qq) as follows:(qq)(a) Vaccination means a process or act of giving someone a vaccine. This will be the interpretation of part eight of the Act. 5993THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 20222. Section 14, the words in subsection (1) seeking the permission of the authority or local government, appearing before the words “authorising the destruction of the beddings etc.” should be deleted. The requirement of seeking permission of the authority or local government to destroy infected beddings or articles is erroneous. During an outbreak of an infectious disease, such as Ebola, any delay to destroy the articles or clothing aggravates the spread of the disease. In any case, under the guidelines of the ministry, the destroyed infected items are compensated by giving a person a compassionate kit, which comprises, among others, a mattress, bed sheets, utensils and any other related commonly used personal items. Section 14(b) and (c) Should be deleted. The amendment of subsection (1) renders the above clause redundant. 3. Section 27(2), the words, “minister responsible for agriculture” should be replaced by the words, “Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries” or “minister responsible for animal health” since rules made under this provision will relate to the disease originating from animals. It is logical that animal health is mentioned as opposed to simply agriculture. 4. Section 37, the word “appointed” in paragraph (a) should be substituted with the word “assigned” since the Director-General Health Services does not have the legal authority to appoint staff. 5. Section 38, the word “immunisation” used in a headnote should be substituted with the word “vaccination.” In medical terms, that word “vaccination” is not entirely symphonious with “immunisation,” as the two processes may lead to entirely different outcomes.Vaccination, on the other hand, describes the act of receiving a vaccine. Immunisation, on the other hand, describes the process of becoming immune through vaccination. (b)  Subsection (1), should be substituted to read as follows: (1) Subject to subsection (2), a parent of a child resident in Uganda shall ensure that a child is immunised free from any charge against immunisable diseases appropriate to the age and schedule as may be declared as such by the minister. The statutory instrument, the recommendation vaccines against such diseases may be administered even beyond 12 months after the birth.(c)  The words “immunisation cards” used in subsections (3), (4) and (5) should be substituted with the word “vaccination card.” (d)  The word “immunised” in section four should be substituted with the word “vaccinated”. Section 45: The words “immunisation card” in subsections (1),(2) and (3) should be substituted with the words “vaccination card” in accordance with Article 91(3) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I hereby return the Bill to Parliament for reconsideration on the clauses that I have mentioned above.” Signed by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. Pursuant to Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure, I have already read the letter that returned the Bill and during recess, in line with Rule 7(3) of the Rules of Procedure, I administratively referred these Bills to the committees. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is where I referred the Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill to. And then the Committee on Health is where I referred the Public Health (Amendment) Bill, 2022 to.I now take the opportunity to formally refer these Bills, through the House, to the respective committees; And they should return the Bills as soon as possible to the House. And because I know they have finished their work, we shall start with the Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill tomorrow. (Member rose_) 5994I know that is your Bill and you would want to have it faster. So, we shall have the Bill tomorrow, Wednesday 2 November 2022.Honourable members, last night, we received information on the attack of the police personnel at Busiika Police Post in Luweero District by unknown people. That was very unfortunate. And even after the attack, the response to that place was slow, bearing in mind that in his address, the President ordered the removal of roadblocks, so they are no longer there. However, you may find that the response was slow because we do not have enough patrol vehicles. This House must decide that we need patrol vehicles to be able to support the police.We are not going to continue lamenting day in day out on why the police did not rush there very fast. It is because we do not have patrol vehicles. The money that was budgeted for the patrol vehicles has not been released. It is unfortunate that happened. We need to get a solution.As you observe, such attacks have been - of recent - in several areas. They happened in Mityana and Kiboga districts.  We need to get a solution to it.Security is a precondition for meaningful socio-economic activities. Any attempt to compromise security requires us to be very careful. I urge the population out there to be very vigilant and cooperate with the security agencies.On a similar note, on Tuesday, 25 October 28 2022, 11 children got killed in a school fire outbreak in Lugga village, Ntanzi Parish in Ntenjeru. This was very unfortunate. These fires add to the list of similar previous fires that happened in Kawempe, Kyotera, Wakiso and so many other places. I urge the Minister of Education and Sports and the local authorities to strengthen the safety regulations in these schools. Beyond the schools, there is a need for us to strengthen the safety and health precautions of public facilities to prevent similar catastrophes from occurring.  May we rise and observe a moment of silence in honour of the departed souls?(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, like I said before, the Daily Monitor reported incorrect information. I have noted that there is incorrect and misleading reporting by the media. At times, I ask myself why they come and are all over there because I expect them to report what they hear and see.Now that you even have new leadership, we ask you to write what is correct, not what you think. As the Parliament of Uganda, we have never increased our salary. Do not put Parliament and the public on a collision course. We are here to work for the public. (Applause) We are not complaining about our little salary and we are here, ready to work for the people. Therefore, write what is correct. Do not write what you think or want to write. I really thank the President for assenting to the Computer Misuse Act. I urge you to be responsible enough. You have a duty of care to everybody, including yourself.Honourable members, as we resume this session, we request the Government to ensure that we do our work by providing us with the Bills and giving us work. Maybe, we are running faster than what the Government is used to. Kindly, let us work together; and give us the Bills in time so that we are able to finish our work.Members, once more, I would like to thank you for attending the House and to welcome you back. Kindly keep yourselves safe from Ebola. Ebola is terrible, so keep safe. Thank you.2.24MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take the opportunity to welcome back all of us from the long recess. [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5995THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, I rise to react to your communication concerning the Uganda Police Force; what they are always going through and the challenges they are facing. Most times, we, as leaders, blame the Uganda Police Force, but I would like to tell this Parliament today that even when we come here to Parliament and appropriate a budget and allocate it to the police, this is never fulfilled. The budget ends on paper and the police remain stuck and they cannot complain. The issues of the patrol vehicles that you are talking about, the issues of supporting the Uganda Police Force with the houses - remember, we talked about it here. These end on the paper budgets. After going to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they do not receive the funds. Therefore, the police remain stuck and completely stranded in performing their mandate of keeping law and order. Madam Speaker, we need to strongly come out and support the police. We need to ring-fence their budget so that they can perform their duty effectively, as per the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.THE SPEAKER: We ring-fenced the budget of the police and the army; all the security organs. To the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, if you are to release money, why wouldn’t you release the money for the security organs first? These are the people who protect your lives.2.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to inform the House that even amidst the circumstances of resource constraints, which we are experiencing now, we have always, as much as practicable, ring-fenced the budget for security agencies, including the police.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, has all the money that was allocated to you been released? If it has been released, why are you not buying patrol cars and fire extinguishers, yet we budgeted for them?2.27THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have been put in a tricky situation. The money was allocated by this House and appropriated, but you remember that in the first quarter, across Government, we suffered shortfalls. That can be better explained by my colleague, but I would not want us to trade accusations. I think the money will be got.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has said that much as there was an allocation by this House, there was no release. And they cannot do anything without money. Can we have an assurance, honourable minister, that you are going to provide money to the security to protect the lives of the people of Uganda and their property?MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, the Uganda Police Force, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and other votes, fall under the votes we categorised as “protected votes”.THE SPEAKER: They call them classified not protected votes.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, in addition to having categories of expenditures, which are classified, we, at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in the current circumstances, where we cannot manage adequate cash flows, there are still votes, which we categorise as prioritised to receive all the money and the Uganda Police Force is one of them. If something is not adding up, I can go and crosscheck.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, for us not to waste time on this matter, can I have a document laid on the Table tomorrow, to show that you released 25 per cent for the other quarter and 25 per cent for this quarter to the Uganda Police Force?5996MR MUSASIZI:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: So, we will get a report tomorrow on the releases that have been given to the police. Remember, we talked about accommodation for police officers and patrol cars - yes.2.30MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen-dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We join the entire country in mourning the souls of the children that passed on in Mukono and those of the of-ficers that participate in keeping law and order in this nation. Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for having brought up this on the Floor of Parliament. However, there are two things I would like to request that you pass on, as questions, to our colleagues on the other side. What happened to the surveillance cameras? I am asking this question because this House appropriated money for the Uganda Police Force to procure surveillance cameras. However, many people have lost lives and property without such information being captured by these cameras. So, there is a huge question, now that it has knocked on the door of the police officers and the school in Mukono, that we ought to know the causes, and proper investigation should be conducted and a report brought to this Floor of Parliament. The use of technology, Madam Speaker, is also important. We were told - and I am aware - that in certain institutions, all firearms that were registered have embedment of motion sensors that can be tracked using GPS. Therefore, we can know who stole these guns, where they have kept them and we can easily get them. If we are not able to use such technology, then –(Interjection)–  pardon! Okay, they were marked, but if we embed sensors - using the embedded systems within the guns and a person kills a police officer and runs away with the gun, in real time, we do not even need a roadblock. We should be able to trace that gun using the GPS. That way, we will be able to know where you have moved this gun to and you will be apprehended. Now, you can see the role of technology transformation in how we can work on our day-to-day security. Finally, there was the capture of all biometrics, including the eyes or fingerprints. So, the question is: where is the data that we gave to NIRA in the last six years? Because if they have a one-stop centre for all this data - data means the fingerprints and the face recognition - then we can procure cameras that can issue clear face recognition signals or if one have touched a place, then the Police can easily use the forensic laboratory to retrieve and ascertain who the criminals are and apprehend them. So, Madam Speaker, if we embrace technology in security, we will have a lesser budget than the budget for more cars and roadblocks, and we will clearly secure every countryman, not only the police officers. The last question is: how can a police station or post be without surveillance cameras? If such had been in place, the whole country would know who came in and from where. We would know how they came in using the roadside cameras and the cameras at the police station. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Nsereko. In the circumstance that we are still analogue - because we have not gone digital - we will need to first fulfil what we are supposed to do under analogue; we need patrol cars and all those things. Minister of Internal Affairs, we need a report from you, on what happened, what actions you are taking, and the preventive measures you are putting in place for such not to happen again, as we also wait for that report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 2.34MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Chairperson COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5997THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022of the Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety, I would like to say that we visited the Police Traffic Headquarters at Nateete. As you know very well, the cameras are not just about getting thieves, they are also to track our road behaviours and as you can see, every day, there is an increase in accidents on our roads. What that means is that something is not being done right. One of the observations is that they need more equipment to enable them to track the bad drivers on the roads. So, in that report, my prayer is to see that they also give us comprehensive information on what we passed here in Parliament - because we pushed for funding to road safety, but also to see that resources to enable these police officers to monitor road usage are enhanced. Madam Speaker, I really pray that is added.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, give us a story about the surveillance cameras. What happened? We approved the money in the Tenth Parliament – no, do not give it to us now; we want it documented and it should indicate how many were bought, where they are located, how much was spent, and who were the suppliers. This will help us to know that it was done.2.36MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to briefly comment on two issues.The first is security and police. This House will excuse me - because the money that was released, before I demand that more is released, is it utilised properly? We have had a case here of the UPDF importing uniforms that are for smaller people “Chinese size” –(Laughter)– you can look at the size of the UPDF representative here. They brought them uniforms that could not fit them. On another occasion, they brought choppers from Belarus that could not fly. Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member -MR SSEMUJJU: If you can allow me to -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you have heard from the minister; the money was appropriated, but it has not been released, unless you are talking about monies of the previous year.MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.MR SILWANY: Hon. Ssemujju, I am giving you important information. The Chief of Logistics at that time was Col Kiiza Besigye who procured those uniforms, which were small like for the Chinese. (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: Hon. Silwany, maybe because you are younger than me - because if you knew, the Commander-in-Chief remains the same, and at that time, he was actually the Minister for Defence.THE SPEAKER: By the way, the Commander-in-Chief does not do purchases.MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, a committee of Parliament chaired by Col Chris Mudoola - it is on the record of Parliament - accused that Commander-in-Chief of participating in small purchases, including that of two pickups. It is in a report of Parliament and on record here, but I did not want to go there. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am one of those who would want police and security to be given the money, but I am reluctant to recommend that more money be accessed until the utilisation - The second point is the rate at which Bills are returned to Parliament. Government ministers, including the principal legal advisor - the Attorney-General, are Members of Parliament. 5998We process these Bills together. Is there anything that they do not tell us and then they go behind our backs and tell the President? Can the ministers tell us whether when we are processing these Bills they are absentminded and they wake up only to know that there may be something and then they go to mobilise the President to return the Bills? So, can we know?THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Ssemujju. The problem is, it is only people that studied figures who know the difference between appropriation and what is released. I can excuse you for that because we talk about appropriation vis-a-vis release. So, the money was not released.Secondly, regarding the issue of Bills that are returned, there is a tendency - and I would like us to pick a leaf from this, especially on this Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill. When we reintroduce an item on the Floor, there is already a ruling to that effect. The ruling was that you cannot reintroduce an item on the Floor and expect it to be passed; it should have gone through the whole committee. The 30 to 40 per cent was reintroduced on this Floor and that is how it has been rejected. This is going to help us in the subsequent Bills; it was reintroduced here. Members, we are still on communication. You are going to talk; I am going to give you chance.2.42THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to welcome back the honourable members from the long recess. When you made reference to Members visiting their constituents to check on them and the performance of the Parish Development Model, you should have observed the demeanour of Members responding to your message. It is understandable because these honourable members you see here are really suffering.For the first time, the job of a Member of Parliament is now a burden rather than a service because as a leader in this building, I receive so many Members from different constituencies and different parties and their pain is easy to understand. Part of the reason is because Members of Parliament have taken the space of Government. (Applause) On my desk, I received a request from an honourable colleague asking for my contribution to put streetlights in his constituency. Members of Parliament are building maternity wards and buying ambulances. It is either an admission of the absence of Government or actually, Members of Parliament have abdicated their duty and are taking on other people’s duties. As we return for this session, I would like to assure you, Members, that this country is not poor. We can be temporarily broke on account of cash flow, but we are not a poor country. We are a country where the extent of priorities is obtuse and therefore, you are replacing Government. If we can stand together and demand that services are delivered and that the funds we appropriate are utilised properly, you will not suffer in your constituencies. If you cover up for Government, please expect to suffer on behalf of your Government. If we stand together and demand that the money we appropriate is utilised properly, you will enjoy your job and you will not run away from your constituents, like you have been doing. Therefore, I would like to ask Members to have the confidence to demand that the Government delivers. If you elect to suffer on behalf of your party, please keep silent and die silently. Madam Speaker, when I saw the Order Paper, I thought that you would amend it because I expect the Prime Minister to be here and deliver a post-recess statement, which is why I postponed mine to Thursday. But in the absence of a statement from the Prime Minister -[Mr Ssemujju] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5999THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022There are times I believe that the Office of the Prime Minister is a very serious office. I have other thoughts now. There is no way we can begin a session of Parliament and the Prime Minister is a no show and there is no statement on the Order Paper from the Prime Minister of the Republic. Of course, we are going to take over in their absence and I would like to put the House on notice that on Thursday, with the leave of the Speaker, I will make a statement on the Floor of the House on a plethora of issues in the land. I actually saw the Speaker occupying the space of the Prime Minister; the presiding officer, in observance of a vacuum, took over the role of the Prime Minister and we can see that seniors like Hon. Muruli Mukasa get to understand what I am talking about. A House of Parliament is opening a session and there is no Prime Minister to make an account of the happenings in the land. Rt Hon. Speaker, I thank you for taking over the role of the Prime Minister in observance of a vacuum and you communicated the issues in the country. Regarding the issues you have talked about, I can feel your pain, as the leader of the House, and I would like to invite the Front Bench –(Interjections) - Let me allow her to give information, being a senior member of the House.MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for allowing me to give information. The Prime Minister of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, would have been here in person, but she is meeting the President –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have the Government Chief Whip, who is going to talk. (Laughter)MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you.THE SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip is going to give a rebuttal.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Government is run like a WhatsApp group –(Laughter)- a junior minister rises to speak when there is a Government Chief Whip - that is very absurd.Madam Speaker, we pray that your instructions to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come to fruition because they are very serious issues of governance and priorities in this land. Government institutions are under attack and the cry is that the police is not facilitated. Madam Speaker, is the police part of a Government that buys drones ahead of police vehicles? Otherwise, we have very many new drones without number plates abducting citizens. They even do not lack fuel and they are brand new. Moreover, we are crying for money to buy police patrol pickups. Where is our sense of duty, responsibility and priorities?We await a statement from the Prime Minister on what is happening in the country. Is the country under attack? I saw the police spokesperson giving a nomenclature of a rebel group - it is a whole paragraph. We even do not know where he got it. Is the country under attack or is it the same old story of manufactured rebel groups? Madam Speaker, we need a statement on what is happening in this country so we can get to understand how to advise our people. Otherwise, I wish all Members a very fruitful session. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. One thing I can tell you is that our country is not under attack. (Hon. Odria rose_) Hon. Odria, do you want to say something? (Laughter)2.50MR ODRIA ALIONI (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for this opportunity –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason I am asking my son, Hon. Alioni, to say something is because he has been a very remorseful boy. He came and apologised 6000before me and I hope he is going to offer the same before you. He is now a free person and he is a mugole.MR ALIONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand here to echo my voice in support of the statement that has just been stated by our Leader of the Opposition. (Applause)Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that we do not have the Prime Minister in the House, who has three deputies, but none of them is present. Why? We have a lot of touching issues. We have resolutions by the Cabinet that were brought to this House in your absence, Madam Speaker. I remember at the time, the House was chaired by your deputy. There was a response from a Cabinet resolution concerning farmers in the region, but a specific region has been considered in relation to the supply of materials to our farmers in the country.Madam Speaker, through your office, I request a statement from the Prime Minister concerning the farmers in northern Uganda and the West Nile region. Why have they not been considered yet there was a resolution by the President?THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odria, what do you have to say about the police? (Laughter)MR ALIONI: Thank you. Concerning the police, they are meant to keep law and order. Some of us have a background of growing up as warriors and we are now leaders. (Laughter) For anything that went wrong, as a leader, I must say, I am sorry. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Alioni. Away from his apology, he wants a statement from the Government. You can take your seat. MR ALIONI: Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, back to what the Leader of the Opposition said, as far as I know, we still have a Government and we are not under any attack.Honourable members, bear with me because we have very important items. If you have not spoken, you will speak during the next item. I know you all have the brains to fix yourselves in the next item.2.54THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to welcome Members from recess.Madam Speaker, from your communication, permit me, on behalf of the National Resistance Movement Government, to convey our condolences to the families of the 11 children and the families of the police officers who were killed. I believe that the responsible arm of the State is doing all it takes to investigate the incidents, as by law established.On the matter raised by the Leader of the Opposition, where he seemingly wondered whether Government is absent because Members of Parliament seem to be doing what the Government is supposed to do, first and foremost, I want to affirm that Government is present. The people of Uganda unanimously entrusted the National Resistance Movement for the next five years and we are, in the circumstances, providing leadership.As parliamentarians, one of our roles is an oversight. Government is present and the Government is releasing money to the lower local Governments to provide services to the people of Uganda. (Interjections) However little it may appear, you are aware that the county runs a cash budget. You are also aware that the country is just recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic. You are even aware that we have another pandemic of Ebola.As Members of Parliament, if we could accept, in our oversight role to go and sit with our respective local Governments to see where these funds - however little it may be - have been put into utilisation, I believe we would have helped the Government in the fight against corruption. It is, therefore, my humble appeal that as Members of Parliament, let us take it [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6001THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022upon ourselves to move and find out how much our districts received under education and sports, how much they received under sanitation – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order -MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is common knowledge that the NRM party won the last elections and we would like to thank the people of Uganda for that. Madam Speaker, you sent us to our constituencies. I have just heard the minister say that the Government releases funds to run business at the local government level. One of the issues that I had on matters of national importance – but due to time - is releases by the Government to the lower local government. We all know that it took almost seven months for the Government to release funds to the lower local governments, specifically the new administrative units. THE SPEAKER: So, what is the point of order? MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the point of order that I am raising is that for three months, since July, the local governments in my district – LC III chairpersons – have not received salaries nor have they received funds for operations. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to say that the Government is releasing funds to the lower local governments when I am just from there and there was no money released to these local governments? THE SPEAKER: Members, let us have some order in the House. It is a known fact that some local governments have not received the money and that can only be answered by the minister for finance. The Government Chief Whip may not be privy to that information. Finance minister?2.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that in the first quarter of this financial year, we did not release all the monies as per the appropriated to MDAs. However, I wish to inform the House that under the item of wage, 100 per cent was released. We have good information and complaints that some entities have not paid wages at 100 per cent. The reason for this is that we have done a system migration from IFMS II to IFMS III; we have upgraded our IFMS system. What this has brought is that some of the accounting officers and users are yet to be conversant with it and the system itself still experiences –(Members rose_)THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you are rolling out a new system, there is a testing process and when you are rolling out a system, you do not do it wholesome; you do it in phases. When you use a system now as an excuse for not giving local governments money – I mean, that is not fair for us. If we do not have money, let us say we do not have money.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I am very confident about what I am talking about. For the IFMS system, we have upgraded, we have enrolled it in all our V otes, except in a few districts where we do not have the network. In this quarter two –(Interjections)–  Can I, please - In this quarter two – I can present the cash limits for quarter two tomorrow. All local governments have received 100 per cent of their due release for quarter two.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since he says is going to give evidence to that effect, can we have that evidence laid on the Table tomorrow so that we know how much each local government got? Honourable minister, can you lay that document on the Table tomorrow – on how much you have given to each local government?6002MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, tomorrow at exactly 2.00 p.m., if you give me permission, I will lay the document here. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Member rose_) - No, he is still on the Floor. Government Chief Whip, can you finish?MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, my statement has been corroborated by the minister of finance and I have nothing useful to add. On the absence of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda on this occasion when Parliament returns from recess, I wish to state, on record, that at the moment, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Robinah Nabbanja, is meeting with His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda at State House. I am aware and informed that as and when space is provided for the Prime Minister to brief the country on any matter, she will be available to brief the country, through Parliament. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, I know why this is being raised. It is out of courtesy for your office to notify the presiding officer that “today, the Prime Minister will not be there; so and so would be standing in for the Prime Minister” so that I am able to defend. (Applause) If I am not coming here, my deputy will be here. Hon. Solomon? Members, we are running out of time. We are going to be conducting the House for three hours strictly. Whether it is a Bill or what, we will have three hours – except when there are exceptional circumstances.3.05MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the rationalisation of government agencies. As you are aware and as has been happening in Parliament, the Government is in the process of rationalising different agencies that are already in existence. However, it came to my notice that certain individuals are misusing this window and taking over the roles of Parliament to do what they are not supposed to do. A case in point concerns NITA–U – and this is under V ote 126. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance wrote a letter – and I am going to lay all these letters that I have accessed - instructing and stopping this V ote and transferring the V ote to the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance, yet it is only Parliament of Uganda that should do this. Madam Speaker, when the Executive Director of NITA–U sought advice from the learned Attorney-General, he guided that this was not right and that it is only Parliament. I would like to state just one paragraph of what the learned Attorney-General replied in the letter:“…the virtue of power to make laws is given exclusively to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda under Article 79(1) and (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”Madam Speaker, the Permanent Secretary is becoming Parliament. She is acting with impunity; trying to shift a V ote that is not supposed to be shifted by her. This is all because of small internal conflicts that exist between different individuals, which could have even been internally solved and people move so that Ugandans benefit from the services.My prayers are that:1. The minister should come here to inform the House and ensure that this is stopped immediately.2. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also assure this Parliament that this kind of impunity will not happen again because I know - and I still stand by it - that it is only  Parliament that can transfer this vote.Madam Speaker, those are the two strong prayers that I have on this issue.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6003THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the letter from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 19 October 2022 with the heading, “Digital Transformation; Agreed Vote allocation for Financial Year 2023/2024.” It was authored by the Permanent Secretary, Dr Aminah Zawedde, Ministry of Information Technology. I beg to lay.I also beg to lay the guidance to the Executive Director of the National Information Technology Authority - Uganda (NITA-U). It is headed: “Request for Guidance on How to Operate Amidst the Rationalisation of Government Agencies.” I beg to lay the guidance of the Attorney-General.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Solomon. Minister, do you have anything to say about your ministry?3.10THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this issue. The issue of rationalisation is still being handled by the Cabinet. At an appropriate time, when the Executive is ready, we shall come to the House to report. There may be decisions necessary for Parliament to take.I am just seeing this letter for the first time from my Permanent Secretary, but in all honesty, she is out of order because she should have discussed it with me. I sit in Cabinet, together with my ministers of state; we should have guided her that this letter is premature. Therefore, the letter will be withdrawn from the ministry and then, we shall proceed.If she had consulted us, we would have given her guidance on how this matter is being handled. That is what I can say.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, NITA-U is a creation of this House, which was created under the NITA-U Act, 2009. For anything to happen with NITA-U, it must also be a creation of this House, and not a PS. Therefore, we expect the minister to take action on the PS for abusing this House.Secondly, NITA-U was allocated a V ote after fulfilling all the requirements provided for under paragraph 4.26 of the Treasury Instructions, 2017. The requirements include a legal framework, running the V ote based on the financial year, over 50 per cent of the funds are allocated from the Consolidated Fund, ability to raise non-tax revenue in a financial year, prepare payments through instructions of the Accountant-General, arrange activities based on medium-term framework and possess sufficient manpower.It is only when a V ote violates any of these requirements that it ceases to exist. The fact that we are going into the budgeting period, the PS is already abusing her powers. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not allow her to be a V ote holder in the next financial year. (Applause)It has been noted that the vote still meets all the requirements that I have just mentioned. Therefore, it is very irregular for the accounting officer to engineer closure of a V ote without adducing evidence, which has been mentioned under paragraph 4.26 of the Treasury Instructions, 2017. That is a violation of the law.Even if there was evidence of a violation, the power to create a V ote is vested on the Secretary to the Treasury on recommendations of the Accountant-General, as stipulated in Section 11(2)(k) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, and paragraph 4.26 of the Treasury Instructions, 2017.For avoidance of doubt, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - I know you want to talk - based on the existence of NITA-U, Parliament appropriated funds to NITA-U under V ote 126. 6004It still maintains funds under NITA-U on that V ote. It has even asked for a loan on that same V ote. Any alteration of the V ote status without satisfying the conditions that were provided for under the Public Finance Management Act and Treasury Instructions is illegal. Whatever is being done is, indeed, illegal. That is why you ought to take action on such an illegality.Aware that the accounting officer is appointed and designated under Section 11(2)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act, the Secretary to Treasury should take action on the accounting officer. We need that action to be reported back to the House because she is abusing the powers of Parliament; she wants to take over Parliament and do everything herself.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe the background to this, briefly, is that the Cabinet has been sitting and has taken decisions on a number of agencies with respect to rationalisation. NITA-U is one of those agencies suggested to be taken back to the Ministry of ICT.However, the process is still on. What we require - like you correctly said, NITA-U is the creation of Parliament through an Act of Parliament. It is not until the Act is repealed by Parliament that NITA-U will cease to exist.That is why I am saying that the letter by the Permanent Secretary - I believe it is in good faith – but probably, she did not appreciate the process we have to go through to complete what is being done.However, we shall take administrative action as a ministry –(Interjections) - but she allowed me.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed the minister to give a rejoinder on what he had said, but unfortunately, the rejoinder the minister is giving is not what is expected of him.I am not asking you to defend; it is something which is in black and whiteDR BARYOMUNSI: But I am not contradicting your guidance, Madam Speaker. I was just saying – (Interjections) - yes, I know. It is the Speaker who allowed me to speak.THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you finish?  But I have already given a ruling. I want action.DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, we shall –THE SPEAKER: Secondly, we had an Ad hoc committee in this House that looked at rationalisation. The report was presented to this House and we have forwarded it to Cabinet to compare with what you have and to harmonise it.At the end of the day, it is going to come back to this House: it is this House that gave and it is this House to take it back.DR BARYOMUNSI: That is the same point I was making, that the Executive will have to come back to the House for agencies like NITA-U, if we are to repeal the law, then we shall have to come back and that is when NITA-U will cease to exist.THE SPEAKER: Now, we are acting on anticipation. We are speculating what we think will happen and then, we make mistakes there. The PS was absolutely wrong to do what she did and whatever she did is legal. Even after getting advice from the learned Attorney-General, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I am waiting for the action.3.19THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, first of all –(Interjection)-  through the Chair.THE SPEAKER: No, let him finish, then you will come.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, first of all, it is our mandate as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to create V otes and also to withdraw them if necessary.[Dr Baryomunsi] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6005THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022I am just wondering how the PS from another ministry gets into withdrawing a certain V ote without our knowledge as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.To cut the long story short, as far as we are concerned, we have not withdrawn that V ote and we do not have intentions to withdraw the NITA-U V ote until this entity ceases to exist. As far as we are concerned now, NITA-U is an entity of Government with a V ote and with a budget until further notice.Madam Speaker, I want to commit that I am going to ask the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to make a statement in regard to this letter I have just seen written by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of ICT.THE SPEAKER: You are going to ask him to make a statement and take action.3.21MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. You begin to worry, I see on the Order Paper we have under item No.4(iii) $140 million and another $60 million which totals to $200 million about to be borrowed for NITA-U.Now, is this a scheme by ICT to take over the mandate of NITA-U because of this borrowed $200 million?Madam Speaker, we saw this happen with the Rural Electrification Agency (REA. As long as there was $400 million to be borrowed for REA, REA was taken over by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and in the countryside, we are stuck with poles and nothing is being done. Now, the same thing -and I think this is the greedy fight for this borrowed $200 million, which is about to be laid in this Parliament.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am happy the House is alert. The money is going to NITA-U and not ICT and the Minister of ICT is with the House: he has just seen the document and he is surprised. 2.23MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance over a land wrangle between residents of Bulindo in Kira Municipality, Wakiso District and Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Elly Kayanja.In all these, we have attached evidence in case of further follow-up. But in this matter, Madam Speaker, over 4,000 residents of Bulindo village are affected. And in this village, we have 226 hectares of land, where a one Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Elly Kayanja is believed to have deployed on the 16th of August 2022 to ensure that this land is taken over.On this very day, the village witnessed UPDF plain-clothed armed men, deployed to guard the flattening of the contested land on Block 182 in Kyadondo in the district. As per these attachments, evidence of plots 1,562, 1,558, 1,559, plot 78 and 79, among others, have titles as per the different individuals already there. Madam Speaker, this land has several community-help projects like Bulindo Catholic Church, Bulindo Government-Aided School, Kira Municipality land, which is going to bear the division headquarters of Kira and proposed technical works and many others. My prayers are:1. That Parliament intervenes in this land row and takes action.2. That Parliament investigates the creation and operations of the ministerial zonal offices that are based at different district headquarters and they are not for districts, but ministries, which many people mistake for districts. So, I request that this Parliament investigates their creations and operations. Many people complain about Wakiso staff over land matters, but it is not Wakiso.60063. I also pray that Parliament further investigates the continued illegal land transfers by several officers in this country.4. I further pray that Parliament asks the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to explain the deployment of the UPDF in such circumstances.I so pray, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Naluyima, I have just been informed that this case is in court. We are going to find out at what level it is before we can allow a debate on it, for it not to amount to sub-judice.We will give you feedback on this matter. Clerk’s Office, make a follow-up on this. Next item.Members who had matters of national importance, bear with me. We will handle them tomorrow. We need to move faster with this Order Paper. Let us go on to the next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROGRESS IN COMBATING THE EBOLA OUTBREAK IN THE COUNTRYTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall what I said before, there is an outbreak of Ebola. I directed that the Minister of Health regularly updates the House on the progress regarding combating the outbreak.I also thank the President, together with the health ministry, for regularly updating the country on what is happening with Ebola. Now, I invite the minister of state, Hon. Muhanga, to make a presentation on the status of Ebola.3.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this guidance. This morning, the senior minister requested that we read the statement tomorrow because she said she had spoken to you yesterday, and told you that the team on the ground is still compiling more information about the person who was exhumed in Kassanda and so, we will present it tomorrow. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the junior minister is asking if the statement can be presented tomorrow. That would be better. We can still keep it for tomorrow. Now that it is going to be presented tomorrow, please, capture some more items.3.29MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for their decision to bring the statement tomorrow, yet, it is on today’s Order Paper. That is incompetence and we now know what is happening. However -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, there is nobody who is incompetent in this House.MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you very much. I wanted to say that that is laziness. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, it is equally not laziness. Can you sit down?3.30MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I thank the Ministry of Health as they organise themselves to present the issues on Ebola tomorrow. However, on the 28th of October, the Ministry of Education and Sports, in consultation with the Ministry of Health issued a circular to all schools and institutions in Uganda, banning all visitations there because of the issue of Ebola.Unfortunately, the issue at hand is that primary seven pupils will be sitting for their Primary Leaving Examinations around the 7th of this month. And then for those in the boarding section, parents are getting information that they are supposed to pick them on Friday and return them to school on Thursday next week.Madam Speaker, if visitation in schools has been banned, yet, at the same time, some children are supposed to be picked to go home [The Speaker] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT6007THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022in different districts and directions, isn’t there a risk that maybe, the homes where they are going to could be infected? And in case that happens, won’t those going back to school infect other pupils in these schools?Therefore, as we wait for the Minister of Health to come up with a statement, my prayer is that may the Ministry of Education and Sports reigns over this so that we control the risk of the spread of the disease in the country. That is my prayer.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. And maybe on top of that, in Mubende and Kassanda, there are some pupils and students who registered with different examination centres, yet, public transport has been restricted.What plans does the Ministry of Education and Sports have to handle that? Let it come in tomorrow’s report. What plans do you have to ensure those pupils go to do exams in those examination centres and return home safely?MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, for granting me permission again. I respect the ministry, but Parliamentary work - we have seen the Minister of Health moving everywhere on radio and social media addressing the people on what they are doing in these districts.We have been away on recess and we do not see the Minister coming here directly to give us information; this is being unfair to this House. They do not respect this House.The Minister of Internal Affairs has been here; we need to request -THE SPEAKER: For your information, I gave permission by the powers vested in me.Mr SSEWUNGU: Yes, but the Minister of Internal Affairs has been here. What is happening in Kassanda and Mubende districts - there is a lot of beating of citizens; preventing them from Ebola. Some people are being arrested.THE SPEAKER: Let us bring that up tomorrow.MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I visited the Uganda Tourism Board this morning because I come from a tourism city and realised that the exaggeration of information about Ebola by the media has affected this economy; you cannot believe the effects on our economy.We have seen 50 per cent of cancellations by tourists coming to Uganda. Unfortunately, ministries are talking different languages. I do not know what Cabinet is doing because they must come with a comprehensive strategy on how to update the world.This business of one ministry coming out to exaggerate a situation - economically, we are doing very badly. That is why Government cannot collect enough taxes. You are running bankrupt; you must learn how to manage information.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not the media misleading people; media is given that information by us. So, we only need to regulate. If we say that it is the Minister of ICT and Guidance to give information, let it be so and not everybody because when everybody talks, information is distorted.Maybe, as we go to the next item, I would like to inform the House that because of the rampant accidents in the country, we lost a daughter to one of our ministers, Hon. Mayanja.Our condolences to Hon. Mayanja, as a House, and we stand with you during this trying time. May the good Lord rest her soul in eternal peace.3.35THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is that after that directive and circular suspending leavers’ parties and banning visitation in schools, the bid to nip the spread of Ebola in the bud would be good, indeed, and would have strict adherence in boarding schools.6008However, do you think there could be similar observance of strict adherence to the standard operating procedures in the schools that have day scholars? I am asking this because they mix freely with the populace as they go and come back to school.3.36MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the ministry comes, tomorrow -THE SPEAKER: Take note of all that is being said and you will respond tomorrow.MR BASALIRWA: As the minister comes tomorrow, it is my humble request that they also table, before this august House, a copy of the Gazette containing the statutory instrument declaring Kassanda and Mubende as areas that are affected and the punishable offences in those specific areas. I say so because we had a problem during the COVID-19 pandemic where the President would make a pronouncement and police officers would arrest people on the basis of a presidential pronouncement. However, a presidential pronouncement is not law. That is why people are being arrested and the police cannot charge them; because there are no offences.Therefore, as you come tomorrow, please, come with a copy of the statutory order where that is contained – (Interruption)DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. The information I just want to provide to you is that the pronouncements by the President during COVID-19 and even the pronouncement on Ebola are in accordance with the Public Health Act. It is just information; take it that way.MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, but with due respect, it was me who raised this matter in the 10th Parliament and presidential pronouncements were transformed into statutory instruments.Therefore, I do not want you to make the same mistake because we had a case in Arua, for example, where a lady was arrested for selling malwa. When she was taken to police, she was given police bond. What offence was written on the police bond? Unlawful selling of malwa during COVID-19 lockdown? Where is that offence written? (Laughter) I hope you do not make the same mistake. As you come tomorrow, please, let us have a copy of that statutory instrument. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Members, to the best of my knowledge, there is a statutory instrument. All that we need is to see it, but I am aware that it is there. All questions related to Ebola – Hon. Odria, tell him to sit. (Laughter) For all issues in connection with Ebola, tomorrow, I will give you one hour. We shall discuss Ebola, come up with solutions and what we can do. That is after passing our Bill. Next item -LAYING OF PAPERSI) REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO €455.03 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO $464.13 MILLION) FROM STANDARD CHARTERED BANK AND OTHER FINANCE INSTITUTIONS TO FINANCE THE DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance-3.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to €455.03 million, an equivalent of $464.13 million from Standard Chartered Bank and other financial institutions to finance the development and infrastructure budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, on 20 May 2022, this House passed an appropriation Bill. The Shs 48.1 [Mr Nambeshe] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT6009THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022trillion budget that the House approved had various funding sources, including domestic borrowing, external borrowing and internal collections. The Shs 25.5 trillion was from revenue. Grants were Shs 2.16 trillion and borrowing from both domestic and external sources was Shs 12.97 trillion.The people in Finance have been lying to this country that they can live within the internal collections. Now, they have come to borrow money - to ask you to authorise the terms. I want to be specific: they are not asking you to give them permission to borrow; you already gave them permission to borrow. What they are bringing on the Table are the terms of borrowing. You gave them the figure to borrow in the appropriation Bill. Now, we are looking at the terms of borrowing. The report has been – Have you laid it?MR MUSASIZI: Yes.THE SPEAKER: Because of the urgency of the matter - we have gaps in the budget - I will refer this, in line with Rule 7(3) of the Rules of Procedure, to the Committee on National Economy and they should report back to the House this week.As I said before, administratively, I also got this loan during recess. When I got it, I forwarded the loan request to the committee and after forwarding it, I reported this to the Business Committee, where the top leadership of this institution sits, including all the chairpersons, vice-chairpersons and whips of this House.I did that administratively and now, formally, I refer it to the Committee on National Economy and it should be brought back to the House. That is under rule 155(2) and I am suspending rule 155(1).II) REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 237.7 (EQUIV ALENT TO  $331.5 MILLION) AND RECEIVE A GRANT OF UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 198.2 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO  $276.5 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE ELECTRICITY ACCESS SCALEUP PROJECT3.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 237.7 (equivalent to $331.5 million) and receive a grant of up to Special Drawing Rights 198.2 million (equivalent to $276.5 million) from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Electricity Access Scale up Project (EASP). I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I invoke rule 155(1) and refer the loan to the Committee on National Economy to be scrutinised and report back to the House.III) REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 98.8 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO  $140 MILLION AND SECURE A GRANT FINANCING AMOUNTING TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 42.4 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO  $60 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK TO FINANCE THE UGANDA DIGITAL ACCELERATION PROJECT – GOVERNMENT NETWORK3.46THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 98.8 million (equivalent to 6010$140 million) and secure a grant financing amounting to Special Drawing Rights 42.4 million (equivalent to $60 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank to finance the Uganda Digital Acceleration Project (UDAP) – Government Network (GOVNET). I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I still invoke rule 155(1), and under rule 155(2), I refer this to the Committee on National Economy to consider and report back to the House.Honourable members, this is money for NITA-U not ICT. The previous loan was for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. This is for NITA-U. The other one was for budget support.3.47THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not trying to pre-empt the work of the committee, but to draw the attention of the House to the fact that the first two borrowings relate to the country’s Special Drawing Rights (SDR) and that connotes the results.I would like to request that while the reports are being made to this Parliament, there is a comment on the extent of infringement on our SDR, so, we can know how safe we are, as a country since they speak to our input capacity over time and our capacity to borrow from bilateral and multilateral sources. Otherwise, we know that the marginal appetite to borrow by the Government is quite high. Therefore, it is quite easy to put this country into a debt crisis. Can we have a comment, as part of the report is being made?Madam Speaker, I read the demeanour of my old friend, Dr Baryomunsi, when he was commenting on the attempted migration of NITA-U into the ministry. It speaks to why, for example, energy fast-tracks the migration of ERA back into the entity and how we are stuck, like Hon. Muwanga observed, with poles in my constituency.THE SPEAKER: Let me make a correction. It is not ERA; it is the Rural Electrification Agency (REA).MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I beg your pardon. It is REA. Now, we are stuck. In my constituency, there are areas stuck with the poles for over five years without lines running. We need to be very circumspect.I would like to invite Parliament to be interested in this facility that is going for electricity distribution. Probably, we shall demand the minister to clearly lay before Parliament where they are going, which region and the cost; the kind of money they are taking for each region so that we can derive equity and value for money. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: The issue of national character and equity must be respected and you can lay that before the committee. Let us leave the committee to handle the matter. We will discuss it when it comes to the House. However, when giving national character, equity must be respected. If 200 is going to Bukedea - this time, also include Bukedea. (Laughter). Next item.IV) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH  JUNE 2022THE SPEAKER: Commissioner, please, come and lay.3.50MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Social Security Fund for the year ended 30 June 2022. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Pursuant to Rule 181(3) of the Rules of Procedure, I refer the report to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). I would like to remind the committee that they should respect the law [Mr Musasizi]6011THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022by ensuring that reports are given back not exceeding six months.V) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE 8TH UNFPA COUNTRY PROGRAMME GPECMUGA, UGA09GBV , UGA09SRH, UGA09WYP, ZZTOGUGA IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20213.51MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the 8th UNFPA Country Programme implemented by the Ministry of Education and Sports for the year ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Pursuant to Rule 174(4) of the Rules of Procedure, I refer this to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).VI) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UNFPA-FUNDED PROGRAMME UGA09GBV/PGUG12 IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE NINE-MONTH PERIOD ENDED 30TH SEPTEMBER 20213.52MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of UNFPA funded programme implemented by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the nine-month period ended 30 September 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Pursuant to rule 174(4), this is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). VII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE 8TH UNFPA COUNTRY PROGRAMME GPECMUGA AND UGA09GBV IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 20213.53MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on financial statements of the 8th UNFPA country programme implemented by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the year ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) under rule 174(4). VIII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UNFPA-FUNDED PROGRAMME COMPONENT OF DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS IMPLEMENTED BY NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 20213.54MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of UNFPA funded programme component of data and population dynamics implemented by the National Planning Authority for the year ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: That is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) under Rule 181(3) of the Rules of Procedure.6012X) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UNFPA-FUNDED PROGRAMME COMPONENT OF DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS IMPLEMENTED BY UGANDA BUREAU OF STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20213.55MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of UNFPA funded programme component of data and population dynamics implemented by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics for the year ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: It is referred to Committee on Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) under rule 181(3). Honourable Commissioner, thank you very much for laying the reports.I urge public accounts committees to adhere to article - Leader of the Opposition, these are your reports. Hon. Asuman, you are a member of JEEMA, so, sit somewhere. I urge the public accounts committees to adhere to Article 163(5) of the Constitution by ensuring that they report on the reports of the Auditor-General within six months. We have a lot of backlog, especially in Hon. Asuman’s committee. That is why he is seated next to you - he is trying to negotiate. I am deeply concerned about the backlog. We cannot do anything, as Finance, since there are no Treasury Memoranda in the House. We need the backlog exhausted.Leader of the Opposition, I know you are a very hardworking person. I urge you to ask your Members to give us their reports. We are ready to pass your reports anytime you bring them, but not after six months. If you do not do that within six months, then we will automatically adopt them as approved reports and you will have no job to do in this Parliament. I need a commitment first from the Leader of the Opposition that we are going to have the reports.3.56THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have conversed over the nature of backlog and the possible causes. I am glad that the Parliamentary Commission agreed to our proposal to offer technical backstopping to the committees. A framework has been laid out and I have no doubt that we are going to expedite subsequent reports now that there is back up from the Commission staff to be able to work these out.The 11th Parliament being new, the first year was a bit problematic for Members to appreciate the extent, depth and engagement that we desired to have reports come out fast. I am going to be on their heels to ensure that the reports come out within the timeframes stipulated, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, since the amendment of the rules, I have been informed that not all Members have copies of the new Rules of Procedure. That could have been an oversight on the Clerk’s side. So, honourable members, as you get out, copies of the Rules of Procedure are at the reception. Please, sign for and go with them. (Applause) Let us go to the next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 ON FOUR DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND TWO MUNICIPAL COUNCILSTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, related to my guidance on the need for timely reporting by the Public Accounts Committee on the reports of the Auditor-General under Article 163, let us receive the report from the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) by Hon. Mapenduzi.[The Speaker]  STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT6013THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022I note that the report he is presenting is for only four local governments; Apac, Mityana, Butambala and municipalities of Nansana and Makindye – plus Kira. Honourable chairperson, next time, we want a comprehensive report without doing it piecemeal. I may ask you: what interest did you have in Butambala? Why not Bukedea or Alebtong?Next time, let us have a comprehensive report. It helps us in receiving our Treasury Memorandum. Please, go ahead and report. Give us an abstract. 4.00THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Mapenduzi Ojara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: This report was uploaded before we broke off. Honourable Government Chief Whip, tell your Members that if they want to shout, the National Theatre is near.MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and advice. Indeed, the committee has been able to conclusively handle all the entities as reported by the Auditor-General. We will be able to provide all the other reports by next week. I take your advice.Before I present this report, permit me to lay on the Table minutes of the committee meetings and a copy of the report.Madam Speaker, just as you guided - and for purposes of saving time - on the 24th of August this year, I presented a report of the committee, covering 14 entities. Today, permit me to present this report, which covers the audit queries contained in the report of the Auditor-General for the financial year ended 30 June 2021 for the following local governments; Apac District Local Government, Nansana Municipal Council, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council, Kira Municipal Council, Mityana District Local Government and Butambala District Local Government.To save time, from page one – this gives the introductory part and background to the report I am going to present. I request that you allow me not to spend a lot of time here and instead move to cross-cutting issues.On page 8, where we have general and cross-cutting audit queries, I refer honourable colleagues to the previous report that I gave – as I stated – on the 24th of August, where we gave details of those cross-cutting audit queries and issues covering those entities. It would be a repetition if I run through the cross-cutting issues.If that permission is granted, Madam Speaker, I now request that you allow me to go to the specific local government entities. I request Members to go to page 28.THE SPEAKER: Go ahead.MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Madam Speaker, on page 28 – that is part two – we look at specific audit queries across local governments. Here, I will start with V ote 582 - Buikwe Local Government, which has an unqualified opinion.Query 1.0 looks at payment of salaries, pension and gratuity. Query 1.1 looks at absorption of funds.The audit report revealed that Shs 15,040,000,000, representing 93.1 per cent, was spent out of a total of Shs 16,150,000,000, resulting in an unspent balance of Shs 1,110,000,000. That is the amount returned the Treasury.We have indicated the explanation as given by the accounting officer and I will not spend a lot of time on that, but I will take you to the committee’s observations.The committee observed that – indeed, Madam Speaker, most of the Shs 1.1 billion that was not spent was money meant for payment of salaries for secondary school teachers, who were not posted to the local government by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Part of the money was meant for recruitment of staff.6014The committee observed that efforts were being made by the district to fill the vacant positions and observed that the staffing level at the district was at 72 per cent.However, the committee also noted the failure by the district to attract candidates for certain key positions that have remained vacant. Therefore, we have given recommendations that:(i)  The Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that recruitment and posting of secondary school teachers is expedited to save these local governments from losing money.(ii) The accounting officer should ensure that the recruitments for the vacant critical positions are conducted to enhance service delivery and avoid return of funds to the Consolidated Fund.Madam Speaker, query number two looks at payment of salary using wrong scales. The audit report revealed that there were cases of salary payments made using wrong scales. This resulted in overpayment of salary to seven staff, totalling Shs 6.524 million and under payment of salary to 24 staff totalling to Shs 20,560,692.Again, the accounting officer explained what happened - and I will take you straight to the committee observation.The committee observed that:i) Payment of staff salaries based on wrong salary scales, was indicative of fraudulent actions and a breach of Section B (a)(6) and (7) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010.ii) Reluctance by the accounting officer and human resource officer in updating annual increments on the salaries of staff. As a result, the committee recommends the following:i) The accounting officer and the human resource officer be held personally liable and reprimanded for failure to update increments on the salaries of staff leading to underpayment.ii) The accounting officer should ensure that the staff underpaid, receive salary.Madam Speaker, I want to be specific when I say the accounting officer has to be held personally liable. I need to be specific and mention these officers. The two officers we are recommending to be held liable are:1. Mr George Tolume (the accounting officer) and Mr Godfrey Kunihira.2. The Principal Human Resource Officer is Ssebaliya Khadijah.Query No. 3, delayed –(Interjections)THE SPEAKER: Can you address the Chairperson?MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Madam Speaker, I need your protection. Under query 1.3 - Delayed deletion of staff from payroll. The audit –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the chairperson is trying to avoid giving us a generic report. Let us be specific. If you are to hold anybody accountable, then, there must be a person held accountable not just an office: it is a person. Please, go ahead, you are doing very well.MR MAPENDUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On delayed deletion of staff from the payroll, the audit report noted that Shs 4,697,808 was wrongly paid to two staff who had retired. Again, the accounting officer gave his part of the story and the committee made the following observation:i) The delayed deletion of staff from the entities’ active salary payroll was a violation of Section B(a)(12) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010, which [Mr Ojara]  STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT6015THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 1 NOVEMBER 2022states that payment of salary to public officers be stopped immediately they cease rendering services to the Government under whatever circumstances, including death;ii) The district had made efforts to ensure recovery much as they had delayed.The committee recommends that:i) The accounting officer should ensure that full recovery of the funds be made as scheduled; and ii) Much as they had made effort in recovering, they violated provisions of the Public Service Standing Orders and therefore, the committee is recommending that the PS/ST should reprimand the accounting Officer and hold him personally liable for causing financial loss to the Government.Query No.2 - Management of payroll deductionsMadam Speaker, the audit report revealed that whereas Shs 2,990,737,881 was deducted from employees’ salaries to be remitted to different beneficiaries, Shs 2,962,441,829 was remitted leading to an over- and under-remittance amounting to Shs 73,052 and Shs 28,369,104, respectively. Again, the accounting officer gave his part of the story and the committee made the following observations:There was an under-remittance of Shs 28,369,104 and over-remittance of Shs 73,052 to the different beneficiaries, hence, affecting the operations of the entity.We therefore, recommended as a committee that:i) The accounting officer carries out reconciliations before remitting the said money to beneficiaries to avoid under payment THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I do not see the Minister of Local Government here and this report concerns local government. Are we going to continue giving reports while respective ministries are not there? Is it proper?Finance is also not there and the Government Chief Whip is also not there.4.11THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, Finance has just stepped out, but he is coming back.THE SPEAKER: But he cannot hear what they are saying; it is all about money lost.MS NAKADAMA: He is following because he is in the building. He just stepped out, but he is following.THE SPEAKER: Are they not under Local Government?MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, let me talk to these people if they are in the corridor, so that they can come, including the Government Chief Whip. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Members, let us have respect for this House. We cannot continue listening to a report that is not going to be acted upon.4.12MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, the Government needs to be around because when you read through all these reports, you will find a consistent and permanent reoccurrence of the same issues.That means at supervisory level, there is a gap and the gap is explicit with what takes place because line ministers receive the Order Paper and they know that their ministries are going to feature on accountability issues. And with due respect, they are not here. They either think what we are doing is useless, does not add value or is of no consequences.6016That is why year after year, if you read through these reports -you have a history of being the Vice-Chairperson of COSASE - the same issues keep remerging and our prayer is we cannot continue like this.THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have been in accountability committees and I know what it means. When you go and interrogate people, you do all that you are doing and you come to the House, year in, year out, the same issues are reappearing. Why? Because of what he is saying; the monitoring process.Now, the Minister of Local Government is not here. They are talking about his members and there is a lot of money, which is lost. How are we going to continue like this? How shall we continue? - I do not want any procedural matter or guidance.I am saying we need these ministers in the House. We circulate the Order Paper a day before; and these 83 ministers are approved.Honourable members, this item will come first on the Order Paper tomorrow. I am going to adjourn the House and make them feel that they are enjoying their safe haven.House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)[Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]