Monday, 1st October 2000

The House met at 2.35p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000" be read for the First Time. I also ought to move that "The Appropriation Bill, 2000" be read for the First Time. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: No, you are moving something which is not on the Order Paper. Deal with what is on the Order Paper, hon. Minister.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2000

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Appropriation Bill, 2000 be read for the First Time.

 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
 
THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (MS. Alitwala Kadaga): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, during the debate on Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee report, hon. Michael Mukula moved a motion relating to the remittance of salaries, allowances and wages abroad to start with Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Hon. Mukula was convinced to withdraw his motion on the understanding that Government would take measures to ensure that the directive of Cabinet that salaries, wages and foreign service allowances be paid by the 28th of every month, would be implemented. 

I would like to assure Members that the matter was, even at that time, receiving Government attention. We have since taken steps to rectify it and the Prime Minister chaired an inter-ministerial meeting of stakeholders. Another Committee was set up comprising the following people: 
    • Mr. John Mitala, Deputy Head of Public Service; 
    • the Secretary for Administrative Reform, as chairperson;
    • Mr. Tumusiime Mutebile, PS Secretary to the Treasury, member; 
    • Mr. Vincent Ssekono, PS Secretary Local Government; 
    • Mr. J. Lwamafa, PS in the Ministry of Public Service, Member; 
    • Representative of the Bank of Uganda; 
    • Representative of the Auditor General.

The function of this inter-ministerial committee would be to monitor the implementation of the Cabinet directive to the effect that salaries, wages and Foreign Service allowances are paid by the 28th of every month. It was further agreed that money meant for payment of rent, water, telephone and electricity for our missions should be put on the list of priorities and should never be diverted to other uses either by the Ministry or by the missions.

We are going to identify and expose wrongdoers who frustrate this Cabinet directive. In order to ensure that people who fail to implement this directive are punished by the relevant constitutional commissions, District Service Commissions and other Government agencies, the Committee will send reports to the Prime Minister, Minister for General Duties, Ministers and Ministers of State, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, PS Secretary to Treasury, Deputy PS to the Treasury and PS in the Office of the Prime Minister.  

The Following are the specific duties of the Committee and there is a time frame:
(a) The Uganda Computer Services will release payroll schedules by 10th of every month.
(b) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development request for audit warrants from the Auditor General by the 12th of every month.
(c) The Auditor General will issue audit warrants to the Treasury Office of Accounts by 14th of every month.
(d) The Treasury Office of Accounts will prepare cash releases and disperse payment advice to Bank of Uganda every 16th day of the month.
(e) Bank of Uganda will transfer salary funds to UCB by the 18th of every month and Uganda Commercial Bank will credit district commercial banks in respect of those officers in the districts on the 20th of every month.
(g) The districts and centre will effect payment of salaries every 28th day of every month.

We request Parliament to support our effort in enabling the stakeholders to be paid by the 28th of every month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Minister for your presentation. Is there anyone who wishes to seek clarification? You recall this was really as a result of a decision you took earlier on following the withdrawal of the motion by hon. Mukula. The discussion was such that you did not want that motion to proceed but because of the pledge the Prime Minister had made, the hon. Minister has come here to update you on what has happened since then and what is going to happen. Let us have hon. Wangubo, then we go this way.

MR.WANGUBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Following that submission, there are two types of staff at the district level. Some get salaries from the centre, while others get theirs from the districts. And quite often they say they are not paid because of such monies delaying from the general conditional grants and that kind of thing. Would this arrangement take care of that? Thank you.

MR.BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have previously made a presentation on the Floor of this House about lack of payment for employees of Moyo district, sometimes for up to three or four months and sometimes even more. I would like to know from the Minister how this directive is going to be applied in relation to districts in general, and Moyo in particular, to ensure that our people’s salaries are paid so that they are able to render services as they are mandated to.  

MR.BAMWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Government for coming up with this Committee to handle the payment of salaries. I am only seeking one clarification. There are a number of stages that the process will go through and we have been getting Government assurances over a number of things including the National Planning Authority, which never took place. In the event that there is a roadblock in between, how will Members of Parliament refer the matter to make sure that the salaries are never delayed, as has been the case before? A case in point is that we need an assurance with the Committee on Government Assurances so that if anything goes wrong, we will be able to know where we can catch up with this roadblock. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT: Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise one small matter in respect of employees in the districts where there may not be a branch of the Uganda Commercial Bank. What measures then, does Government have? Is it only transferring funds through Uganda Commercial Bank or through other banks as well?

MR.BUTELE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to remind you that this matter was discussed here and because of the mood of the House, the motion was withdrawn on the understanding of the Prime Minister that certain things were going to happen. These are the things, which are being reported on by the hon. Minister. Should it really take us into another full-length explanation? Okay, proceed.

MR.BUTELE: Mr. Speaker, I just want the Minister to clarify that those debts are actually there. The problem is in the rural areas, where bank facilities are not there. These UCBs you are talking about are at the district headquarters. So, I think this Committee should go further. Apart from checking that everybody must be paid on the 28th, they should make sure that all the people are on the payroll. You may find that some of the senior secondary school teachers’ names are not even on the payroll. I think we should begin with the payroll and then come and talk about paying them in time. Thank you.

MR.AISU OMONGOLE (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do not doubt the integrity of the Members that have been put forward to be on this Committee. But I wanted to remind the House that the gist of the matter of Mukula’s motion was the Foreign Service and payment of money to these foreign missions in time. I am wondering whether this Committee will do service to the foreign missions, given that they have been the very ones responsible for the remittance of funds to these missions. I thought maybe there would have been a composition of other members, not directly related to the Finance Ministry, Public Service and the Treasury. I think maybe those members would have been able to pressurise Treasury to release monies faster. 

Secondly, again on the duties, I do not see anywhere where it is highlighted that the Committee will have to ensure that money is sent to foreign missions in time. The duties seem to concentrate on salaries to our people back at home. Nothing is mentioned about the foreign missions. Maybe the Minister would like to take that into account. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.MIGEREKO DAUDI (Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As my Colleague Omongole has rightly pointed out, our biggest problem was foreign missions. I would have therefore thought that inclusion of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on this Committee would have been a must.  

Two, the other issue was the outstanding arrears of our missions outside. I do not see any mention of it and I thought that was the real burning issue. It is stated that “payment of rent, water, telephone and electricity for our missions be put on the list of priorities.” What about the arrears? In future, payment of rent and what have you could be one of the priorities. But we are saying, and we were saying at that time, that we wanted the matter of arrears to be resolved because the courts of law in those countries had already blacklisted our missions. Nobody wants to deal with our people.

The other thing is payment of dues to international agencies. It is not mentioned anywhere here. We go to these agencies to seek support and when we go there, we are told we cannot qualify for support because we have not paid our subscription. Our President goes out to attend some of these conferences and he attends in an observer capacity when he is supposed to be an active participant. How do we deal with all this? Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.RWAKOOJO SAM (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for this, but I particularly want to thank the Committee for having brought out the plight of this Ministry. My worry and concern is what precedent he is setting and what this says about other Committees, for instance, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs which has not moved a similar motion and made the Prime Minister react the way he is reacting. If one has to move the kind of motion that was moved here in order for the plight of some of the civil servants in those Ministries to be discussed, it sets a precedent that it is really not attainable. It is like the Government was not paying any attention to our Foreign Service and when the motion was brought, they woke up and therefore, other Committees and other members who are interested in some other Ministries need to do the same in order to have a similar reaction.  

Obviously, the problem was not the money element because, if it were the money element, then they would not react the way they are reacting. Can I therefore, call upon the chairpersons of the other committee to do a similar thing so that we have similar bodies set up to take care of the plight of the civil servants in other Ministries? I thank you.

MS.ALITWALA KAGADA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for their interest in this matter. Hon. Wangubo - the question of money for the district is under paragraph (a), which will be distributed to you. UCB will send money for the districts to the district commercial bank or wherever they operate from. I think we shall also take opportunity to look into the situation of arrears of districts that do not have banks so that we hasten this process to make sure that money reaches there by the 20th of every month. This has become an assurance because we have said this is what we are going to do and we have set a timetable. So, it is now a matter which the Committee of Government Assurances can take up and call Government to order to if they feel that we are not delivering on this matter. 

As for whether it is only the UCB, I have said that the issue of commercial banks, which ordinarily the districts or those organisations operate through, will be addressed by the Uganda Commercial Bank. 

Concerning the update of the payrolls, I think each Ministry will have to address the question of updating their payrolls. I am aware that there are difficulties with teachers and other service people.  So, we shall call on the Ministries to update their payrolls.

I think the composition of the Committee is sufficient, but if you feel that we need to add more people, give us ideas about those you think should be added to this Committee and we will do the needful.

On arrears, I do not think we can address this issue now because the arrears must have been handed over to the Ministry and the Ministry will be able to tell us what they did with the money. What we wanted to do was to set in place, from now onwards, a process whereby there is no question of diversion and to make sure that these people get their money. But we can also ask the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to explain what they have done about the arrears because I cannot answer that. If they are paid to the Ministry, I cannot say where the money is or how quickly it will go. We shall ask the Ministry to tell us what they have done about the arrears –(Interruption)

MR.MIGEREKO DAUDI: Mr. Speaker, when this motion first came up, the issue was the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We have clearly stated that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be a Member of this Committee. I do not know whether that requires further debate? And if we are going to make any other formal presentation with regard to improving the composition, how do we go about that? But I would like to add that the issue of arrears is not hypothetical; we were dealing with something real. It was presented so I really need to be guided on this one. 

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker I would like to comment on the issue of arrears. When we were discussing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see the hon. Members are seeking clarification on certain issues, so you clarify to me.

MR.OPIO: Yes that is what I am doing. I want to clarify on the issue of arrears Mr. Speaker. When we were discussing the methodologies of withdrawing the motion, we requested the Mover to remove the issue of domestic arrears from the argument we were to present on the floor. This was because the issue of domestic arrears was being handled in the budget which we read on the 15th of this year. It is part of what we are going to do and it was not necessary for us to give that as one of the terms of reference. So, I hope this one is understood. We are going to handle domestic arrears as planned in the Budget, which we read on the 15th of June this year.

THE SPEAKER: He still has another point; whether the proposal for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be included on the Committee is acceptable to the Office of the Prime Minister.

MS.KADAGA: Mr. Speaker we have no objection. In fact, in the initial meeting, they were part of the team. I do not know how they disappeared, but we have no objection to their being there.  

On the question of which agencies we pay for, each Ministry was given responsibility to determine which agency we should belong to and they were accordingly paid the contribution. So the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will determine or must determine which meetings we attend and therefore, which ones we pay for.  

As to whether other Committees should step up pressure on the Government, I think so. We are partners in this business. If you feel that there is something unsatisfactorily done, really I think you are welcome to put the necessary pressure. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR PARLIAMENT TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES (II) AND (III) FOR THE FISCAL YEARS 1998/99 AND 1999/2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of supplementary Schedules Number Two and Three for the Fiscal Years 1998/99 and 1999/2000. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, allow me to make the following clarifications about Supplementary Schedules Two and Three for the Financial Year 1999/2000 and Supplementary Number Two and Three of 1998/99, which have been distributed to hon. Members of Parliament.  

The total supplementary expenditures authorised for the period April to June 2000 amount to Shs.66.64 billion. This amount comprises Recurrent/Supplementary expenditures of Shs.55.86 billion and Development expenditures of Shs.10.776 billion.  

The supplementary expenditures both Recurrent and Development are of two types namely: Technical Supplementaries and Extra Resource Supplementaries.

Recurrent Expenditure:
Out of the supplementary expenditure of Shs.55.864 billion, Shs.33.509 billion was for re-allocation within the Budget i.e. Technical Supplementary that is about 60 per cent of the Recurrent Supplementary. Shs.22.35 billion of the Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure required extra resources i.e. extra Resource Supplementary that accounts for 44 per cent of the Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure.

A 40 per cent Extra Resource Supplementary expenditure was largely to address the unavoidable circumstances such as the inspection of our missions abroad, funds frozen in closed banks, arrears for quota awards and other court cases, relief assistance, payment of Mehta senior lenders, payment of rent.  

Under the Development Budget, the total supplementary was Shs.10.7 billion out of which a total of Shs.4.396 billion, about 40 per cent, was re-allocation within the Budget while Shs.6.38 billion, i.e. 60 per cent, was required for additional resources. Just like for the Recurrent Budget, the proportion of the resource based development Supplementaries approved during the period was unavoidable. For example, we had to provide for emergency relief seeds, the Government of Uganda counterpart requirement for the World Bank Local Government development programmes; counterpart funds for ADB funded rehabilitation at Mulago Hospital and meeting Government taxes.

The supplementary expenditure for the period was financed by re-allocations within the Budget and between development and Recurrent Budgets as I have stated above. This category totalled Shs.37,905,000 i.e. Shs.33.59 billion for Recurrent, plus Shs.4.396 billion for Development and accounted for about 60 per cent of the supplementary funding. The Extra Resource Supplementaries were financed through budget cuts across the board due to poor revenue performance. Also the budget benefited from upward exchange rate changes of the dollar and denominated financing sources such as grants and HIPC. This category is about Shs.28.735 billion and accounted for about 43 per cent. I would like to make it very clear that the resource-based Supplementaries are within the agreed limit i.e. 3.1 per cent. Attached to the schedules is the explanatory note from hon. Members.  

I would like now to touch Schedule Three for 1999/2000 Financial Year. This Schedule is intended to capture the expenditures omitted under Schedule One which we have already discussed and under Schedule Two which we have, but we found out that we had left out some of these areas. And this Schedule totals Shs.0.647 billion comprising of Shs.0.074 billion for State House, Shs.0.079 billion for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Shs.0.056 billion for Ministry of Internal Affairs, Shs.0.439 billion for Mulago Hospital complex. Because we cannot raise corrigenda for Supplementaries, we have had to prepare Schedule Three to re-dress these omissions which are very small. 

I now want to say something about Schedule Three of 1998/99 Financial Year. During the 1998/99 Financial Year, the Office of the Clerk to Parliament reallocated Shs.6.6 million from the Recurrent Budget to top up for the purchase of a Toyota double cabin pick-up. This unauthorised reallocation has attracted an audit query. Schedule Three of 1998/99 has therefore, been prepared to formalise this expenditure.  

I now request the hon. Members to pass Supplementary Schedules Two and Three for Recurrent and Development Budgets for the 1999/2000, Schedule Three for 1999/2000 to redress the omissions in Schedules One and Two and Schedule Three of 1998/99 to formalise the unauthorised expenditure by the Clerk to Parliament. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Abura Kene): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wish to present to the House the Report of the Committee of the Sessional committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Supplementary Schedule Two and Three for the Financial Year 1999/2000.

In conformity with Article 156(1) and (2) of the Constitution, the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development brought the Supplementary Schedules Two and Three to this House. Schedule Three as has been reported was a correction of Schedule Two. The committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development proceeded to make an analysis of the Schedules after which this report was made.

Total supplementary was found to be Uganda Shs.50,317,230,000 which is 3.11 per cent of the approved estimates and technical transfer was found to stand at Shs.64,526,350,000 which is 3.98 per cent. We have put this in a summary form, in table form. Table 1, shows that the approved estimates of the affected Votes. Under Recurrent Expenditure it is Shs.889,900,488,000 and Shs.1,119,841,282,000 under Development Expenditure. 

Under Schedule Two, the Recurrent Expenditure is Shs.55,218,888,000 and Development Expenditure is Shs.10,775,734,000; and Schedule Three, which is a correction, we quoted a figure of Shs.647, 465,000. The total Supplementary under Recurrent is Shs.55,866,353,000, and under Development Expenditure Shs.10,775,7534,000. The technical reallocation total is Shs.37.9 billion, which is 56.9 per cent of the total Supplementary Expenditure. 

Supplementary for 1999/2000 was found to be 3.1 per cent of the approved estimates compared to last year. Remember we quoted a figure of 9.6 per cent, so this is an improvement on the performance supplementary. The technical reallocation was Uganda Shs.4.4. billion on the capital supplementary while Shs.6.3 billion was extra resources.

For the Recurrent Supplementary, close to Shs.33.5 billion was reallocation while Uganda Shs.22 billion was extra resources.

The Committee noted that there is a general decline in supplementary since the introduction of commitment control system introduced by the Ministry, which I think has helped the supplementary to come down from the high figure, which we had last year. This system should be held as it has led to the reduction of both supplementary expenditure and Domestic Arrears.

The Committee noted with concern, however, that some Departments still incur large supplementary in the Recurrent Expenditure. The Ministry of Finance, as usual, has a supplementary expenditure of Shs.24,469,532,000, which is 30.3 per cent of the approved estimates.

The following are some of the increases under the Ministry of Finance: 
    • Shs.3,762,531,000 - this was money sought to settle some project and local authorities and Central Government accounts frozen in the closed banks as the Minister explained earlier.
    • Shs.15,334,000 was payment to senior lender to Mehta. This is a matter, which passed through this House and it was approved and;
    • Shs.1,450,000 was payment to INTERTEK for pre-shipment inspection services. This is the collection, after the collection is put in the bank then the Ministry pays back to the company for their services.
    • Uganda Shs.1,500,000,000 was payment to Custodian Board arrears to Kampala city Council and lastly, Mr. Speaker, Uganda Shs.1,708,875,000 was payment again for Mehta which matter also passed through this House.

Other Departments, which registered high Supplementaries, are; the Office of the President at Shs.3,374,505,000, which is 170.4 per cent of the approved estimates for Item 5030, which was for rents and rates. This money was an additional fund for paying an outstanding rent and VAT for plot 10A on Nehru Avenue.

The supplementary incurred by the Minister of Foreign Affairs was for payment of outstanding bills and facilitating the return of staffs from the closed missions abroad.

Under the Prime Minister’s office, the supplementary of Shs.2,400,019,000, which was against the approved estimate of Shs.43,431,000 for Item 3030 for Hire transport, is 5,528 per cent. The department also incurred a total recurrent supplementary of Shs.2,600,564,000 against the approved estimate of Shs.13,874,000. The whole process was to enable the Department of Disaster Management to meet its obligation, which was mainly, as explained by the Minister, was that this was to respond to the needs of the displaced persons in Lira and Kitgum districts during the Financial Year. 

It was noted that the Ministry of Defence and Local Government did not have any Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure this time.  

The Committee was informed that the increase in the Recurrent Budget for the districts was due to under budgeting. We looked at the Budget for the districts and some were also given supplementary. This was explained as due to under-budgeting for Primary Health Care and Monitoring of Poverty Alleviation Programs. The Minister said that the extra resources for settling these obligations were from grants and the increase in local currency due to the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling.  

In conclusion, the Ministry has tried to reduce on the supplementary and is about to achieve the promised three per cent although they went above by one per cent, which is still not very bad. The Ministry should aim at doing away with supplementary in future. That is the only suggestion we contributed to this House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that the other Ministries should take the cue from the Ministries of Defence and the Local Government?

MR.ABURA KENE: Yes Sir.

DR.KAKUNGULU SHANON (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for a good analysis. However, there are some clarifications I would like to seek from either the Committee or the Minister of Finance. The greatest challenge we have to this Government is the question of poverty and corruption. The rest are insignificant. Despite all the huge sums of money we have been passing in the budgets -(Interjection)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The clarification I am seeking regards the Appropriation Bill. I do not know if this Bill has been circulated and I would like to be advised Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, do you have the Order Paper? Does it not give you the appropriate message?   

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Yes Mr. Speaker. I have the Order Paper and I thank you (Laughter.).

DR.KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, I was saying that despite the huge sums of money we passed, the impact on the ground is minimal. The people of this country are in dire poverty. Why? - Because most of the monies that we pass actually do not reach the peasants. We have a lot of answering to make when we go to seek for election in the coming year. 

When I look on the second page of the supplementary explanation by the Committee, I see that the item under schedule 2 that Shs.15.3 billion was passed for payment to senior lenders to Mehta. Then lower down, another Shs.1.7 billion was again paid for Mehta. I wish to get clarification from the hon. Minister of Finance how big the entire debt Uganda owes to Mehta is. For so long, every year in the past five years we have been talking about payments to Mehta and it keeps cropping up. While there is so much poverty on the ground, it is only one individual who is being paid. The domestic arrears for other persons and businesses – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you moved the motion. Members are contributing. Unless the issue is really going to delay the – wait a minute. You should also give me an opportunity to speak. I do not speak much (Laughter.). When I do, you should at least allow me to speak. Now, the problem is this; unless the issue is really burning, take note of what the hon. Members are commenting. But there is flexibility. You can proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to come here so that the Member can be more focused. You will recall that when we had the issue of Mehta in our Votes, the CAOs decided that this amount should be removed from the Vote to give the House time to investigation. There was a Committee to do this. The Committee carried out investigations and recommended that Mehta should be paid. So this payment is in fulfilment of what we should have done during the Financial Year because we had put this money out until the investigations were carried out. 

DR.KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, I thank you the hon. Minister for the explanation. However, my problem is not only on this payment. My question is, ‘is this the last payment due to Mehta?’ If not, then the peasants of Uganda and the people who have supplied Government for so long and have not been paid their arrears –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: You want to respond to that? He asked how much, how small is this Mehta  -(Interjection)

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker sir, the amount, which they removed from the budget, was Shs.18 billion.   

DR.KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, the amount, which we would have included in the Budget and we would have tried to pay Mehta during the Financial Year –(Interruption) 

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification. The question is, ‘how much do we owe these people’, not how much you had in your budget. Can we be clarified? Is the debt over now or we expect another Shs.50 billion?

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, the figure, which was presented to this House to pay the Mehta Group of Companies was, Shs.18 billion. The House came out and said, it needed more investigation into the authenticity of this amount of money. The House, through its Committee, carried out the investigation. The House said, Mehta could be paid, and the Government is now implementing what they should have done in the last Financial Year.

MR.KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister is just filibustering around.

THE SPEAKER: I think my understanding of the Minister – may be I am wrong – is that Mehta’s debt is Shs.18 billion.

DR.KAKUNGULU: If this is the confirmed figure, so we should put it on record that no more claims by Mehta should ever be entertained by this House.

I notice that in the supplementary, apart from Mehta, so many people supplied Government over five to ten years ago and are still claiming money including hon. Okumu Ringa of Padyere for his failed company not because of his own fault, but because Government defaulted on its promise. He has not been paid, and thousands of others have not been paid. This poverty in urban authorities and in cities and towns of this country is because of failure by Government to pay domestic arrears. So many businesses have collapsed, some individuals have even committed suicide because of failure Government failure to pay them. It is unfortunate that even in the supplementaries, nothing has been catered for these people.

As I conclude, there is also another funny transaction that has been taking years to conclude. Under the Office of the President, there was over expenditure of 170.4 per cent of the approved estimates specifically to cater for additional fund for paying outstanding rent and VAT for Plot 10A, that is the Okello house. When people hear that we are paying such huge amounts of money as rent, the peasants of this country are not happy. You pay Shs.3 billion to an individual for rent in one year! Can Shs.3 billion not start up a complex of offices?  

The people of Uganda are not happy about - probably this is just a front for officials to either get kickbacks or make false claims in the name of Okello house. It is high time the Ministry of Finance woke up and put such money to good use and built permanent premises instead of spending over Shs.3 billion per year. This comes to about US$2 million, which can easily put up a structure like UDB House. Otherwise, I beg to support the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I support the motion, but I am reliably told that the management of Poverty Alleviation Funds in the district is very, very poor due to lack of accountability and corruption in awarding tenders under this financing. I notice that a supplementary was provided for monitoring the Poverty Alleviation Funds. I would like the hon. Minister to confirm the state of management of Poverty Alleviation Funds in the districts. Despite the provision for monitoring the utilisation of these funds, why does that state of affair continue? What measures have been taken to make sure that these funds are managed economically and to derive the benefits for which they were intended? I thank you.

MR.BYANYIMA NATHAN (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My worry is about Shs.15 billion. I can recollect very well that this House resolved that we give a chance to the Minister of Finance to go and negotiate with Mehta and report to this House how far they had gone with the negotiations. On top of that, the Minister was rushing in to ask this House to allow them to cater for this amount in this coming Budget, but not to be paid immediately. One Member said that there was a lot of interest on the part of the Ministry of Finance officials who get this amount of money. It is not surprising that this money has been paid. 

As one of my Colleagues has said, we know that the domestic arrears has a big chunk of money outstanding, but there is no effort on our part since Ministry of Finance officials do not want to pay any money to any body. They only prefer to pay people who do not have anything they throw back to our people. Mehta companies do not have anything they are producing to this Country, and we have resolved that we better cut on our costs by not paying any money to Mehta so that we divest ourselves from those companies since they are no longer profit making. But it is surprising that the Minister is here telling us lies. The outstanding figure could even be much, much bigger. Every Budget a bid amount of money goes to Mehta, and I do not think any citizen of this country gains anything out of those two companies.

I ask this House to request the Minister of Finance to tell us the last figure. Otherwise, we shall continue passing money, and more money will be paid without our consent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
MR.CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for availing me this opportunity. I rise to support this motion because there is still very little choice that one has. The money is already spent and we are dealing with something of a post-mortem nature.  

I commend the Ministry of Local Government and that of Defence for strictly observing what somebody alluded to as “the Commitment Control System” where they have not made any over-expenditure. In that respect, I would like to pose a question to the Ministry of Finance. What incentives do they have for those Ministries, which are very disciplined and do not incur extra expenditure? What do you have for them as opposed to those going beyond the estimates? This is quite abnormal. You go beyond 100 per cent of expenditure! In my simple view, it is outrageous Mr. Speaker.  

It is very difficult – I am not an economist, but I know it is very difficult in economic terms to go to the extent of incurring over expenditures of over 100 per cent. It shows something very faulty with our accounting system and with our budgeting process. And perhaps later on, I think the Minister should make a commitment to this House as to when the Budget Bill, which he promised many months back is going to be presented to this House so that we have some discipline in budgeting and controlling our budgetary provisions.

I would like to find out also - because the way we deal with budgeting as I read is very interesting. If you look at the current budgetary proposals, there is no adequate funding for next year's elections, both Presidential and Parliamentary Elections. Is the Minister telling us that the Ministry of Finance has a will to over spend the way they want and then they bring it here? We also know from reports throughout the country that we are likely to face famine next year. But if you look at the current budgetary provisions, I think the money is very little. Is Government telling us that we should not budget for some of these catastrophes? So, I beg for some redress on the part of Government particularly the Ministry of Finance, Planning & Economic Development. I thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR.WANGUBO ABDALLATIF (Bunya West, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to echo the same stand as hon. Chebet has put that considering the amount that has been spent, the Shs.1.5 billion as arrears for Custodian Board and Shs.1.7 billion for Mehta. Sincerely, this leaves a lot to be answered. One would then wonder how much was estimated? What was the budgeting for? If such monies can be spent as supplementary, were these really emergencies that demanded supplementary? Otherwise, I see this as an abuse of the budgeting system. I therefore, urge the Minister of Finance to help us understand the budgeting, otherwise we waste a lot of taxpayer's money budgeting and such budgeting not used. 

The additional funds to pay for the Okello house: What was budgeted to demand such extra payment as supplementary?  Therefore, see this as a post-mortem that it is rather wasting tax payer's money to discuss something that has already been spend and actually giving way for fraud. I therefore, urge the Ministry to change the system so that we have a proper budgeting process or else such monies should come to Parliament for approval before it is spent. If we can spend time to discuss money that has been borrowed, we should as well do it before Supplementaries are done to this magnitude. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In his contribution, hon. Nathan Byanyima raised a very important question. He reminded us that the House passed a resolution to ask the Ministry of Finance to re-negotiate with Metha group of companies and report back with in a period of time before payment of their debt. Now we are faced with a supplementary. The clarification I am seeking is, should we not require the Ministry of Finance to report first to us to explain what happened before we can approve this? Is it proper for us to continue to debate this particular item when we have not got a report this House required? 

THE SPEAKER: If you want guidance from me I would prefer that you draw my attention to the resolution you are talking about. If it is not there, then I do not think it is fair for you to request me to guide. You are making a reference to a resolution, where is it? Hon. Byanyima, where is the resolution you are talking about?

MR.BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I am not the custodian of this resolution. But I remember I was on the Committee of the Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. We discussed here; it was a very long discussion. I even had a chance of writing a report about the Mehta payments. And we resolved that the Minister of Finance should go back and re-negotiate. Because we knew we were just guarantee, we never took the roles on our own. We had been 60 per cent owners but we had never got any single shilling from the Mehtas and yet it has been a loss making company. I recall very well, you could check with the Clerk. We said that the Minister of Finance officials should go and re-negotiate and report to this House.

THE SPEAKER: But I think the debate can proceed. When it comes to taking a decision that is when you can come in. Is that not fair? 

MR.OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support this motion because even if we were to oppose it, it would not make much sense. So, I support this motion on several grounds. One; this money has already been spent and though we note that the expenditure is much more than what had been - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom and hon. Toskin; when your Colleague is making his contribution, you should not disturb, please. The procedure is that when a Member wishes to interrupt a debate - hon. Okumu Ringa I am trying to assist you -

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you Mr. speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The procedure is that when a Member wants to interrupt a debate on a point of information or clarification, it is up to the Member on the Floor to decide one way or the other and then the Speaker will act appropriately. So you leave Okumu Ringa alone.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you Mr. Speaker. I suffer from a number of heckling and I would like to request that I be allowed to continue, I thank you Mr. Speaker. 

I support this motion. Unfortunately the principle, which we laid in this House that, Supplementary Estimates should not go beyond the mandatory and constitutionally required figure is not being adhered to. For example, the Committee has stated that on Recurrent Expenditure, supplementary estimates has gone up by 6.2 per cent which, is way above the mandatory required percentage. We urge the Minister responsible for this sector to ensure that the financial management of this country is in good shape. Mr. Speaker - (Interruption) - anybody who would by - (Interruption) - I will take the clarification.

MR.MUKASA PASCAL: Could the Member holding the Floor please clarify what the mandatory limit is? The limit of three per cent of supplementary budget was the resolution of the Sessional Committee on Finance advising the Ministry how much in excess they should be. Because last year, we had a Supplementary Budget that was over nine per cent and we are applauding the action of the Government in trying to be within the envelope. So could the Member be specific when he says that they have exceeded the mandatory envelope? I think for clarity, we ought not to lose sight of that. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: May be that is what he meant, what you advise here financial - but he is there; he will explain.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. What hon. Mukasa has referred to is correct. I was on that Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development when we came up with that proposal that it would be advisable for the Minister of Finance to ensure that Supplementary Expenditure does not exceed three per cent limit. We thought that the Ministry would adhere to that recommendation, but alas, you can note the amount of money being spent. 

If you look at page two of the Committee’s report where Shs.3.72 billion was spent to settle additional funds for local authorities and Central Government accounts frozen in closed banks; the Minister has not informed the House how much money Government has paid to depositors of the closed banks. It would be important for the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to demand that the Ministry of Finance comes up with a proper schedule of how much money has been spent to pay thieves, bank robbers and embezzlers. This is a very serious matter.  

The other concern, which has been expressed by Members, regards payment to Metha. It would be important if the Committee responsible for this sector could bring another resolution to compel the Ministry of Finance to come up with a figure of how much is owed to this company because every year we pay a lot of money. When you look at the local entrepreneurs, they have been drilled; they are on the streets. One would ask that when we talk of privatisation and liberalisation, are these policies meant to favour foreign investors against local investors? Foreign investors will come to this country when the economy is buoyant. Foreign investors look for locational incentives, and if there are not there, then they will not come. If they come they will be brief and get out of the country. But the local indigenous entrepreneurs who have been deprived of any ability to perform in privatisation must be looked at. We must find a policy, an equilibrium, where we, as leaders, should realise that we are in transit; the people of Uganda are not in transit. The people of Uganda will be there whether we are there or not. When our time runs out, the people of Uganda will remain here. If we are in transit, then we should ensure that the policy we promulgate must favour the population, who are the backbone of our leadership. 

So, I am calling on the Minister responsible for this sector to ensure that the supplementary we are providing for should also cater for domestic arrears. Let domestic arrears be paid. In fact, in a normal financial management cycle, you have what you call investment, re-investment and dis-investment. Most of these domestic arrears owners are people who have invested and either supplied to Government goods or services, but up to now they have not been paid. They have to pay interests on loans, most of them have been closed up and this is most unfair. 

So, if the Minister could encourage a deliberate policy, even to draw from our foreign reserve - we have foreign reserve of about 700 million. If you can get out US$100 million, that will be about Shs.180 billion, if you could use that to pay domestic arrears, you would have re-energised the economy because there will be a trickle down effect; that is my prayer, Mr. Speaker.

My last point with regard to these Supplementary Schedules is what is referred to as Technical Supplementary. I remember having raised this many times, and I got inadequate explanations, but I have been contented with those explanations because I have no choice but to be contented. When the Minister says so, who are you as a Backbencher to question further? So, I think these Technical Supplementaries should not even appear as a percentage of extra expenditure because you are moving money from one vote to another. So, the envelope remains the same. This, to me, is simple arithmetic. 

I request the Minister that if the law does not allow this aspect to be reflected, then we should amend the law so that what we refer to as Technical Supplementary should just be transfers. If it is within a Ministry, and the envelope of the Ministry remains the same, if it is from one Ministry to the other, it would mean you are reducing from one Ministry and increasing resource to another Ministry. It is as simple as that. But because of ambiguity, which is created deliberately, as sometimes we are requested to accept what even appears not to be correct, but with due respect to my senior Colleagues, I know they know what they are doing, but they can do it a lot better. 

I would like, with these few remarks, to support this motion, and also to thank the Minister for coming up with a resolution because in the past we would not have a resolution on which we debate and eventually pass the figures. Of late we have been able to receive actual resolutions, which should be passed, and I would like to thank the Minister for that innovation. I support this motion. Thank you. 

MR.BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What we are labouring about is Number Five of the Fifteen Point Programme. I think you all know it very, very well. 

In the Committee report they said the supplementary for the Prime Minister’s Office is more than the estimate approved by this House. This shows that there is something wrong with our budgeting process. Even the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not know how to budget for itself! This is why it is coming to ask for supplementary. So, we are to improve on our budgeting system. Year after year we pass Supplementaries here. This House approves these Ministries’ budgets, I do not know whether the relevant Sessional Committees are consulted before these Supplementaries are applied for. I would recommend that when the Ministry is applying for supplementary, it should also involve the relevant Sessional Committee because those things were discussed and passed by that Committee and reported to Parliament. 

Here in the report you only hear that they were only two Ministries that is, Defence and Local Government, which did not require supplementary, but that does not rule out that the others requested but they were refused. All the Ministries, which asked for supplementary and were refused should be reported to the Sessional Committee so that we can take appropriate action rather than the Ministry officials harassing the other officials in other Ministries.

 What I am trying to say is that all the supplementary requests should be reported to the relevant Sessional Committees so that they can access the situation properly. I cannot imagine Ministries like Lands, Water and Environment, they have not asked for supplementary. They might have asked but the Ministry of Finance might have refused. But if the Sessional Committees are involved, then we can have an argument. You can see that we are having a problem in the implementation of the Land Act, the Land Board, the allowances and what have you. 

You have seen here that Audit has not asked for supplementary. It is zero. I expected Ministries like Defence and Local Government to ask for Supplementaries because they do a lot of work. Not asking for Supplementaries means that the Ministry of Finance does not have criterion to give supplementary or not to give. I think that should be made clear. I think next time, like mobilisation, there is no supplementary. They might have applied for supplementary and the Ministry of Finance might have refused. So I want the Minister to clarify why only two did not ask. Maybe the others might have asked. So in future, to arrive at the correct figure, I will request that any Ministry asking for supplementary to the Ministry of Finance, should inform the Sessional Committee the reason why it is asking for this money. Otherwise, I support the motion. Thank you.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the motion on the Floor. I have two concerns to point out on page three and to this, I would like to hail the Ministry of Defence and Local Government for having succeeded in not applying for supplementary expenditure. But you are telling us half of the story! I do not know if they also did not have supplementary in Development Expenditure. I would like that clarification from the Minister. If they did not, then I will add on my praises to them. But if they did, it will give us a clear focus as we budget for this country. 

Secondly, we have seen part of the Supplementaries going to Local Governments and the reason given is that there was under funding or under-budgeting for Primary Health Care and monitoring of Poverty Alleviation Programmes. I think this is a reflection of lack of capacity in our districts. We have always said decentralisation is very good but there is lack of capacity down there. We need to build capacity in our districts so as to be able to help them to budget better. I know the district priorities are supposed to reflect the national priorities and Primary Health Care is one of our national priorities. I wonder how some of the districts did not or under-budgeted for this national and very important priority. 

Lastly, I would like to comment on page two of the Ministry of Finance on Recurrent Supplementary Expenditures. Other Members have mentioned it. I would like to add my voice because more than 90 per cent is going to people who are not local. If you look at Mehta, that is about Shs.17 billion, INTERTEK pre-shipments Shs.1.5 billion. All that does not help the local poor person in the rural areas. I think the Government has to redesign its policy on how to tackle poverty alleviation. I think the prioritisation here, especially in giving Recurrent Supplementaries is wrong and it does not address the concerns of the poor majority in the rural areas. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to stop there.

MR.BAMWANGA STEPHEN (Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the motion and I thank the Sessional Committee on Finance for their report. I also join my Colleagues to say that I support the motion because once the money is spent, it is spent. When Colgate is pushed out of the tube, you cannot push it back. But when Government comes to this House to seek approval of the Supplementary Expenditure, it is only prudent that we should remain within the acceptable variance. It has been said that the total Supplementary Budget Estimates was about Shs.50 billion, about 3.11 per cent of the national Budget. When compared to last Financial Year, which stood at 9.6 per cent, we thought that was a good percentage. 

When you look at page two, you find that on the Office of the President there was a variance of 170.4 per cent. One wonders whether Okello house has become elastic in terms of size and accommodation. We need to know the rationale of having such a big percentage increase in the supplementary estimates. We also need to ask ourselves how much was actually budgeted for in the first place in order to bring up such a big variance. 

The Minister of Finance and the chairman of the committee explained that the extra resources came about were actually from other sources like grants. The Minister, to my surprise, has hailed the good performance from the external grants and the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. The depreciation of the Uganda shilling is harming the economy. The poor performance of our economy is definitely as a precursor to the depreciation of the shilling. 

When the Minister says that the extra resources for settling these obligations were from grants, and the increase in local currency due to depreciation of Uganda shilling, it makes me shake a bit because the depreciation of Uganda shilling is a symptom of the poor performance of our economy. And as we look through the ministerial policy statement, we are told that as of today in the year 2000, Uganda’s debt burden is standing at about US$3.6 billion. Our National Budget, since it is supported by 53 per cent of the donor funding, this should not be cause for pride. We should be more worried. 

The economy is getting out of hand because we do not have any inflows of foreign exchange from increased exports. No wonder therefore, that our economy has slumped from seven to five per cent this Financial Year, and the declining Terms of Trade because of the low coffee export in-flows, the prices having fallen by 25 per cent, is enough indicator that our economy is really on a downward trend. 

I want to get a clarification from the Minister whether to him the depreciation of Uganda shilling has more than helped the situation to finance the supplementary expenditure? Should we also be proud of increasing our export earnings to be able to meet our budgetary requirements rather than having to rely on the external debt, external grants which are creating a burden for our future development? Some of this money is going to be paid by our future generations. 

I also wish to thank the Committee for pointing out the weaknesses about the money that is being paid out to people like Mehta. It has been said more often that this House had really queried the payments to Mehta and now it is coming up again as an emergency as if it was a disaster case. Mehta keeps on appearing, coming as if it was one of the most important and priority areas this country has got to finance when it comes to moving Supplementaries. 

Since money is already gone out of the pocket and spent, I think this House in future should be given the opportunity to look at some of these expenses that can be a hindrance to our performance generally. With those few comments, I wish to thank the Members for their contribution on this Bill. Thank you.  

MR.AISU TOM OMONGOLE (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I do not support the principle of Supplementary Budget. I remember very well last Financial Year, when hon. Kiraso was presenting the Supplementaries again to this House, I said that it would be to the advantage of this House if these Supplementaries were first passed through a Committee of this House before they are approved. 

I was promised that a Budget Bill was in the offing to correct these anomalies. That was last year. This year, we are still talking about a Budget Bill in the offing to correct these anomalies. I do not support this business of Supplementaries at all. Most of my colleagues have said, ‘well, it is already spilt milk. Whether you try to gather the soil or not, you will not get the milk, you will only get the dust’. That is not my thinking. My thinking is that one of these days we should throw out a supplementary to send a signal to the Permanent Secretaries and the Budget Officers in the various Ministries that this House does not support their attitude of ridding the economy of the essential services through their dubious acts. Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I would like to draw your attention to Article 156 of the Constitution, which actually allows Supplementaries of two types. What would you say about that?  

MR.OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, we are -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is in the Constitution. I would probably have to tackle the Constitution so that the concept of Supplementaries is removed.

MR.OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, this is my considered view and, of course, this House has the authority to amend the Constitution, but I do not call for it now but if time comes we can do that. That makes me to wonder. What is the role of our Budget Officers in the various Ministries? Should these Budget Officers really not be sacked? Look at page two, the last paragraph. We budget for Shs.43 million and we spend Shs.2 billion, a variance of 5,528 per cent! If we have Budget Officers whose work is to forecast the expenditure of this country, should we have this kind of variance of 5,528 per cent in our budget? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Member on the Floor for giving way. Actually, this page two you are talking about is in relation to disaster. There is no way in budgeting you can anticipate that there will be hunger in Kitgum -(Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Finance to mislead this House that you cannot forecast for disaster when we have got a whole Ministry in charge of disaster and their job is to forecast the disasters in this country and budget for them? 

THE SPEAKER: I think what the Minister meant was you cannot forecast with precision, otherwise the meaning of disaster preparedness would be very difficult to deal with. So, can we proceed?

MR.MANZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance. What I really was saying was that whereas you may have a Ministry for Disaster Preparedness, for you to be so exact that in district ‘x’ there will be hunger and that hunger will be cured by Shs.5 billion is impossible in budgeting. You can forecast that there may not be enough rains and we anticipate some hunger and you provide a figure that you think is reasonable, but the end result may not be exactly what you anticipated. And sincerely, that is why this money increased because the type of hunger we had anticipated was much less than what actually came up. There was no way the Ministry could sit around and say, ‘because we planned 40 million, we should not spend more when people are suffering’. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR.OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, I regret having given the Minister the Floor to give me the information. When you look at this paragraph, it is stated very clearly that Shs.2,400,000,000 was spent on hired transport and stores. Hired transport! We hire transport for two billion and yet if we bought these vehicles, we -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is stores, hon. Minister? Shs. 2,400,000,000 for hiring transport and stores, what does that mean? Maybe hon. Omongole will benefit from that. Can you explain? Okay, proceed.

MR.OMONGOLE: So, Mr. Speaker, it definitely proves my point that this money sometimes is just spent on some ways we do not understand. I therefore, urge the Committees concerned - I know it is a constitutional provision that we must approve the Supplementaries but can we not ensure that these monies are properly accounted for? Because every time we allow a supplementary, we are simply giving a leeway for these thieves to continue with their thieving because they know it is a constitutional provision and that once they come to this Parliament, we will always say, ‘we support but with reservations’. We do not throw it out.  

Mr. Speaker, I am definitely baffled over the –(Interruption)

MR.BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform my Colleague who is on the Floor that the constitutional provision is not that Parliament must approve supplementary, but it is in relation to the power of Government to incur supplementary expenditure. So, if we see there is a good reason to reject it, it is possible with the power of Parliament to reject approval of a supplementary expenditure.

MR.OMONGOLE: That is good information. Well of course, if I said we reject I will be a lone voice. Most Members have already said, ‘we support, we support’. But my point is, let the Committees that scrutinise these Supplementaries ensure that this monies are properly accounted for before they bring it here because the Committee has not even told us whether they are satisfied with the accountability of these moneys. If they are satisfied with the accountability they will of course, convince the House also so that these monies are approved when Members are sure that the moneys were put into proper use.  

Lastly, I would like to join hon. Ongom by requesting that the resolution that stayed the proceedings of the Metha payment be produced in this House. I remember the resolution said that the Minister should report to this House by 4th of July 2000, but that has not happened. May be the best way would be to ask the Clerk to Parliament to produce the resolution to this House. Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Winnie Babihuga, you have been up for so long, I am sorry. Let me sort out the gender issue then we will come to you.  

MS.BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman representative, Rukungiri): Thank you for your sensitivity. Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those Members who have raised concern about the lack of discipline in spending in some Government Departments. Year in and year out, I think now we sound very rhetoric here raising our concern and some individual Members of the Front Bench not having any shame standing up here and defending unreasonable spending in some Departments of Government.  

I would like to thank the Committee for this precise and focused report because on page two, the Committee still raises concern over those Government Departments, which incur large supplementary expenditure. It seems that these Ministries have taken this House for a ride. It is high time disciplinary measures were taken against those Ministries, because if you have no spending discipline there is no reason why we should be so generous to release money to your Departments because it means that you are not a good manager. And in fact, I would appreciate the appointing authority to put to task the Ministers in charge of those Ministries and actually discipline them either by cutting their salary or removing them totally and finding new players who can exercise discipline in spending. Good governance goes hand in hand with transparency and accountability. That means that those Ministries are operating without transparency because they did not like to bring here their budgets for Parliament to scrutinise them and give them the leeway to spending. I will give you an example, - (Interruption)- I will give the new Minister for Local Government a chance to give me information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): I am very grateful to the Chairperson of the Committee in charge of my Ministry. But sincerely and in good faith, I would like to appreciate that, year in and year out, every Chairperson of a Parliamentary Committee laments about the under-funding. This is always indicated in all presentations of different Departments year. We always lament. It is therefore, in that light that I would like to ask my hon. Colleague to appreciate, in some cases it may not be really possible to exercise the severe disciplinary action that she is prescribing for all Ministries. And in any case, not all heavy spending is undisciplined spending. Some heavy spending sometimes is extremely disciplined and very necessary for the benefit of the population. I thank you.

MS.BABIHUGA: I thank the hon. Minister for that information, but if he had a manager and gave him a budget limit and that manager went ahead to spend over 5000 per cent of that ceiling, would he take him to be a good manager or a bad manager? I think he would be a bad manager. Therefore, Ministries which have continued to be careless in their spending at the marginalisation of the other Ministries, which would have also benefited from such monies, or even put it to better use; I still hold that they are undisciplined and those political managers need to be held accountable. Because if that defence is going to be put for the office of the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business who is given Shs.2,400,914,000 to hire transport and stores, and you spend Shs.43 billion put it on stores! Who benefits from the hired transport? In disaster management it is those –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you willing to take the Minister’s information?

MS.BABIHUNGA: Mr. Speaker, I will take it but I will just finish my sentence. It is those components, which are directed at saving lives, which are of paramount importance because we have got Government silos in Kyazanga. Could the hon. Minister tell me whether they utilised them? We have got Local Governments, which have got the funds now and trucks. Were they given the opportunity to transport those commodities to the needy areas? I am highly suspicious of who is benefiting from this hire transport and stores.

I think this component should be thoroughly investigated and the beneficiaries should be into the light so that we know who is benefiting from this hired transport and from these disasters. Certainly, it is not the vulnerable poor Ugandan right there starving in the parishes; it is these people who are in charge of apportioning these monies and put colossal sums of money to benefit their own pockets. I will give the Minister opportunity to inform me.

THE SPEAKER: You do not have much time left.

MR.OPIO GABRIEL: Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Member that after consulting with the hon. Minister of State in charge of Disaster Preparedness and my technical staff, I have been told that Shs2.4 billion under transport and stores was also used to purchase the food. So, it should have been purchase of food, transport and stores. So, I would like, therefore, to correct the impression created in the document that the amount was only paid for transport and stores. I thank you.

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, as I wind up, I want to commend the technocrats and politicians who are in charge of the Ministries of Defence and Local Government for the financial discipline they displayed in their last year's expenditure. I call upon all the Government Ministries to have the good will to exercise prudence in their spending. It is not enough to come with supplementary here, Mr. Minister of Finance, when you have spent the money and to say it is up to you to approve or not to approve. Therefore, the sooner the Parliamentary Budget Office is put in place, the better for the expenditure in this country. It is then that transparency will be displayed in the budgeting and spending of monies in this country. I support the motion, Mr. Speaker.

MR.RWAKOOJO SAM (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The reason the Constitution provides for supplementary is because one, a budget is nothing by an estimate. It is an educated guess and if you are doing it in January you are estimating and hoping that by December you will have spent “x” amount of money. It is an educated guess. So to be above or below that budget, should not be looked at as a crime. The Supplementaries come in either because a Ministry under budgeted or there was some unexpected and unforeseen expenditure at the time the budget was being done. 

You should also realised that we are on a cash budget. In other words, the Ministry of Finance will release the money that it has in its coffers. When in month “x” the expected amount of collection is not realised, any Ministry is going to be given that percentage less; but that does not mean that the needs are that percentage less. So, in my opinion, it is really unfair to call an accounting officer in Ministry “x” a thief because it is not really his fault.  

When you look at our budget process, the reason we have been suggesting that we should have a Budget Bill is that the final Accounting Officer has nothing to do or has very little to do with the amount he gets at the end of the year. He prepares the budget but when he surrenders it to the Ministry of Finance, he has no more say to that Budget. The amount that is returned or is granted that Ministry is not necessarily what that Accounting Officer asked for. They slash it by whatever percentage in order to fit within the collections or the expected collections; and on top of that when the collections are less, that amount of money is further reduced. 

So, whereas it might be true that there might be some fraudulent expenditure, it is not fair to think that because there is a supplementary that Accounting Officer was in the wrong. I therefore, do not support and praise Ministry of Defence for not having a supplementary when the soldiers are on the streets walking naked and bare-footed. They should have got a supplementary because that is a worthwhile expenditure. So, it is really not good that they did not have a supplementary, it is also not very good that you ask for a supplementary.  

There are other expenditures that should have been foreseen.  For instance, the Shs.1.5 billion payment to M/S Inter-take Pre-shipment. I do not think that should have been a supplementary because the contract was signed long ago. We should have known how much we are going to pay Inter-take. That was -(Interruption)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I would like to give information with regard to this particular payment. Technically, it should not have been a supplementary because the pre-shipment company charged a certain percentage for the services being rendered and as such, the cumulative funds being generated from the percentages they charge importers should be the sum due to them as income. So, what is being referred to as supplementary here is questionable.

MR.OPIO GABRIEL:  Mr. Speaker, I want to raise two points.  One, as a point of information. It was the resolution of this House that the Government should be paid directly by its pre-shipment companies and then afterwards Government pays the pre-shipment companies. So, we were receiving the money but we pay them on a request. 

Second, when we budget, we put this money as contingencies so that when these pre-shipment institutions ask for money, we re-allocate this money to the pre-shipment company. So, we know that we shall pay, but we put this money in a contingency awaiting for the request by this company for this money. If we decide later on that these companies pay directly to the pre-shipment institutions, then we should not have this in our Budget. They will be paying directly and we should not budget for them as a contingence. But we are honouring this House’s request that instead of these pre-shipment companies being paid directly by importers and therefore having access to money which Government should have anyway and use it and to pay when they request, we have been doing this one.  I thank you.

MR.RWAKOOJO: I appreciate the information.  Mr. Speaker, I only think that we should differentiate between a Budget and cash flow because the monies coming into the Government coffers and then later on spent do not qualify to be supplementary. I thought it becomes a supplementary because it was not budgeted for; but I appreciate the information.

In the same breath, I would also want to point out the Shs.3.3 billion on housing in the President's Office. It is true that the President's Office takes care of all Government housing, but day in and day out, we have been saying that Government  should get its own accommodation. You should realise that the building of Uganda Development Bank cost about US$3 million to put up, which at that time was about the same amount of money we are having as a supplement. In other words, it is over and above what was budgeted for. Surely, we should look at the possibility of housing, of constructing a building for each Ministry, because obviously we have the money; this money is already spent. So, we definitely had Shs3.3 billion, it would have made a good down payment on any piece of land or any building and we would get out of this business of paying so much money when really, we could have saved it.

I also think that whereas an estimate of some kind should be done for disasters, it is extremely difficult to get to know which part of the country is going to be hit. But I agree with the issue of the Government silos, which are now empty and we are probably paying some money to maintain them when they are empty and we turn around and pay Shs.2 billion to some individuals. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NDAWULA KAWEESI  (Kiboga West, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman and the committee for writing a good report on Supplementaries. My concern is on page three, paragraph three, where it was noted that the Ministries of Defence and Local Government did not have any recurrent supplementary expenditure. I am also interested in the Ministry of Defence.  

We know very well that last Financial Year we read in the newspapers, and it was later confirmed that, someone called Byakutaga of the Ministry of Defence, stole over a million dollars for salaries and wages of soldiers. I want to find out from the Minister, how the Ministry harmonised an expenditure of over Shs.6 billion without a supplementary? Does it mean soldiers are not going to be paid or that they were paid because of the over budgeting for that Ministry?  

The other issue is on this Shs.3.3 billion meant for Okello House. Really, this one is over US$2 million is Supplementaries. I want the Minister to let me know how much was budgeted and what happened, because we know that while the Uganda shilling has been sinking, it has not sunk so much as to warrant 100 per cent. How much was budgeted and what wisdom was used to allow over Shs.2 billion to be spent on this Okello House? 

Lastly, I want to talk about disaster preparedness. Year in, year out, we are told by the Minister that you cannot predict with precision. But you can predict within limits. You cannot be out of step by over 5000 per cent. This means any kid in elementary school would have budgeted for this Ministry, because any guess would have been good enough. Otherwise, this Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has been here for quite some time and it is going to be here for so many years to come, and their job is to predict with some element of precision; and this was not a calamity. Really, hunger cannot be a calamity, it can be predicted with some precision. There are some variables one can look at. If the rains are so low, if good seeds have not been distributed, you are sure famine will come on the way. 

So, I suggest that in future, if we are going to have a supplementary over and above what was budgeted, at least, the Ministry of Finance should have the courtesy of bringing some statement to Parliament so that we know. Otherwise, I believe, this money is being used for soft payments and it comes here as supplementary. We do not get a chance of scrutinising it and then it is paid. With those observations, I wish to support the report. Thank you.

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to speak on this motion. That we shall always spend supplementary cannot be doubted; we cannot question that. It will always be necessary because we cannot predict 100 per cent all the time. But what we are questioning is the priority, not the fact that money was spent on supplementary. That is why it is necessary that when supplementary becomes necessary, before it is spent, it is foreseen, then the relevant Sessional Committee should be appraised so that they can give even prior approval although they will eventually come here. This is necessary because some of the payments that have happened here may not have happened.  

I said that it is the priority, which is being questioned. Many people have questioned the reason for paying the Mehta bill. What was priority about that? What was so urgent that Mehta had to be paid by supplementary? What made it so urgent? Earlier on you asked the House to produce the resolution and I have it now with me on Mehta. This resolution was passed on 4th May 2000 and if you may allow me, I will read.

THE SPEAKER: Read it in full.

MR.ONGOM: I will leave out the preliminaries and come to the resolution itself.  

THE SPEAKER: No, you read the full thing.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you. I will do that then. I thought I would save time. This is a resolution of Parliament on the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises on the investigation of Mehta claims.  

“Having received and debated the report of the above Committee on the investigation of Mehta claims; 

Reacting to the reports of the inequalities in the bill; 

Aware of the strategic importance of the investors to the economy and;

Taking into account the debate in the House;

Now therefore, Parliament resolves as follows:

That considering the inequalities in the bill, Government should re-negotiate with Mehta payments in relation to UGMA.

That Government may, depending on the outcome of the negotiations mentioned above, go ahead and compensate Mehta.

That Government avails a copy of the report on the investigation of Mehta claims to the Police for further investigation.

That Government reports to the House the outcome of the negotiation with Mehta within two months from the adoption of the report.

I certify this resolution of Parliament was passed on the fourth day of May 2000”, signed by the Clerk to Parliament. 

The Report to the resolution required that the Ministry of Finance comes back to Parliament and report on the results of the re-negotiation, but instead the Ministry comes with a supplementary already spent on the same issue before reporting here. I realise that the resolution does not say that Mehta should not be paid before the report is made here. That is not stated in the resolution. But the point is, did we have the money, and why did we have to go to Supplementaries in order to pay for this, a thing that the Parliament requested to be reported here? And this is October, two months passed in July.

One would have thought that if the Ministry found it necessary that Mehta must be paid, assuming that they did the re-negotiation, they should have included this in the current budget and not go to supplementary. Why rush to supplementary? I this is because if it came in the budget, this question would have risen. The Committee would have questioned it. We asked you to re-negotiate and report back, where is the report? And so the Ministry finds it a shortcut using the supplementary. I think this is very poor indeed. It is extremely poor. 

This is the same Ministry that not so long ago we had to withhold transport money because they did not adhere to Committee recommendations. They did not even care to report back to the Committee what problems they had about the same issue. It was only the other day that we released them. It is the same Ministry that was being punished, and it is the same Ministry that is coming back now with a supplementary ignoring parliamentary resolution. 

People are referring to 118, I think they refer to the Constitution. But that is not the line I am taking. I think it is extremely poor for the Ministry of Finance to continue to ignore Parliamentary resolutions. I do not think that it was so important, so urgent, and such a matter of priority that Mehta should be paid immediately, particularly considering that the matter is really of a great concern to the Nation and to the House.  

I believe that it is time Parliament took some stern action and my line of action would be slightly different from censure. We are still in the process of approving the Budget. We have not yet passed the Budget in full. My suggestion is that we should recover this money through the Budget process. In other words, we should deny the Ministry this amount of money. And I would like, at resolution stage, to first amend the resolution so that Parliament deducts from the Ministry Vote this amount of money, because otherwise this deliberate ignoring of Parliamentary resolution will continue. And I think it is time Parliament put down its foot and said, ‘enough is enough’ (Applause.).

I would like to touch on disaster preparedness. I believe it was necessary to spend that money. The question is why did we have to budget such small amount of money when we knew that the country has had for the last few years some disasters. We can go back a few years, every year we have had some disaster. So why did we not at least make a reasonable estimates for this? I do not belong to that Sessional Committee on the Ministry of Disaster and Preparedness, but I suspect that the Ministry itself might have even given some estimates by the Ministry of Finance as usual. It must have cut down. I could be wrong, but I suspect that this is what happened. The Ministry might have budgeted a reasonable amount but the Ministry of Finance saying, ‘where shall we get the money’ cut it down hoping that time will come for them to spend through supplementary. 

I think both Ministries of Disaster Preparedness and Finance should do a bit better in this line. We have been prone to this problem of disasters for some time now. Right now, the fact that an hon. Member has just mentioned that there has been talk for some time about the possibility of big famine next year. I am not sure how much prepared we are for this eventuality. I hope that the Ministry is not going to solve this problem through Supplementaries again having been warned so many times in advance.

THE SPEAKER: Can you come to your concluding remarks?

MR.ONGOM: Yes, there is only one more point Mr. Speaker. I want to comment on the Okello House payment. The Okello house saga has more implication than it is shown in the supplementary. I do not know why, having taken over the house and having rented the house and knowing how much the rents are, that the Ministry or the Department concerned did not budget for it properly? Even if they were being paid in dollars and the variation is in dollars, it cannot be to that extent as is being said. 

But the problem with Okello House, - Members have suggested that the Government would rather build their own houses than keep on renting.  A particular problem with that house is that the house is already there and that the Government because of the security of the President decided to take it. Otherwise, from what I know, Okello did not want to rent the house to the Government. In fact, there was a proposal for the Government to buy off, only they failed to buy. It was taken over because of security. So even if the Government built their own houses, State House is there already, and it is imagined that the house being where it is, it is going to cause insecurity to the body of the President. What are we going to do about that house, which is next door to the State House? We are going to build houses but it is already there and it does not belong to Government, so what are we going to do about it?

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I want to get clarification from the Minister of Finance, what became impossible in Government negotiating with Okello and this house being bought by Government? If we continue to pay the rent at this rate, then definitely Government loses a lot of money. What was difficult?

MR.ONGOM: It would appear that the Minister does not have an answer immediately; he has asked me to continue. But that is the question I am asking seriously. The house is there and the State House is there and it is deemed that the position of the house makes a matter of security to the President, whichever President is going to be there. So, what are we going to do? I think the Government must find a solution. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for technical reasons we shall not be able to sit to the conclusion of this debate and the technicality came about understandably. I understand many of our Colleagues have gone for the funeral service of a prominent politician within the Democratic Party. What I propose to do is to adjourn the House to allow the Minister and the chairman to wind tomorrow before we move to the next stage. I think you understand the situation. So we will adjourn until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.53p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3rd October 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)

