Tuesday, 3 October 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY BILL, 1995

DR ADONIA TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, you will recall that last week, we were not able to proceed because we did not have a quorum during the committee stage.  I would like to now raise a pint of order and I request you whether it is in order for us to proceed in the Committee Stage without a quorum in this House when we are discussing this important Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well hon. Members, we shall go by the procedure laid down but also allow me to bring to the attention of hon. Tiberondwa that every time he raises this point but also he should stay with us whenever there is a quorum. Because immediately we realise a quorum, he always also - but as far as we are concerned, we cannot proceed without a quorum. We shall adjourn.  (Interruptions) 

Order, we shall ask the Clerk to ascertain the number first of all.

Clause 1

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, when we adjourned last time because lack o f quorum, there were still some queries which required some clarification on this clause. I thought it was pertinent before you put the question that actually the Members are made clear so that we move together when they know exactly the problem involved and the magnitude of it.  

According to consultations I have made, the Bill constitutes a comprehensive securities legislation regulating all aspects of the securities industry.  Provision has been made for phase development of the security market by enabling different provisions of the Bill to be brought into operation as the market develops.  To enable that trading in securities to commence within simplified regulatory regime pending emergency of appropriate conditions for fully-fledged stock exchange, the bill provides for the establishment of an interim stock under operative rules made by the Capital Market Authority.  

Clause 91(2) allows for necessary modifications of certain provisions of Statute in relation to interim stock trading facility.  It might be necessary for example, not to bring into force part four dealing with the conduct of securities business but make simplified rules to initially regulate the business pursued to clause 91(3). Part three, that is Clause 26 to 30 would also not be brought into force immediately but rules to regulate for example, listing of securities, obligations of issuers would have to be made.  

In short, we are trying to constitute a comprehensive law during which we shall go on implementing as the Capital Market grows in the country.  We shall have an interim which requires some parts to be left so that we do not cause penalties for certain things when it is still in its infancy and whoever is involved has not caught up.  So it is in that light that I thought I should say it before you put the question.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like in addition to what the Minister has just said to inform Members that we went to great length all the way and it took us more than or nearly three months discussing the bill.  Therefore, after discussing, when somebody comes up to divide this House when some of the amendments which he knows do not contribute to moral tapititude which is what is required in most stock markets, you find that he is not being sincere and being in the best interest of our country.  

Therefore, I would urge Members to know that if it is a stock exchange and you want to establish a capital markets office -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member is advancing a position, which is extremely dangerous.  Is he implying that because they have gone through this bill for three months, therefore there is going to be no amendment at all?  Is he telling us that so that we should not bother, we should just pass the whole thing like that?  Can I get clarification on that?  If you are going to amend some parts and you are going to agree, why is it that he is so strong about this particular part?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  From whom are you seeking the clarification? From the Chair or from him?

AN HON. MEMBER: From hon. Wanendeya.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I did not mean to say that the Members should not have an opportunity but I was relating and saying that one of the Members who distributed this yellow piece of paper from which it was copied was a Member of the committee from which it was adopted just almost in the same manner as they way hon. Marwas was debating the Press Bill.  It was in that kind of way that you get one of the Members to derail others when all matters had been definitely discussed in great detail and it is in that light that I was giving this information to Members. I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for this House to be derailed by a committee, self-constituted committee which never reported to the House what they had done?  And in fact we never requested them to.  Now to say that we were there, we discussed, whatever they discussed was never requested for.  Is it in order to derail us?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order from yourself.  Could you clarify which is the committee, which constituted it?

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Well, hon. Wanendeya has been telling us that they met.  Now who are they?  I do not know and I have never asked them. (Laughter) If it was in Budadiri, that is another matter.  Let him tell us who they are and who appointed them and in what capacity.  He is now telling us that they met for three months. Mr Chairman, is it in order for an hon. Member come in and disorganise us when we are busy dealing with the business on the Floor?   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, you know hon. Wasswa Nkalubo and hon. Members, last week, I think, a list of names of a committee, I think, this committee you are referring to, was read here and you endorse it.  You were also here.  If that is the committee hon. Wanendeya is referring to.  I think it was a legal committee. Then it is in order.  Please, hon. Members, let us not go on tribal matters.  let us stick to the subject matter here, something pertaining to Clause 1.  

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, the Minister has already explained the Clause and we have the Bill before us and we do not have a contrary amendment.  I would like to propose Mr Chairman that we proceed to debate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question on Clause 2 put and agreed to.)

(Question on Clause 3 put and agreed to.)

(Question on Clause 4 put and agreed to.)


Clause 5

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, I sent in my proposals for amendment and if you have not but some people have received them.  And my amendments are on Clause 5 sub-Clause (3)(b). I want to propose that we delete 6 and insert 4 and I also want to propose that the same sub-clause, we delete (e), (f) and (g).  

Mr Chairman, I am moving these amendments because of the fact that this Authority is too big.  If you add, we have about 12 proposed members.  With this amendment we shall have a total of seven, which I think is a more manageable number.  

I would also like to propose that since this is going to be a private organisation, the number of people from private business should be preponderant in the sense that they should be more.  Therefore, I would like this body Authority to have a chairman, four members from the private sector, the governor of the Bank of Uganda and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning or his representative.  I do not think that we will need to have a registrar of companies; I do not think that we shall need to have the solicitor general or any other person from his office that deputizes him.  I do not think that even the chief executive officer of the Authority should be a member of the Authority.  He should be a servant of the Authority but not a member of the Authority.  Mr Chairman I, therefore, wish to move those amendments.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the hon. Member for making this proposal.  Because firstly, when you look at this particular area sub-section 3(d), six members are a bit too many, because the Minister will have the latitude to appoint and if he is not all that careful, he will bring in people whole interest may not match with what is on the ground.  By bringing the registrar of companies and the solicitor general, these two people are coming from the same Ministry.  That is the Attorney General’s Chambers and to me therefore it would not carry any weight because whoever does one thing here is still answerable to that particular Ministry and also the chief executive who in many corporations and companies is always the secretary to the Authority.  So, to make him a member here will also make him grow wings and consider himself equal to these other people. Therefore, I am just supporting his amendment Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether they have been talking on the same thing because actually the chief executive is not a member here.  He is just an ex-officio.  So he is not a member as far as this bill is concerned. However, for hon. Sebaana Kizito’s amendment to reduce four and have those few would be - because much as his argument says that this is a private undertaking, it is not.  It is the market exchange industry, which has to remain purely private. This Authority is there to promote until that exchange market has grown.  Therefore, it is actually in a way doubling but to make is balance it, we had to nominate six from the private sector so that we take interest of the private sector. But actually this body is under the, or is still part of the government to promote and spearhead the stock exchange industry which is going to be a private industry altogether.  So, we need these people to help us.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have listened to the Minister very carefully and I can see there is need to strengthen the board with people who have a lot of information and knowledge in their relevant fields.  My worry is this, if you are for example, the chief registrar of a company or of government and you go and become a member of the board and they take a board decision, which you do not accept, they out vote you.  Do you go back in your office and conduct your business of that business as registrar and do what you want or do you fee duty bound to go along with the board?  Is collective responsibility going to affect your performance in that board and also in your office?  Because, I have a feeling that the solicitor general, and the registrar of companies are actually anyway going to do this work. Because if you are going to have a company, you had better be registered.  The registrar of companies had better say that you are actually a genuine properly registered organisation.  But if you want him to give you more information about company law, I think that is another aspect.  

So, I wanted to know if that was the case, the registrar of companies should be a director of all the authorities and all the companies.  But if this is a special thing and since hon. Wanendeya has completely assured us, this is a matter, which we should not discuss -(Laughter)- and you are supporting him, I just want a little clarification on that.  Secondly, so far the solicitor general and the registrar are working in the Ministry of Justice together.  Would it not be in order if we just said that the representative from the Ministry of Justice, maybe, the solicitor general would call on the registrar of companies in his personal capacity?  But to say the office is different and I think if that is the case, it should be a representative of the Minister like we have done with the Secretary to the Treasury. Maybe, that way, whether we are in the meeting or not, but I think in this situation, maybe you have to re-consider this position and increase the number of the board members from six so that we have or the Minister gets more resources from the population and we keep the old number for the board members.  If you are dropping any of those, assuming that we have convinced you, then you may increase the number to keep the old number from six for voting purposes.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Hon. Karuhanga has two issues now. The one issue is that regarding hon. Sebaana Kizito’s amendment.  He is moving to remove both of them yet in your submission you are talking whether we should have one.  Now as to whether if we have the registrar of companies and he goes on the board, whether he will not be biased by what has transpired in the board, actually this boards are always policy makers.  You have to operate within the law, which we shall have passed here.  Even the registrar of companies has to go and work according to the laws under which the companies are registered.  Whatever comes out from the board will be policy issues and guidance.  I think the issue is whether we should have perhaps two or from the same office.  But Sebaana Kizito wants to remove all of them so that we reduce the number. I am saying no, because this is not purely a private undertaking.  We need some people from this office to help us on this board as a government.  But the exchange market industry is going to remain private as it grows on. This is just to promote it.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want very strongly to support hon. Sebaana Kizito’s amendment.  I think there is a misunderstanding as to what the Capital Markets Authority is all about. If you look at the long title to the Statute Mr Chairman, it is a Statute to establish the Capital Market Authority for the purpose of promoting and facilitating the development of ann orderly, fair and efficient Capital Markets industry in Uganda and to make provision with respect to stock exchanges, stock brokers and other persons dealing with securities and for certain offenses.  

Therefore, this is essentially a capital market authority.  It has nothing to do with government as such.  Government may regulate them and the only way it can regulate -(Interruptions)- the only way government can regulate this Authority is by being outside this Authority and not being within the Authority.  Mr Chairman, in other countries where they have established stock exchanges and so forth, this is privately a matter governed by business enterprises, by industries -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba to mislead this august House that a securities exchange like the one in the United States which was established after the great crash of the 1920s was set by the government and it is partly controlled by government? And therefore, is it in order for him to say it is not government and stock exchange.  Is it really in order when we know facts? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya, you know government is trying to get a way from as many businesses as possible and trying to liberalise as many institutions as possible.  In light of the current things happening in Uganda, I think Prof. Kanyeihamba is in order.  Let him advance his argument.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I may not be familiar with United States stock exchange but I am very much familiar with United Kingdom stock exchange and for six years, I taught company law, which included stock marketing.  So I know what I am talking about.  The idea that you can only control the Authority if you are a member of it is absurd.  Because if you are a member - we are talking about solicitor general and the registrar of companies, that they are there simply to control the Authority.  But they are members of the Authority and therefore their instinct is to defend any decisions taken by the Authority should act properly and should act in the interest of stock brokers under the market, it is essential that members of the government should be outside it in order to oversee and control its activities.  There is confusion about accountability and responsibility of government in bringing these organs to Authority.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to call the attention of hon. Members to look at Schedule one which is on page 11.  The number of six members is drawn from this area; Uganda Accounts Association, Uganda Bankers, Uganda Law Society, Insurance Institute, Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda Chamber of Commerce, Uganda Association of Securities Dealers.  All these have to be on the board and now on the government side, we have only two.  One is the Solicitor General as a legal advisor and the Registrar of Companies as an Authority.  The thing is accountable to government.  It is not actually a private undertaking.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  i think this Authority is an organisation of government.  It has nothing to do with the private sector in its formation.  It is an Authority to monitor and guide and facilitate the market.  It is not participating in the sale and buying of securities.  So, if an organisation and arm of government intended to ensure that what is happening in the private sector is properly monitored and facilitated, therefore, acting as a policeman for the Capital Market, it is important that the government should be represented on the Authority.  However, I wanted also to propose that we should have a point of procedure.  I would want to break hon. Ssebaana Kizito’s amendment into two.  One; whether we are reducing the six to four and then two, whether we are going to delete, because if we put them together it looks like we are not going to be very far.  So, I wish to propose that do we agree first of all to delete from six to four.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, you are now contributing.  (Laughter)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I am so amazed that Mr and hon. Tumubweine wants to inform me on matters and the functions of the solicitor general and the registrar.  At one time you know I used to be in that Ministry.  So, I am aware of what these people do.  So, I do not need to be informed.  I thought you are going to inform me of something different.  But please, I think one of the issues which the Minister said, if you look at the composition of the Authority as proposed to this Bill, the chief executive of the Authority is actually proposed to be a member.  But the Minister is saying that he is only there as ex-officio member.  That is not reflected in this Act.  He certainly is a full member of the board.  I am not concerned whether we keep the number to six or reduce to four.  That one, I am indifferent.  But what I am concerned about is making officials of government particularly the solicitor general and the registrar of companies to be members of this Authority when they are the same people when it comes to accountability and policing this Authority, they are the ones who will be asked to do that same job.  So, I think that hon. Sebaana Kizito’s amendment should be supported so that we have an Authority which is not or whose composition is divorced from the day-to-day members of government so as to allow accountability and better co-ordination of this Authority.  

Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Motion moved by hon Sebaana Kizito.  Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 (3)(b) be amended as proposed by hon. Sebaana Kizito.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members. Let us also be attentive.  In fact I had advised hon. Manzi Tumubweine that he could contribute because there was his amendment there and I think it was also absorbed in this kind of thing.  So, I will extraordinarily allow you.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I wanted to move an amendment on Clause 5 that we delete (e), registrar of companies and retain (f) Solicitor General.  the reasons is that the two are actually in the same department and what we are trying to look at is the Ministry which advises government to be represented on this Authority and therefore it is not necessary to have two offices of the same department being represented on the same Authority. I beg to move.

MR MARWAS: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, I am rising on a point of procedure. I am sure and I believe this is one of the best Parliaments Uganda has had.  We have been following our rules as a government and as a nation.  It will be unfair to this House if we start not following rules of procedure right from this House.  The rules - unfortunately I do not have them - but the rules say if the Chairman’s ruling is challenged and more than 50 people stand, which it did, the Chairman has to follow the rules.  Unless we are trying to bring in other -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order. We counted, you were 46; you were not 50.  I am aware of the procedure myself.  That is why I allowed you to stand up. Hon. Marwas even last week we allowed you but you were 40.  Today we allowed you, you were 46 and 46 is less than 50.  So we are following the procedure hon. Members.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, when a resolution is put into the House, the Chair with all due respect does not restrict an individual Member but restricts the House because it is the expectation of the House and it is the judgement of the House that takes place, not of an individual.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I am rising to speak on the amendment.  Mr Chairman, first of all, let me also join in welcoming the Minister.  Mr Chairman, on the question of the amendment, one of the reasons for setting up the Authority is to make sure that the companies, which are floating shares to the public, are not fake. The Registrar of Companies is probably the best in telling whether the company is a true one or not.  

For those reasons, if hon. Manzi were seeking to throw out the Solicitor General, I would have been on his side.  But to throw out the only party that can confirm whether the company we are talking about is registered or is a true company existing or not, I cannot support it and I did not support it even in our committee because this is not the first time that we are talking about it.  Mr Chairman, I do not support.

MR ELYAU: Thank you Mr Chairman. I also do not support for one reason.  In this country today, people come in as businessmen.  We are not checking our immigration properly.  Suppose somebody who is not registered takes up to be security and runs away with money, how will money, how will you find him.  I think the registrar is very important so that security is well guaranteed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members.  Let us proceed faster than the speed we are at.  The matter is now at the committee stage and I do not expect a lot of argument again and with due respect, allow me now to put the question.  The question is that Clause 5(3)(e) be amended as proposed by hon. Manzi Tumubweine.  

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order.  I now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question on Clause 6 put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, on Clause 7(1), I wanted to move an amendment to delete the word to and replace it with for.  The reason is that if you allow the Authority to be called upon to perform business on written request by only two individuals all the time, you create a situation where you could have a caucus and every time two people keep calling the meeting.  It may necessary to have a bigger number to create a situation where meetings are called. I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you Sir.  Mr Chairman, much as hon. Manzi Tumubweine’s reasoning sounds valid, there are good reasons in capital development, why people must be wary to the extent that you do not even talk in terms of numbers but a minute you smell fraud, you detect there is something amiss.  Even one individual should cause a meeting to take place.  In other words, the reasoning behind the Clause if you read it, it is saying; ‘The Chairman of the Authority or in his absence the chief executive shall convene meetings of the Authority at least once each month. That is statutory to carry on the business of the Authority and whenever he receives a written request signed by at least two members of the Authority.  In other words, there is the statutory arrangement where meetings take place regularly but there should be reasons why members need urgent meetings and I want to take this opportunity to inform the House about two recent cases that have alarmed the global money market just to reinforce the point.  One is a Mr Iguch of Daiwa Bank of Japan.  This is a fellow that operated from a branch of Daiwa Bank in New York.  For 11 years, he suppressed transactions and by the time he confessed himself, 1.1 billion dollars had got lost from that bank.  The second one is a recent one of Nicklison of Barrings of U.K.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am a bit confused here because the Minister who moved this bill suggested earlier on that the chief executive is only an ex-officio member of this board.  He was trying to explain away the amendment moved by hon. Sebaana Kizito.  Now, here we are saying that in the absence of the Chairman, it is the chief executive to call a meeting presumably not one of the regular members. Can I be explained whether actually he is an ex-officio, whether he is a full member of the board. 

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  No doubt my Colleague the Minister of Finance should be able to clarify.  That is a simple point and I hope he is there taking note. (Laughter) The point really I am trying to convince the House about is that we do not lose anything by keeping at least two members of the Authority summoning these meetings; because whenever they smell anything wrong, they should be able to have Capital Authority meet and they deal with it expeditiously.  I therefore, regrettably have to oppose my Friend hon. Tumubweine on very, very valid grounds.  I hope he will join me.  Thank you.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I support the amendment.  We have just thrown away two amendments. We are saying one must call the matting when two have written and down there, I have already seen the Registrar of Companies is there, the Solicitor General and the Chief Executive.   So, they will always be calling a meeting because they are always here seated and we can always disregard the existence of ten people. Why do you say two when they are 12? Because if you put three, one and two does not make a lot of sense.  So, I am saying I am supporting the amendment.

MISS KADAMA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think the Member has not directed himself properly to the interpretation of this Clause.  What it means is that if two members write and cause for a meeting, a meeting of all the others will be called.  That is what it means, they will all be called but two can call the meeting.  That is what it means.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I also rise to oppose the amendment.  Mr Chairman, the nature of business of this Authority is so sensitive that we should not make it difficult for a meeting of the Authority to be called.  It must be reasonably easy and I think if two responsible members of this Authority decide among themselves that there was need for a meeting to be called, surely they should really be in a position to cause a meeting to be called and, therefore, I oppose the amendment.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I do not think Mr Chairman; hon. Manzi is very strong on this amendment in light of the information given.  He might have misinterpreted that this is about a quorum but actually if two sign, they will cause the meeting to sit in ordinary manner.  So, I think I would ask hon. Manzi to withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed by hon. Manzi Tumubweine.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, in Clause 8, the appointment of the chief executive, it says; ‘The Minister shall appoint the chief executive of the Authority.’ The bills we have passed so far it has been found that it is better for the Authority when it is put in place by the Minister, the Authority appoints its own executive for reporting and other considerations.  It becomes a bit cumbersome and complicated when the chief executive who is going to report to the board is appointed by the higher authority because in the end, you create some unnecessary conflict and confusion, and most of the statutes we have so far passed in the last years have shown that we have had one trend of having the board appointing the chief executive although the chief executive also becomes a member of the board.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

CAPT. GASATURA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  The amendment by hon. Manzi Tumubweine may be a little misplaced in that it is the Minister appointing the chief executive but on recommendation of the Authority.  He does not appoint from his own volition.  His position has to be recommended.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Amendment but the only compilation with it is that, all the other members of the Board are appointed by the Minister; including the Chief Executive and now, the Chief Executive is again going to be appointed by the same board.  It is a bit complicated but the general trend is that chief executives should be appointed by the board.  We shall consistent if we do that, except that in this case, the chief executive is not ex-officio member of the Board but he is a full member of the board.  Other wise, I support the Amendment.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I do not support the Amendment and hon. Presidential candidate, if he had looked at the Bill -(Laughter)- Mr Chairman, me protect from the members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.  Proceed. 

MR WANENDEYA:  If the hon. Member, Dr Adonia Tiberondwa had read the Bill properly, he would find out that in the first Schedule the seven people are nominated by their respective organisations and it is from those nominations that the Minister just picks one and therefore, even hon. Manzi Tumubweine’s Amendment as a whole and even the other one - if some of you listened to hon. Members listen to BBC, you find that last night, they were talking of some members of Parliament in Ecuador who were tampered by some people and this thing, the Amendment, we have copied from here, which was issued by one of the members to here and therefore, when they were even debated, I do not know whether that is the right moral aptitude.  I, therefore, do not support this Amendment.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I think if hon. Manzi looked Section 5 again, and moved on to look at sub-section (5) of section (5) (this is on page 22 in the Bill) which says, subject to sub-section (iv), the Chairman and the six members to be appointed under paragraph (b) of Sub-section (iii), of this section shall be appointed from among persons nominated by the relevant body.  Saying that appointment shall be made entirely by the Minister is not quite true; because the Minister will receive a list of those nominated by relevant bodies and of course, relevant bodies here are things like, the Stock Exchanges themselves, the Associations of Brokers, and so on Mr Chairman -(Interruption)              

MR NKALUBO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to confuse the two.  The other one he is quoting is the Chairman, whereas the hon. Member, hon. Manzi was speaking about the chief executive.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to confuse the two?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member has a normal knowledge of this subject and may be he did not get him well.  So, would you clarify, please? Let him clarify.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I know what the Amendment is talking about and it is because of that, that I am saying, that if we rely on the argument that the chief executive should not be appointed by the Minister, because all the others have been appointed by the Minister, it is from that, that I wanted to point out that, among those others you are talking about, is a big chunk which is half six primary members who are nominated by the relevant bodies. The relevant bodies are the Stock Exchanges, the Associations of Brokers and such.  He actually does not have the freedom, the liberty, just to look around and pick people of his own choice, he has a restriction  - he is given a list.  So, it is there that he picks from even though he has a liberty to take this one and leave that one, but you must be nominated from those relevant bodies.  So, it is not so true that he has liberty just to appoint anybody.  In any case, the Chief Executive you are talking about has to be recommended to the Minister by the Authority itself.  So, it may be that he gets two names recommended by the authority, and they say, okay, you have (a) and (b), you can appoint either of the two.  Mr Chairman, I think I would like to oppose this Amendment.

MR ELYAU: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want us to be very serious in these issues.  I see people taking it loosely.  Take for example, what happened to Cooperatives?  There is a committee of farmers, and every year the Minister dictates to pick somebody on their behalf; these people go down and ruin the whole operation.  Here, I am saying that - respected by the Chief Executive, why should it not appoint the executive for the sake of doing it, so that it is under the authority.  I see very well the point, people are looking at the Minister, but supposing that the authority has a right board to appoint and govern this executive, do you not think it would be good and orderly?  Mr Chairman, I am not supporting.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I sympathise with hon. Manzi and the Members who may be sharing his views.  That if you are a chairman of such an authority, you need to work with the chief executive who is under your direction, but also with such a body, to leave a Minister without having a say of what person is being appointed, is very dangerous.  However, to balance the two, the minister appoints on recommendation given by the authority.  (ii) Even if you read 8 (i), the Minister shall appoint the chief executive of the authority on the recommendation of the authority and, the authority is given a leverage of a Minister on deciding shall determine the conditions and terms of employment of the chief executive.  So, he is actually subject.

Secondly and most important, include the remuneration. Somebody who gives you a remuneration, who determines your remuneration I think has a leverage to tame you and on that ground, I oppose the Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Manzi Tumubweine.

(Question put and negatived.)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from the Minister in relation to Clause 3 (b) that is where it is inserted ‘any other reasonable cause.’ Before the Minister gives me information as to what he means by reasonable cause, I want to give information that in the new Constitution, where the appointment of Directors, Boards, Commissions, are involved, the Constitution has now removed any reasonable cause because of its vagueness and liability to be abused and we have instead inserted the words: the only other cause we found which was not listed in these reasons, was incompetence.  So, I do not know whether the Minister would be happy to replace the word ‘any other reasonable cause’ with incompetence and delete nay reasonable cause, which are liable to abuse.  I was seeking information, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I would not mind but incompetence is already in (a); the hon. Member maybe, he has left his glasses behind.  But also, once the Constitution comes into force, of course, it is going to be - to prevail over any other, but now we are operating in the existing law; even if you have any case, you have tried in the present laws.

MR ASIKU DRATRUTRU:  Point of clarification.  In any case this is what is clear to me.  What is this ‘any other reasonable cause?’  What is its relevance, where?  Any other reasonable cause would mean also benefiting against individual.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, in light of the confession by the Minister, May I propose with his permission that we delete any other reasonable cause, which is covered by all the other grounds.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, we have essentially agreed that the capital market authority is private business, but so sensitive that we need government policing.  If reasonable as the hon. Member said, bad feeling, if there is bad feeling between the chief executive and the authority, fire him.  They will pay him, they will keep him happy but if he is not performing to their satisfaction, that in itself can actually - that bad feeling can affect the market and markets are so sensitive that even that might in the view of the authority be sufficient to give him other duties or relieve him of his duties.  This is private business and I believe with the New Constitution which hon. Kanyeihamba refers to, will not affect him or me; firing his house because he has an ill-feeling.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a proposed Amendment by hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba George.  I will put the question on his Amendment and the question is that Clause 8 (ii) (b) be amended as proposed by hon. Prof. George Kanyeihamba.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33 agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40.

MR ELYAU: In respect of Clause 40, I wanted to know as I was talking this afternoon about the people who will come into this field suppose who is not a citizen and he is Uganda trying to pose as if he wants a license for operation here, is there any way that the Board can assure that this man will not run away with.  Something - this is what I want clarification from the Minister.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Suppose someone is not a citizen and is licensed? I cannot see how we are going - we have all the steps to regulate and check on those who are not citizens, I have not contemplated clearly his fears.

MR ELYAU: What I wanted to say is this.  Is there authority given opportunity to ensure that this person is properly checked. Now, how shall they know that this man is a proper person and reliable, he will stay in this country, he will not mess in the course of the market business.  Say, somebody who comes here like an Indian, and then one day you find that he has disappeared, he has a different name here, he has another name in Congo.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, that is exactly why we said that this Bill, we had a problem at Clause 1, that we have to implement it in phases; because licensing, when it is the full, capital market has been developed, is so complicated that it has all those levels to clear away those; otherwise, we are going to start with an Interim and such cases will be easily detected. But when the business has grown so large, the licensing is a complicated matter which has to take time, and to fulfill it by that time, they will know what type of person - to liaise with your bankers, what other companies you were involved in, what is your integrity, what businesses you are running and so much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41 agreed to.

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43 agreed to.

Clause 44

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am seeking information from the hon. Minister as to the discretion given to the authority under this section.  Clause 1 reads that the authority shall keep in such form as it thinks fit the register of the holders of current licences specified in the following.  This to me, sometimes to be that the authority can just willy nelly decide any form.  Should they not be asked by this Statute to make regulations or rules if even if it is at their discretion, rather than to say, at any given time, they can decide willy nelly as they think. Could the Minister explain why this lassitude is given?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Those whoever will be appreciating, the dealers, the Brokers or the Stock Exchanges, they have their Association and they have their regulations and these will protect them against such decisions and of course, there is even a court and as the reform is going on we hope that there will be a commercial court to assist such issues, where they can be decided so that they are not bored by the regular court procedure as you know it, as it stands now.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr Chairman. I am grateful for the Minister’s explanation, but I think he has not addressed the point I am making; the Rule here, rather the section says that the authority shall keep in such form as it thinks fit.  My question was direct to that, that should we not require them to make regulations, Rules, so that people who deal with the stock exchange know precisely what form their information is to take.  This really was the question.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: The authority shall keep in such form as it thinks fit a register of holders of current licenses; it must be - it cannot be in a relation  specifying (a), (b) (c) and (d) it will have been developed, and it will be known, it is not just he thinks fit, as if - because it must be known to whoever is going to participate, it must be known in advance.  So, it would have been developed.  I think this will clear your fears.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 44 do stand of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I propose that Clause 45 sub-section  (ii) 6, be amended by deleting the clause punishable by imprisonment not less than six months.  We are talking really of systems and causes why licences should not be held by specific individuals. If an individual has not been convicted of an offence in fraud or dishonesty, it does not matter whether he is sent to jail for six months or for one month or for ten years, the fact is he has been convicted of this offence, fraud and dishonesty and that is bad enough; he has lost the confidence of the public and therefore, he should not be allowed to operation in stock exchange.  I move this, Mr Chairman. 

MR WANENDEYA:  I thank you for giving me this opportunity. Mr Chairman, the punishment should be really heavy enough to make anybody contemplating to do the wrong so that the others are really - they will not think about it again; so that we strengthen the stock exchange and indeed the capital mark in the country because currently, they may be, let away by judges, magistrates, in rather a very simple manner as though it is not something great.  But this involves the economy of a country. So, all those people playing around should know that there would be something in stock if they do the wrong thing.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the proposed amendment by hon. Sibo.  What is important in this case, is not the punishment, but if you have to protect our stock exchange, so long as we are convicted of fraud, whether you are in for one day, you have lost your face, you should leave, the sin for the others who are already to continue.  Now, I think hon. Sibo’s amendment is carrying the fact, it should not be defenceless so long as you are convicted and i support him in that even if you are jailed for one month, you are convicted, it should not be how heavy the punishment is, but so long as you have been convicted you should leave, you should not get that license. Mr Chairman, I support hon. Sibo’s Amendment.

MR MWANDAH: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I also do support the Amendment by hon. Sibo.  I think the question of the length of imprisonment should not arise in this matter, the fact is that somebody has been guilty of having committee fraud and in itself, that is bad enough and I think that should not be subjected to any length of imprisonment.  So, I support the Amendment.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I also stand to support this Amendment because really the importance is that somebody has been convicted of fraud and dishonesty, that is enough and therefore, we should not say specifically six months or more, that is the only time when you are disqualified.  So, I support the Amendment, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, for Member who have seen what we have circulated, I was to move this Amendment, so it is accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 45 (1) (vi) be amended as proposed by hon. Adrian Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I just beg to move that we delete the words, ‘broker of’ those which appear in the margin so that we only leave ‘dealers’, because these are the ones affected but not the brokers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 48 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50 agreed to.

Clause 51 agreed to.

Clause 52 agreed to.

Clause 53 agreed to.

Clause 54 agreed to.

Clause 55 agreed to.

Clause 56 agreed to.

Clause 57 agreed to.

Clause 58 agreed to.

Clause 59 agreed to.

Clause 60 agreed to.

Clause 61 agreed to.

Clause 62 agreed to.

Clause 63 agreed to.

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification. Thank you very much.  I feel that there is a loos end here.  Now, when he says used by the broker or dealer of a client’s money and also part 2, he says if there is any fault in it, a man will be charged or woman 4/= -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Juventine, which section?

MR ELYAU: This is 63, the whole clue there, there is a problem there, it is very loose, how will you make sure that the money is safer, because here, they say in clue 1(a), deposit the money in account in the bank not later than the next day, which the bank is open.  Supposing somebody who has a chance and the same money has been dropped on the way, how safe is this transaction? I wanted the Minister to give me an assurance, because some dealers may cheat the developing stock exchange.  This is what I want clarification.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, as I had earlier intimated and explained, even Associations and these brokers have even regulations governing them for discipline - disciplining themselves in their own transactions, but also, here if that is bank to alleviate the fears, obviously, it will take the course of the law.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, this is a matter of drafting 64 (i) Clause (a), paragraph (a) does not seem to contain anything.  I do not know why it is paragraph (a), when he is selling an agent, his principle has; that is what the paragraph says; it says nothing unless we combine it with (b), I do not know what the Minister has to say about that.  In law, a paragraph must make sense in its own, you cannot just have it hanging like that, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I cannot debate on law, but what I understand and I hope Members do, is that subject to this section ‘and regulations at person shall not sell securities to a purchaser unless at the time when he sells them he has or where he is selling as an agent, where he is selling as agent, his principle has or he believes on responsible grounds that - because the idea was to separate the has and believe.  But of course, when you go together with (b) it comes clear.  Reasonable grounds that he has or where he is selling as agent.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, with our permission perhaps I could assist the Minister here.  I believe that this section ‘would be complete if we - I accept his point of view, but the sentence in (a) must be complete.  So, we should say, he has or where he is selling as agent, his principle has a sustainable and unconditional right to get the securities of the purchaser.  You have to repeat those in both (a) and (b) if it is to make sense.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I have listened to hon. Kanyeihamba: it seems as if what he is saying is what is meant by what is existing.  So, since he also shakes his head, that the two mean the same, I see no reason why we should change (Laughter)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Otherwise, really we should clarify the law, rather than just make it hanging.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: If it is drafting, we can look at it but, this is 90 - 64 (i) (a); because if he really he has or where he is selling as an agent, his principle has or an existing an exercisable and unconditional right to vest the securities in the purchaser.  (b) he believes on the reasonable has also an existing - I think the idea was not have the two repeated but the sense is important.  I hope we agree on that.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, what the Minister has read out, now makes sense and I think we should draft it that way, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 64 (a) is redrafted.  I now put the question that 64 (a) be redrafted as proposed by hon. Kanyeihamba. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MARWAS:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I just want the Minister on 64 (iii), it says for the purposes of his election a person, shall be taken to the cells if he purports to sell - I do not understand, 64 (iii) (a), - he purports, he pretends, I want some clarification, in purporting just.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I sympathise with the hon. Member that he does not understand for the purpose of this section, the person shall be taken to cell securities if he purports to sell securities - the problem is with purports; the sense is that if he is - in case if it is pursue, if you are seen to be selling securities, to be seen, I am putting in the simplest language I can afford, if you appear to be selling, to behave as if you are selling, you will be taken as if you are selling and therefore, you can be sued because you are not lucky or whatever; it is just a language.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order.  I now put the question that Clause 64 as re-drafted do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65 agreed to.

Clause 66 agreed to.

Clause 67 agreed to.

Clause 68 agreed to.

Clause 69

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend section - Clause 69 (i) (a), the sentence at the end of (i); commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 4/= and imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.  Substitute a comma on a full stop and add ‘and to refund the money to the Trust account.’ This is a case of a broker or a dealer who withdraws the money from an account - a stock account he has and this man belongs to the clients and if he withdraws and goes to drink or goes to buy another woman, (Laugher) I withdraw the clause, and goes to marry another woman, I think this money  -(Interruption)

MR KADAGA: Point of order.  Is the hon. Sibo whom I respect very much in order to continue alluding to women as if they are chattels?  Is it in order, Mr Chairman?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  I think the hon. Member did not mean to take women as if they were stock exchange, no he was meaning something else. 

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I believe in our culture we still pay dowries and when you marry a woman, therefore, I am suggesting that the man - the stocker broker who with draws money from the stock account goes, and uses it in paying a dowry to marry a second wife, that is why I am saying, and the wife is a woman - well you could spend it on anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please concentrate on the subject matter, hon. Adrian Sibo.

MR SIBO:  I am saying Mr Chairman, when he goes to court and he is ordered or his convicted and he is sentenced to a fine or to an imprisonment, in addition, he should pay back that money; it does not belong to him, it belongs to a client and that is why I am saying, and I suggest that, that clause should go to both to particular clause and to the second one in the second sub-clause.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support hon. Sibo. I think the principle he is raising is extremely important; he is saying, once you have a broker and a dealer and he ends up withdrawing some funds from a Trust account, it is not enough to be convicted and fined, that is the principle.  The principle is that, beyond that, that individual who in trust fails the trust of these individuals must refund this kind of money as a principle.  So, really I think we should not be moved up with example he quotes about marrying a second wife, you could choose to marry a second husband, and there is no contradiction.  So, I would like to go back to the principle of refunding and I beg to support hon. Sibo’s Amendment.  I thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr Chairman. I have no difficulty in supporting that principle, but I think we are putting it in the wrong place.  These provisions are creating an offence and the punishment for an offence is either imprisonment or a fine and not compensation.  Obviously, if somebody’s money has been taken by a broker, this could be a breach of contract, it could be a breach of faith and the person should be entitled for example to sue separately for his money, including interest, which he may have accrued.  If you combine them here, you are even depriving him of that right to claim interest and so forth.  I do not mind if another place is found for this contribution, which is a good principle, but we should not mix it up in this offence and its punishment. 

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I would have agreed with the hon. Kanyeihamba but if you go ahead of the Bill, Clause 101 (ii) comes into place, where it says, without prejudice to Article 71 of the Constitution of ‘Uganda, the authority may compound any offence punishable under this statute, by accepting such sums of ‘money as it considers fit, not exceeding the amount of the maximum fine to which that person could have been liable; who has been convicted of that offence and that sum of money shall be paid into the general fund of the authority, which means, we are now bringing, computing a punishment into money.  So, the Amendment brought into place is completely in ‘conformity with this Article 101.

MR SIBO:  Point of information. While I respect hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba, I think he should not mix up the Penal Code with a Bill that is purely civil.  The punishment in respect of the offence is a Penal Code punishment, this particular Bill, if we left it as it is, the only remedy that the client has is to go to court and a civil is put - to open a civil suit, and we do not really want to open a civil suit in an obvious case.  So, I think it is irrelevant, this civil Bill and I think there is nothing wrong to include this retribution in respect of money that has got to be refunded.

MR OLUM:  Mr Chairman, if you look at page 91, there is in investor compensation funds, this takes care of all constructual obligations which may not have been honoured.  I think it is wrong to bring this refund of money under this section but the investor compensation fund takes care of the losses that may occur as a result of constructional failures.  So I think it is correct to leave this punishment on its own dealing with this particular sections; then when we come to that particular section, we will be able to cover the losses that are incurred because of constructional failures here and there.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Sibo is right.  Firstly because we are trying to concentrate at the fund where the money has been withdrawn.  That is the principle I think he is trying to establish.

Secondly, where he proposed to add the refunding of the money that was illegally removed is actually a penalty clause because it says, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 4/= or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.  So, it is a penalty clause.

The other point, of the compensation funds, ins a separate and distinct clause; the money may come from the government, it may come from the stock exchange.  But that really will not take care of the genuine concern that hon. Sibo is trying to high light in this clause that he whosoever removes the money, uses it on trivalties or in other matters, should not only suffer the penalty, of being lined or sentenced to a term of imprisonment but he should make good of the fund where the money was withdrawn. So, with respect to my learned Friend, Prof. Kanyeihamba, this is a penalty section, so the compensation element can be involved and with respect to my learned Friend, the other section which is specifically with a future which cannot be in any way linked with here.  So, I strongly support the Amendment, it is in the right place, and the principle is eminently supportable. 

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I see there are two issues.  One is the need to compensate to replace the loss of the money.

Secondly, is to go by the law and refer to the punishment is concerned as this clause refers to, and the compensation which is in 81 is actually contribution by authority and general fund to meet all those I do not see why we disorder the law in case of this case only of the stock exchange when there is even arrangements made to meet the pecuniary loss which has been made in such cases.  After all, the example hon. Sibo is giving on having paid dowry, if one actually with draws such money and pays dowry, where is he going to get it any way.  So, it is better to have a fund, which we all contribute on so that whether one suffers the prison and the fine, but actually you are sure that there is a source from which you can be compensated.  I oppose.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 69(i) be amended as proposed by hon. Adrian Sibo.

(Question put and negatived.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, the clarification I want from the Chair is whether or not the principle of refunding the money notwithstanding the defeat here, will be incorporated appropriately by the Minister and the Attorney General.  

I want to repeat the section quoted by hon. Olum - Section 82 - He is talking about general failure in business. You have dealer, a broker during the nature of the business because of reasons beyond his control people lose money in the process.  We are talking about specific transactions with clear individuals’ - withdrawing money in trust.  This is a principle of ‘Refund not incorporated somewhere.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I do not have to make any decision here.  It is the House that can come with the proposal either it will be accepted or rejected.  Now, I think as far as this Refund is concerned, the Minister has taken note and I think there should be a provision somewhere to water for that kind of thing.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, in my contribution I did say that I accept the principle of the Amendment moved by hon. Sibo and I said we could find a separate principle for it.  However, we can still insert here by putting a provision. 

But notwithstanding the Provisions of these clauses in ‘this Section, a person who may have been convicted of this may compensate the person agreed.  Now that provision with separate  - provisions from this compensation.  So, I would want to propose that Amendment or rather the formulation of that Amendment to take care of ‘hon. Sibo’s point.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Members, we had already made a decision on 69. Unless you are coming with another Amendment, then that is something else. 

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, hon. Kanyeihamba has just proposed to move an Amendment to be the provision on 69, 1(b).  So, Mr Chairman, I would seek your indulgence to accept that we put ‘provided’.

MR ASIKU DRATRUTRU:  Mr Chairman I also stand to support the additional Amendment.  This Bill is very difficult.  I think we have been discussing it.  Few people seem to be technically qualified to manipulate it.  The rest of us are watching, but one snake has now arrived.  The snake that has arrived is the one where public fund will be stolen.  It is that one quotation I am very conscious about, that if somebody is going to play with public money and can go away with it, then there is no provision to punish this one or to compensate the donor.  I am very worried.  I have looked around and I have seen whatever is in the Paper.  No Provision has been given to compensate the money stolen.  What is provided and what we said in the provision is that we decided to make general administration.  

So, I believe genuinely if public money must be cared for, this Amendment brought hon. Member, Mr Kanyeihamba must be supported and I support that that additional Clause must be added.  I beg to support, Mr Chairman.

MRS KADAGA: Mr Chairman, Clause 4 provides for what Professor wants to include.  It says, ‘Nothing in this part takes away or affects a local claim that a person `has against or on any money on the Trust Account.’ 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, much as we are proceeding according to the Law, but I think sometimes when the House feels that certain section should be revisited, we can entertain that because here in light of the contribution from several Members, I think they have a case here.  It will be just to call upon Prof. Kanyeihamba to put a proviso to Clause 69.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I propose that in this section, we make two sub-sections.  We leave this section (1) as it is, and then create sub-section (2) which will read as follows:

‘Notwithstanding the Provisions of sub-section one of this section, the Court may, in addition to be punishment enforced, order...’

MR SIBO: My Amendment, Mr Chairman, it makes the mandatory.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I accept the mandatory nature of his Amendment.  It is only that I did not have a copy of his Amendment.  What I have done is to provide this proviso which says, ‘Notwithstanding the Provisions of `sub-section (1) of this Section, the Court shall, in addition to the punishment imposed order that the person `convicted take compensation to the aggrieved Party.’

MR ONGOM ABEDNEGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with hon. Kanyeihamba only that I would like his Amendment to incorporate Section (2) as well.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman (Interruption)

MR ZACHARY OLUM: Mr Chairman, if you read on page 21, sub-section 6, where a broker or dealer with - a Trust Account an amount that is or any part of amount of cheque that has been deposited on account, but there is no cheque that has been paid by the banker, the dealer shall immediately pay into the Trust Account by cash that account which is equivalent to that.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, we could at the end include that proviso so that we recover all those sections, which are  -(Interjection)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, here we are dealing with the principle where someone has been charged and convicted for offending specified in this part of the Act.  What we are dealing with is the compensation for the offence he has committed under this Act.  I think we stand a danger if we just wonder about in the whole Statute making for senior Provisions and I think we can now sort them out.

Mr Chairman, I think that the principle has very well pronounced by hon. Sibo and hon. Kazoora and others and has been accepted.  I request that you put a question.

MS KADAGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to pick up the point made by hon. Olum. In 69, there are still areas, which provide for punishment, fine and imprisonment.  So, I agree with the reason of Prof. Kanyeihamba, but the should come at the end of Clause 69 to say, ‘Wherever a person is convicted of an offence, or imprisonment or fine, he should in addition pay the money.’ Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  May I take the information given by hon. Kadaga.  I think that would be even more convenient that they have a Prison like this one, which covers all senior Provisions, but notwithstanding them, then the Court convicting and punishing of people can share all the compensation in case of Law.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Members there are about three clauses dealing with punishment.  Then we can just make another Amendment to read, ‘Notwithstanding Clause 69 - 1,2,3,’ then you will see it is very difficult.  So, hon. Members, I now put the question that Clause 69 be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69 as amended, do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.

Clause 70 agreed to.

Clause 71 agreed to.

Clause 72 agreed to.

Clause 73 agreed to.

Clause 74 agreed to.

Clause 75 agreed to.

Clause 76 agreed to.

Clause 77 agreed to.

Clause 78 agreed to.

Clause 79 agreed to.

Clause 80 agreed to.

Clause 81 agreed to.

Clause 82 agreed to.

Clause 83 agreed to.

Clause 84 agreed to.

Clause 85 agreed to.

Clause 86 agreed to.

Clause 87 agreed to.

Clause 88 agreed to.

Clause 89 agreed to.

Clause 90 agreed to.

Clause 91

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 91, sub-section (2), we substitute (111) for (1X) occurring in the second line of the sub-section.  This is simply because that is referred to much as is it is in (ix).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 91 be amended by hon. Kisamba Mugerwa.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91 as amended, do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.

Clause 92 agreed to.

Clause 93 agreed to.

Clause 94 agreed to.

Clause 95 agreed to.

Clause 96 agreed to.

Clause 97 agreed to.

Clause 98 agreed to.

Clause 99 agreed to.

Clause 100 agreed to.

Clause 101

MR SIBO ADRIAN: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 101, sub-section (2), and (3) be deleted.  The reason is that this particular section says that where a man has committed an offence and he would be charged before the Court of Law.  If he goes to the Authority and confesses and pleads before the Authority, then the Authority can forgive him and fine him a certain amount provided that amount is not what he would have paid if he went to Court and was fined by the Court.  In other words, you can look at a person who has committed exactly the same offence.  One goes to the Authority and pleads guilty and the Authority forgives him and says, ‘you can pay us so much and go back.’ Such an offence is offence in the dishonest and fraud.

Another one has been charged before the Court of Law for exactly the same offence.  Then he pleads guilty also there.  Then the Court convicts him, and also sentences him.  Now these individuals have both committed the same offence.  But they are being punished differently.  The Authority’s punishment is very light.  If you can repeat the same thing and go back to the Authority several times as many times as you want.  The other one can be charged, and if he is charged and is convicted, there are certain sanctions against someone who has been convicted even if he is not sentenced.  

So, I am saying that this thing really is any form of a kind of bribery to the Authority - to stop the Authority from complaining before the Court of Law to charge him and to get him convicted.  So, these two clauses really are serving a very bad purpose indeed.  I propose that they should be deleted.  Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I want to support hon. Sibo that actually these clauses be deleted.  But I do so for different reasons. First of all these sections, differs provisions of the Constitution and of the general Court generally. We should leave the matters of the double jeopardy to those Provisions rather than put them specifically in this section.

Indeed any reference to the constitution is not necessary because whereas before this august House could have amended a Legal Notices that we are having in the Constitution of 1967. Any Law made by Parliament this august House if they are in conflict with the Constitution, of course the Constitution will 
So, I think that we would be creating doubt for provisions if we included these sections here.  So, I agree with hon. Sibo that this should be deleted.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I have no objection.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now put the question that Clause 101 (2) and (3) be deleted as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101 as amended agreed to.

Clause 101 as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to.

Clause 102 agreed to.

Clause 103

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I seek clarification from the Minister whether it is not the issue of this Statute to say that until the Authority is established, the Governor of Bank of Uganda shall be acting at that Authority and therefore, implementing this whole Statute and the coming out of the functions that they have assigned to the Authority.  Is that the intention, Mr Chairman?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has got it that we shall have an interim authority.  So, it is the Government of Bank of Uganda in the Authority.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, the whole problem was that the Governor is already a Member of the Board.  We have already effected Page 1 which says, ‘the Minister can stagger the operations and put in place of these clauses different times.  So, why is it that we cannot wait?

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I sympathise with my Colleague because there would be a tendency once the Governor sits in that Chair for us to relax and over-burden him.  Since there are provisions of making the Minister work, we remove the burden from the Governor, let the Minister do what is provided in the Clause.  Otherwise, I fear that once the Governor sits in the seat, he will get relaxed and will see things are going on and he will stop and then we shall have problems  So, let us get the Statute approved, then those which we can do be done without the involvement of the Governor of Bank of Uganda in this exercise.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I support the Amendments by hon. Manzi Tumubweine.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman - to markets is not a simple thing whereby you can say, the Minister is lacking.  The point is that the Governor has been entrusted.  The Minister, it is up to him to push the Governor to make sure that the Act is put in operation as soon as possible. The Law and the Stock Exchange Authority must be meticulously administered; otherwise, we may have - which may be uncalled for.  So, I would prefer that the whole thing be left to the Governor.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa) Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the statements expressed by the hon. Members of burdening the Governor.  But I would like to appeal to the Members to appreciate that we - there are several financial implications which we are really to take off.  (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, if he says that it is no longer even the Governor and he brings in even a minor official to look after this it will complicate matters.  Not only that, the Governor in the Statute which we passed here, is left to be so free.  Now if he brings in this one, and the Minister starts giving him orders, he may think that it is already infringing on his -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member that the Governor will be independent of the Minister and of the Government.  In this Statute we have said that the person to implement is the Minister.  After the Constitution has decided there is no way the Minister can direct the Governor to implement the - from the Statute.  All that will be in conflict with the Constitution.
MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, let us delete this Clause and we move on. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): The sentiments in the House feel that the Governor should be in touch.  But if the interim authority has been taking the office of the Government and this House is subject to all questions and the Constitution also when it comes to force, we all know.  But it is also its interest of the Central Bank really to see that its branch is put in place.  So, it is not a matter of a Minister of Finance directing the Government.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, the Minister for Finance talked in this House about protection of shares.  This task is now being undertaken by the Bank of Uganda.  Could it be that actually the Minister started the process with the Bank of Uganda? Can the Minister clarify?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, but when you know what we require to state this Bank of Uganda is a good home for the Interim and since it is in interest of the Central Bank to mobilise resources and investments and it is needed in the Ministry of Finance to mobilise resources and investments it is in interest of this House that this Authority is in place.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, why we say that we delete this, we should not infringe with the Law.  But the Minister has the right administratively to see how to start the authority without necessarily involving the Law.  To allow the Minister to see how best he can gather the Authority without necessarily treating it as part of the Law.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, it is the mood of the House.  But throughout in most cases it is actually the Central Bank, which has more authority.  If you remove Governor Bank of Uganda and you want to use it to initiate the machinery, then you will have removed the power really

End of text
