Wednesday 4th October, 2000

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair

The House was called to Order.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi  Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, yesterday, Tuesday, 3rd October 2000, there was an article in The New Vision newspaper, which said that Jinja Storage Tanks have been sold off. This article was erroneous and misleading. However, even when we came to Parliament, some Members of Parliament were concerned about what had happened to the fuel tanks in Jinja. On behalf of Government therefore, I wish to put the record straight as here under. 

The Jinja Storage Tanks have neither been sold nor privatised. They remained the property of Government and are managed under the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. 

The Uganda Oil Board Statute was enacted in 1991 January.  The principle functions of the board were to import, store and trade in oil products and to advise Government on petroleum matters. It was also envisaged at the time that the oil board would manage Jinja Storage Tanks.  Soon after the Statute was enacted, the Government of Uganda adopted a policy of privatisation and liberalisation of the economy and reform of the private sector through the Civil Service Reform. The principle of the commercial oil parastatal was therefore in conflict with the new policies. Accordingly, the Government decided that the board should not be constituted and the parastatal should not be formed. 

Several options for the management of the strategic reserves have been considered. These range from complete privatisation to contract management, to setting up a national reserve board and direct management under a Government Department. 

For reasons of its security and strategic nature, it has been proposed that the reserve tanks be managed under a department of petroleum supplies to be created in the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. The Department will also be responsible for the regulation, licensing and monitoring of petroleum supplies in the country. A new law, therefore, is going to be proposed, which if enacted, will repeal the Uganda Oil Board Statute and streamline the legal status for Jinja Storage Tanks. 

Due to lack of legal status, Jinja storage tanks have not had permanent staff. The present members of staff are appointed on contract, which are renewed on yearly basis.  The annual budget for the management of the tanks has fallen from Shs.220 million to as low as Shs.3 million.  

In March this year, Cabinet authorised the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to sell off 6,800,000 litres of fuel products to meet some budgetary short fall. The sale was effected in July 2000 through a public auction, which raised US$2,100,000. This was made up of 4,700,000 litres of petrol, 1,500,000 litres of diesel and 600,000 litres of kerosene. The balance in the tanks as of today is 5,956,854 litres of petrol, 6,169,521 litres of diesel and 5,311,771 litres of kerosene. 

The auction was open to all the oil companies operating in Uganda; eight companies participated in biding. Proceeds from the sale of the products will be used to finance the approved capital and recurrent expenditure. Capital expenditure is expected to be Shs.3.22 billion, and recurrent expenditure approximately Shs.120 million. The capital budget is mainly for installing a very efficient modern fire fighting equipment system, which estimated to cost about US$2.1 million. With this kind of fuel concentrated in one area without proper fighting system, there could be chaos if something went wrong.  

At the close of the Financial Year 1998/99, the budgetary proposals for rehabilitation and maintenance of the storage tanks was Shs.236.2 million for recurrent expenditure and Shs.2.66 billion for capital expenditure.  This is the money that was requested. However, at that time, it was expected that the tanks would be privatised in the course of the Financial Year. As it turned out, it was decided that they should not be privatised but should be kept as Government reserve tanks. 

However, only Shs.1 million was given as recurrent and Shs.35 million for capital expenditure. This was extremely inadequate for the works that were available to maintain the tanks so that the leakage and other areas that need attendance are done. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development jointly worked to restore this matter of lack of money. The only way this was to be done was to allow the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to utilise the Appropriation-in-Aid or the money received as fees for the use of the tanks and the budgetary income that come out of ARA was Shs.93.6 million, which was used to top up to the maintenance and parts of the capital works done on tanks. 

That supplementary budget of Shs.93.6 million was used as follows; Construction work Shs.8,655,000, salaries and wages Shs.36,395,000, allowances Shs.3,361,000, vehicle operation and maintenance Shs.6,676,000, consumables on spare parts, Shs.4,676,000, utilities Shs.7,101,000, property cost Shs.21,385,000 equipment and others were Shs.5,270,000 totalling Shs.93,623,246.  

The article therefore, raised issues that were available anywhere else; and as I said yesterday, there was no plan to sell and there are no plans to sell the tanks. They are to be used as reserve tanks for Government, only that some litres were sold to supplement the budgetary provisions in order for them to be maintained and have a fire fighting equipment in place that is actually modern and is able to contain every situation if it arises. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for this information, which we have been lacking. First of all, it is confirmed that the fuel has been auctioned off. So in effect, I want to know whether they have some fuel left, and is this reserve going to be built up again for what we have withdrawn to meet our budget shortfall? Or are we reducing our storage levels to what the Minister might consider adequate levels? I will not ask for how many days this fuel is reserved as a security reason but if he would like to volunteer this information, we will be very happy to know.  

The Minister has raised a very important issue in his speech. Some of the money realised has been used to buy fire-fighting equipment for that storage tank. We want to congratulate the Government for that. Having such fuel in such concentration indeed requires fire-fighting equipment. For the safety of the rest of Uganda, this is not the only place where concentration of fuel is. In fact, the Kampala 7th Street and 6th Street are always parked with fuel vehicles over 20 or 30 bridgers at a time each carrying 60,000 litres of fuel or more. 

Can I know from the Minister whether our Government, having considered the importance of fire-fighting equipment in Jinja, is also aware that a similar problem could happen to our industrial area? Will similar efforts be made to procure fire-fighting equipment or is there fire-fighting capacity in the rest of Kampala or in other places to protect against possible fire outbreaks? Is this mobile fire-fighting equipment or is it fixed? Because if ever there is a fire in Kampala, which may occur anywhere not only in the fuel storage depot, this whole city could be burnt to ashes. Could the Minister, in concern of the possible danger of fire, address this issue and put our hearts to rest that there is capacity for emergency fire fighting?

MR.DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek two simple clarifications from the Minister. I am quite sure when Government decided that there must be fuel security for the nation in case our imports are cut off, that fuel should be enough to carry the nation for a certain number of days or weeks. Can the Minister assure us that what is left after the sale is sufficient in case of the emergencies?  

Secondly, can the Minister tell us how the sale of such fuel to meet budgetary shortfalls is accounted for in our budget? Because if we pass a budget here where nothing is indicated that we shall be selling our oil reserves and then you sell all the reserves and this Parliament whose major task is the allocation of monies for development work of government in Uganda, how do we account for it? Thank you.

DR.MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I am seeking one clarification from the Minister. We know we are a land-locked country and it is disappointing to see that we are actually selling fuel reserves to meet certain obligations as far as fighting fire at these depots is concerned. Since we are landlocked, are there any other plans to build further fuel depots and scatter them all over the country in case our supplies are cut off?  Thank you very much.

MR.KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for clarifying on the issue of the fuel depots in Jinja. But I would like to add my concern to the point raised by hon. Pinto regarding the dangers arising out of the management of our fuel supplies countrywide.  

Apart from the dangers posed at the fuel depots that have been provided with the fire fighting equipment, it is now common knowledge that all our petrol stations in various parts of the country are storage places for vehicles at night. This adds up to the dangers if there is a fire at any of these places. I know that some of the responsibility for this may be within the areas of local authorities. But I think the Minister must be aware that if this situation continues, it may be a catastrophe just waiting to happen.  

Secondly, I do not mind the reserves being sold off if it is necessary. But I think the people would like to know first whether the Government intends to build up the sold off reserves as soon as it is in a position to do so, so that we can ensure our sustainability. I think it is only right and proper that we are told whether we benefited price-wise from what we sold off from our reserves because the prices of oils have been going up from time to time. Did we benefit from the boom that has been going on in this regard?

MR.BAMWANGA STEPHEN (Ndorwa West, Kabale): I am seeking clarification from what the Minister explained about the international oil price going up by more than three times yet Uganda continues to import a lot of petroleum products. Secondly, there is public outcry on the super profits being made by the oil companies in terms of pump prices of fuel. Did the Government in its wisdom consider the fact that when they were going to sell this fuel, they were going to buy further reserves at much higher prices? If the reason given was that they were going to repair the leaking storage tanks, I will understand that.  But to sell petrol to companies like Shell does not really convince me beyond any reasonable doubt unless they tell us exactly how much money was raised over and above the cost of procurement of the petroleum reserve.  

We have had a lot of problems. The other day we were trying to discuss the Appropriation Bill and as you remember, I raised a concern when the hon. Minister said that we have been able to meet the shortfall by getting grants and as a result of the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. That we have been able to get more money to finance this shortfall hence the variances we got as a result through grants and through the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. Was this the only way we could have raised the money to install the fire fighting equipment and repair the leaking tanks? Could we not have passed a supplementary budget to meet the cost of repairing those leaking tanks and also be able to install the fire fighting equipment rather than really selling what you already have? 

We have a saying in Rukiga that, “ a bird in the hand is better than two still in the bush.”  When tomorrow we have to import at twice the price. So, I think it was not wise. Well, I was interpreting it in English but in my view it is certainly dangerous to the taxpayer to sell petrol or diesel. Even if it was the highest bid of Shs.800 or Shs.900 per litre, when tomorrow we are going to import at Shs.900 and sell to the public at Shs.1,500! I thank you.

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The New Vision is a Government newspaper and the hon. Minister also is a Government Minister. To me, it is not enough for a Government Minister to come to this House to deny a story in a Government newspaper. I would like to know if the Minister has gone deep to find out why and how the story came to be published.  

DR.BYARUHANGA PHILIP: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and thank you Brother for giving way. The issue of equating the editorial policy of The New Vision, which is a parastatal of Government to actual policy of Government, is not correct. This issue came up again last week when the same hon. Member said he had got his information from The New Vision and therefore, that was a Government statement. The two are completely different.  There is administrative flexibility within the editorial policy of The New Vision. You can question that but not to equate what was reported in The New Vision to actual Government policy. Thank you.

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker; that is a quarter of the kind of information I was seeking. What I am saying is that a Minister could have taken the information to The New Vision or The New Vision could have picked it from a Minister. 

My second point is that I belong to the Committee on Natural Resources. That Committee had wanted to go to Jinja to have a look at these tanks. We were told that everything about these tanks is confidential, that even a Parliamentary Committee cannot go and inspect. Even the amount of fuel inside there is not supposed to be disclosed to anybody. It is now common knowledge that these tanks are actually being used by small petrol dealers who are hiring from Government. I suggest that if the Minister is serious, let him lead a delegation of Members of this Parliament to go and confirm. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we can confine ourselves to seeking clarifications on the Minister’s statement, I think it will make us move a little bit faster.  

MR.OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his statement but allow me to seek three clarifications.  Strategic fuel reserve for a country like Uganda, which is landlocked, is very important. It is extremely important not simply because there could be fuel crisis on the international market but because of our country being landlocked. 

The statement by the Minister revealed that we still have a balance of petrol, diesel and kerosene products.  Could the hon. Minister inform the House who owns these products since we divested ourselves from anything to do with petroleum products? 

Two, how will the Government procure more products to top up what has been sold? 

Thirdly, what plans does Government have to regionalise strategic fuel reserve so that in time of need, the country is properly supplied? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want clarification from the Minister. What was the objective of Government to create a fuel reserve and is this objective still relevant? What does Government consider to be the minimum amount for a strategic reserve? Was the sale of some of the fuel meant to cushion this dollar which is sliding and possibly America could have learnt from us? Thank you.

MR.LWANGA TIM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek clarification from the Minister on an issue, which probably I understand differently from the way he understands. When you start selling off assets in an economy, it implies that the economy is on the verge of collapsing. If it was a company, you are heading for bankruptcy. Selling off a strategic asset like oil reserves for a country like ours is not a good indicator given the fact that our economy is a shining star when you compare it with other economies. We have been growing; the GDP is growing per annum on average by eight per cent. Are you telling us that we have reached a stage, despite our growth in GDP, to start getting rid of our strategic assets? Are we on the verge of bankruptcy?  Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister to clarify.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Members for the interest they have shown in our having strategic reserves, especially when we are landlocked. n my Statement, I clearly said the fuel was auctioned and eight companies participated and we sold in dollars meaning that we cushioned against the fluctuation of the shilling and we sold for us$2,100,000 by selling 6,800,000 litres, which is an average of 0.32 American cents per litre. That means that if you multiply 159 litres per barrel you get approximately 45 Dollars in the barrel. The highest so far of the barrel cost ex-deports like – or Iran and for the best crude like Iran light is now 34 Dollars per barrel, meaning therefore, we must have sold at a profit because that was the price –(Interruption)

MR.LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. Are we selling crude oil or refined petrol?

MR.PINTO: The hon. Minister has given a figure of some 34 American cents per litre and has compared a pure refined product, which has been transported, stored and is ready for use to crude costs. Surely, he should help us to understand the comparison of the refined product on the market at that price against the price we pay, because that is what we feel from our pocket not the theory of barrel and marshal or whatever.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Pinto. He was the Marketing Manager of ESSO when I was the Planning Manager, so we both understand oil. In order to produce pure or refined oil, you need crude. And he knows very well that petrol is the second lightest of the oils and in order for you to have a price of oil you must have both the white products above the line and the black products below the line.  And the black products have got the price, which is much lower, and they are cautioned by the white products.  Therefore, for me to begin with the crude is to show you that when products are imported and refined the prices are actually related to the raw material.  

In the last statement I made here; I gave you exactly how much it costs to transport fuel from Mombasa to Eldoret by pipeline, from Eldoret to Kampala by road and the distribution costs and even the profit cost of each of these litres. And he also knows that a barrel has 159.1 litres, so when I say that we sold at US$45 a barrel which would have cost us US$30 as raw material, surely US$15 dollars is enough to cover all those costs and give us a profit. I can debate, we can argue, we can have calculations. 

The other issue that hon. Pinto raised was whether Government is going to have fire fighting equipment –(Interruption)

MR.NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am not very good at mathematics, but if a litre of petrol is auctioned at 34 US cents and I am buying a litre of the same petrol at Shs.1,560, does that not imply that this Government get the oil companies free money? I cannot see how 34 US cents is more than Shs.1,560.  

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I said we sold at 0.3 American cents per litre because we are selling ex-bonded warehouse not after tax. When you buy a litre you have to pay tax, you have got to add on distribution cost and you have got to add on profit margin. Therefore, I do not see the contradiction.  Mr. Speaker, hon. –(Interruption)

MR.BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Minister, I am seeking a simple clarification from you and we want a simple answer. How much money did we get as a profit on selling these petrol and oil products? Do not tell us the cost given to the goodwill; tell us how much profit we made.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Mukwaya Janat): Mr. Speaker, is it really fair when hon. Members request Government to explain - Government can explain in one hour, it can explain with a preamble, why should we be limited when we are trying to explain? Some of us are being educated about this oil thing, which we do not know! So, is the hon. Member in order to ask for a short precise answer from Government?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Members, when you ask a Minister to explain; you give him the opportunity to do so. And if it is not clear you can seek further clarification. Hon. Minister, can you proceed.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, hon. Bamwanga wants exactly how much money we got from the sale of oil products. I repeat US$2.1 million for the sale of 4,700,000 litres of petrol, 1,500,000 litres of diesel and 600,000 litres of kerosene. 

Now, the question of how much profit we made depends on which method you are going to use LIFO or FIFO because these products were brought into the country at different points in time. If you want me to calculate the profit on continuous oscillating basis, that needs another answer. But I do not think it is really very necessary because Government was not in business to make money, it was in business to have reserves.

Hon. Pinto asked me whether Government is going to have fire-fighting equipment on the 7th street in Kampala where most of the petrol companies are located. He knows very well that it is the policy of oil companies to have fire-fighting equipment. These are private companies; therefore, Government cannot buy them fire-fighting equipment. What we can only do is to ensure that the regulator ensures that they have got fire-fighting equipment.  

Is this fuel enough in case we do not have imports?  Well, it depends on how long we do not have imports. But it is reasonable enough for us to keep going on until we find alternative routes, because what we have been holding is approximately worth 21 days’ supplies on normal basis and after the sale, we have got about 18 days supply.  The question is, ‘are we going to replenish?’ Yes, we shall replenish as soon as we have got funds. But you cannot keep replenishing these tanks; they are actually 30 million litres in total. So, you cannot keep replenishing unless you have the required equipment to contain fire or leakage at the right time, and that is why we actually sold.  

Why are we selling fuel to buy equipment? I think that is normal and with this I can answer hon. Tim Lwanga’s questions. Are we selling assets? Hon. Lwanga, as an Accountant, knows that there is a difference between fixed assets and current assets. We normally sell current assets in order to maintain the business and we keep the fixed assets in order to strengthen the business, so we are not doing anything very different from what is normally done in business.  

All petrol stations including those where people park, have an obligation and are mandated to ensure that they have fire-fighting equipment when they are built. If any is built without fire fighting equipment it should not be licensed and the Ministry is trying to strengthen capacity to ensure that fire fighting equipment is everywhere where petrol is sold and stored.

Of course, hon. Bamwanga has been raising the issue of how much money. I think I have answered that many times, so I do not need really need to repeat it. Should we have raised this money by selling the fuel, by getting a loan or by getting a grant? It is not easy to get a grant to repair fuel tanks; but of course, if we had access to a grant, we would have used it. The next option would be a loan. Processing a loan takes a lot of time and yet you have got to do something about your tanks. So, the next option was to go to the Consolidated Fund and get the money. At the time, there were not enough resources in the budget to cover that. So, the Government and Cabinet thought that the best way to do it was actually to sell off some litres, then get what is right and later replenish.

Hon. Okello-Okello says The New Vision is a Government newspaper, therefore when the Minister talks, he should talk like New Vision. I wish him well if he believes what all the newspapers write are true. But he will soon realise that newspapers do not necessarily write Government policy. The New Vision does not have Ministers as editor or as a reporter or as anything to do with the writing.  Yes. The New Vision is a Government newspaper, but it is independent; it reports and writes independently.

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I never said that The New Vision was Government. My point was that when two children from one house speak about their house differently, then something is wrong with that house, and the owner should know. Is the hon. Minister therefore in order to misquote me? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, I find it difficult to believe that the Minister really misquoted you, unless I also did not hear you well. I think you had a problem, you said now, if The New Vision wrote in the manner in which it did, why should the Minister speak the other way?  Meaning therefore that they should have spoken the same language because they are - one is the son or daughter of the other. So, I really find problems when you say that you have been misquoted.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, as I conclude these questions, hon. Okumu Ringa was worried about who owns the products. Of course, I said Government owns it; that is why Government sold it. Otherwise, we would not have sold it if it was not ours.

I thank the hon. Members for the interest they have shown in this question of the reserves and I assure them that as soon as Government has enough resources, we shall have other strategic tanks located in some other places. But I do not think that strategic reserves should necessarily go on regional basis but on strategic basis. I thank you.

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 8 AND 44(d) TO SUSPEND RULE 100(5) TO ENABLE THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO PROCEED TO THE SECOND READING OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2000.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion in accordance with rules 8 and 44(d) to suspend rule 100(5) of our rules of procedures to enable me to proceed to the Second Reading of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?  Proceed.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, in pursuance of Article 156(2)(b), concerning supplementary estimates in particular, supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the 1999/2000; and supplementary schedule of No. 3 of 1998/99 were laid before Parliament. They were consequently deliberated on and approved by this House. Article 156, Clause 3 requires that a Supplementary Appropriation Bill for Supplementary Estimates approved by Parliament in accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution be introduced into Parliament.  

It is in respect of the above provision of the Constitution and in accordance with Rule No.100 of the Rules and Procedures of Parliament that I now move that the Bill entitled Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000 be read for the Second Time. So that Parliament can consider the amount set out in the Schedule against various Ministries, Departments, district votes, provide for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purpose specified in these estimates. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR.PINTO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have not heard a clear reason from the Minister as why it has become necessary for us to suspend the rules. From what I understand, there must have been a delay in the presentation of the Appropriations Bill. So now, he wants to rush it by suspending the rules. What was the cause of this delay?  We do not want to make it a habit of continuously suspending our rules. I am not convinced from what the Minister has explained that there was an inevitable delay.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Pinto for giving way. An Appropriation Bill is the last stage of the discussion on the Budget. There is no way you can present the Appropriation Bill unless you have first finished all the Votes and approved all of them.  An Appropriation Bill is a summary of the total Budget authorising the Minister of Finance to withdraw money from the Consolidate Fund. Therefore, there was no delay. We just finished a Finance Bill a day or two before. We could not have brought an Appropriation Bill before the Finance Bill. So, there was no delay and if we did not suspend the rules and we waited for the two weeks, that means that the Budget was not going to be operationalised until the Appropriation Bill is passed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, may I remind you of an earlier decision by the Committee on Business and Welfare with regards to the Budget process? The decision of the Committee then was that we should try as much as possible to complete the Budget process on the request of His Excellence the President by the end of August. But because of the problems, which are quite understandable, this was not so. 

I would like also to remind you that as the Minister says, the actual exercise of going through the figures and so on, has been completed. What we are really doing by these Appropriation Bill is to translate what you have already agreed upon into law as required by the Constitution. So, I take it that there should be a minimal debate on this issue unless there are burning issues. That should really be the position. Can you proceed? 

I have been advised that we have a quorum, so we can pronounce ourselves on whether the motion should be carried or not and I therefore, put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
SECOND READING

the SUPPLEMENTARY Appropriation Bill, 2000

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has just stated, we spent some hours here looking at every Vote in the Supplementary Expenditure and we all got convinced that supplementaries were necessary and that they were also moved according to the rules. I therefore, would like to commend the Members to discuss the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000 and we pass it as quickly as we can. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Abura Kene): Mr. Speaker, you will recall that yesterday the Committee of the whole House considered and passed the Supplementary Schedule Two and Three, which contained Supplementary Expenditure for the Fiscal Years 1998/99 and 1999/2000. The House also passed Supplementary Schedule One in April this year. It is the amount we approved yesterday, which has been translated into law in the form of Supplementary amendment Bill, 2000. I recommend the Bill to the House.

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure.  Now that we passed the Supplementary Estimates yesterday, I know that this Bill will only validate into law what we passed yesterday. My procedural question is, will it still be necessary to go detail by detail in the Committee and so forth? Should we not just pass it omni-bus since we have already passed it anyway? Otherwise, to me, it looks like a waste of time.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, actually, we are looking at the Supplementary Bill, not so? There are only three Clauses and one or two Schedules; it will not really take us long. Is that okay? There are only three clauses and I think there are two Schedules. The Minister moved a motion that the Bill be read for the Second Time.  

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2000.

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, on Schedule Vote 042 - Mbarara University, delete zero and insert 51744.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this appears on top of page 8 of our Bill, Vote 042.

MR.OPIO: For instance, Mr. Speaker, it says supplementary amount required in the year ending on 30th June 2000. For recurrent expenditure on salaries, wages and other expenses of central administration, teaching, hospital and halls of residence of Mbarara University, there is zero, I am correcting it to be Shs.51,744,000. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. G. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the House reports thereto. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. G. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000" and passed it with one amendment. I beg to move.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, my colleague here has drawn to my attention something. While there was an amendment on Mbarara, when it came to voting the total, there was no amendment on the total and so, I would like the Minister to take that clarification.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker the total is accurate, it was that omission which I introduced and amended. So Mr. Speaker, I was doing my job of reporting to the House that we considered the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000" and passed it with one amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000" be read the Third Time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this concludes consideration of The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000.

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 8 AND 44 (d) TO SUSPEND RULE 100(5) TO ENABLE THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROCEED THE SECOND READING OF THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2000.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion in accordance with rules 8 and 44(d) to suspend rule 100(5) to enable me to proceed to the Second Reading of the Appropriation Bill, 2000. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Proceed.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, as we remember, the last few days we have been discussing the pursuance in accordance with Article 154(4)&(5) of the Constitution, which authorises the President to issue funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the Financial Year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act whichever is the earlier; Parliament has, over the last three months, deliberated and approved the Budget Estimates for the Financial Year ending 30th June 2001.  

Article 156(1) requires that “The heads of expenditures contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in the Appropriation Bill to be introduced into Parliament to provide for the Consolidated Fund in the sum necessary to meet the expenditure and the appropriation of those funds for the purposes specified in the Bill”.

It is in respect of the above provisions of the Constitution that I now move the motion that Parliament considers the amounts said in the Schedule against various Ministries, Departments and district boards and appropriate these funds to enable them to operate.  

As hon. Pinto put the question when I was moving the motion for the Supplementary Expenditures, I would like again to capture the Members with a view that we have done all we were supposed to do. As a last point, we are going to appropriate what we have discussed for the last three months. And therefore, we are not hurrying the House into making this law. The House has heard it for the last three months and I am sure we are satisfied that we have done justice to the Vote as presented by my Ministry. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that we go on to the Second Reading.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson. Wait a minute; this is still the motion to suspend. Is there anybody who wishes to speak to it? I will now put the question.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to support the motion to suspend the said rules and I will make two points on that. First, if we had an opportunity to look at the other Parliaments, suspending our rules on matters of this nature is normal. You should, in fact, get some films from Sincepan and you will realise that all the time the Speaker calls for suspension of the rules in order to help the House move.

The second point is to say that since this is now the last part we are playing in –(Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the matter I was raising was a periphery matter, which does not need further debate because it will be wasting our time.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, he has declined.

MR.KARUHANGA: The second point is that Parliament and the chairpersons of Sessional Committees have done a unique work in the history of this House in making sure that this Budget is passed in the first week of October and not at the end of October as is required by Law. And this point is escaping attention. This is a well considered matter and none of the Members on the Front Bench has recognised that we have been working and burning the middle night candle and recognised our efforts on this; both the chairpersons and the Members.  And I would wave that at some stage somebody would have the courtesy to recognise our efforts.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga I recognise and appreciate those efforts. But there will be others whom I am sure will similarly do so. Is there any other person?  Otherwise, I put the question.

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I also rise to support the motion that we suspend the rules to enable the House get the budget out of the way because I am looking forward to making very useful contributions to the pending Budget Bill. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
SECOND READING

The Appropriation Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker, we have had quite a long time discussing the Budget and we are now nearing the end, and both the Executive and Members of Parliament are satisfied that we have done the best we could do. So, I do not have much to add but to thank the Members for having done a great job and enable both the Members of Parliament and the Executive to near the completion of the Budget process before the end of October as per the Constitution. I therefore, move that all Members agree with me that we go ahead and pass The Appropriation Bill, 2000.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are moving a motion for Second Reading, not so? Chairperson, there is a Report.

MR.ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You are already aware that Parliament, through the Committee, has been handling the Budget since 15th June 2000. The Sessional Committee then handled the Ministerial Policy Statements together with the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the various Votes and Heads. Thereafter, the Committee of Supply adopted reports from the Sessional Committee on the Budget.

In conformity with Article 154 of the Constitution and specifically Clause (2) and (4), it is vital that this Bill be urgently considered by the House to enable the Accounting Officers to carry out the services since the Vote on Account for the Ministries and Departments are almost running out. Mr. Speaker, I recommend this Bill to the House. I thank you.

MR.BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I support the motion by the Minister that we should pass the Appropriation Bill. However, I have got a few areas where I would like to get clarification from him. My first comment is on Vote 034, which is the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2001 for Recurrent Expenditure for Mass Mobilisation. The Departments, which are specified here are the Office of the Chairman, the National Political Commissar, Mass Mobilisation and Political Education, Economic Affairs, Directorate of Legal Affairs, Directorate of Information and Education, National Leadership Training Centre and District Movement chairpersons. 

However, from my connection with the Movement Secretariat, I know that there are other Departments, like the Directorate of Administration and Finance, the Directorate of Research, the Directorate of External Relations which are not specified within the headings which are given under Mass Mobilisation. May I know from the Minister whether these are immaterial or they will require specific Amendments so that they are included under the Vote of 034?

Secondly, when you look at the provisions under the same Vote in the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the year 2000/2001, the Directorates which I mentioned that are not included under the Appropriation Bill are specified and provided for under these estimates. So I think there is need to harmonise the position in the Appropriation Bill with the one in the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.

My second area of observation is in relation to provisions relating to districts. I have seen that different amounts are provided for under the Appropriation Bill from the ones under the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure. One specific case is Moyo district, which is provided for under Vote 072. Under the Appropriation Bill the amount provided for Moyo district is Shs.2,997,321,000 but when you refer to the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure under Moyo district – Vote 072 for the Recurrent Expenditure, the total amount is Shs.3,090,761,000. So, what is provided for in the Appropriation Bill is less than what is provided for in the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure. Can I know why there is a reduction? If there is no reduction, can the figures be harmonised? I thank you.

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM (Moro County, Gulu) Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. My first comment is on Vote 034. Consideration should be given to deleting Vote 034 altogether in the future.

The second comment is with regard to supplementaries. We are today approving appropriations for all the Ministries and I know that occasionally it may be necessary to resort to supplementary appropriations. But, Mr. Speaker, you heard during the debate on the supplementary the concern of Members on this issue. My appeal to the Minister is that he should try to go by the recommendation of the House that when the need arises for the supplementary but before it is expended, the Ministry should come to the Sessional Committee concerned and express these views so that we all move together. The answer we got yesterday from the Minister is most unsatisfactory. He was asked why the Ministry did not find it necessary to go to the various Sessional Committees to get the supplementaries considered, and he said, ‘we were going by the Constitution’.  

Obviously, we go by the Constitution but there is this thing called co-operation and every time you ask us for co-operation. This is an area where Parliament is saying, to avoid any further problems, please, come to us so that we can scrutinise the reasons for the supplementary and agree with the executive so that when expenditure is incurred we are all at one. Mr. Minister, I urge you to consider this very seriously and this is the only reason I am standing up (Interruption.).

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished or not yet.

MR.ONGOM. I am giving him chance for clarification.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I am a bit at a loss as to what hon. Ongom is asking for, because if carried it will have to create a crisis in Government.  Supplementaries are not done in a lump sum in one go. A Ministry comes in with a supplementary of Shs.10 million for either travel or buying something. Then they go to a Sessional Committee. The following week they ask for another supplementary for another small purchase or another small activity, then you come back to the Sessional Committee. 

I want a clarification as to whether the hon. Member means that for every expenditure of a supplementary nature, we should come back to the Sessional Committee at every stage and time? Or whether he means that should be aggregated and we come after sometime, say, a month or two and say, ‘in the last two months the following supplementaries were requested by the various Ministries and we want to brief you on them’.  I want that clarification so that we do not pass something, which cannot be implemented. Thank you.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Minister for the clarification sought. If the scenario you have described to me is what actually takes place, then there is chaos in the administration of our funds. If the supplementaries are used in the way you have described, then there is a problem. That means, in fact, even the Minister of Finance can never be able to control this. Really then there must be something wrong in the way we do our things. Let me hope that this is not what happens but anyway, it is necessary for the harmonious working with Parliament for this request, at least in some cases to be considered. I do not think that, for instance – (Interjection)- and the Minister who asked for clarification is not listening to me! 

I do not think, for instance, that Mehta was paid in bits to the tune of Shs.15 billion. And if that is really how we operate, then there is something wrong. Anyway, my request still stands that the Minister should consider the possibility of consulting on this matter.  Thank you.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I do not know whether Members have realised that this is the first Appropriation Bill prepared like this. In the past they used to bring some papers to pass together; I am happy with this development. I think it is very healthy and we are moving forward.  

Secondly, permission for supplementary should be included in the Bill in future. This Bill should permit you to ask for a supplementary and I think whoever is drafting that should take care of it. And then I am sure that my colleague, hon. Ongom, will not be complaining much after that. 

I traditionally asked this question and I want to ask it again now. How much money is sitting on the Consolidated Fund? And since this is the Appropriation Bill, could we have an idea how much money is sitting on the Consolidated Fund? Was any money saved last time? Have we over-spent on the Consolidated Fund? Is there an account called Consolidated Fund Account? We need a little bit of education on this matter and I will tell you why. Nobody has ever given me a proper explanation on this because it looks like it is an academic fund. It is not so clear that you see a statement of account; this is a Consolidated Fund Account. Is it kept in Bank of Uganda and if so, do we have some losses on it or not?  Or is it just meaning a collection account for revenue?  Many of us are not accountants and when I ask a question like this, I never get an appropriate answer. 

Now, Article 157  - yes I will need to get information.  Thank you for your education.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Karuhanga. Uganda Revenue Authority collects Government funds on a daily basis and this money is banked, currently with the Uganda Commercial Bank, which releases it to a Consolidated Account in the Central Bank. 

Money is also spent from the Consolidated Fund on a daily basis because various Departments and Ministries prepare cheques on a daily basis. However, at the end of each month, the Central Bank prepares a statement of account of receivables and expendables and gives it to the Ministry of Finance. If there is a deficit, it means that the Central Government would have borrowed from the Central Bank. And if there is a surplus, it means that the Government is healthy and it is able to continue spending. This money cannot be given on spot because you cannot have spot balances on a daily basis. But at the end of each month you can actually give a statement of affairs of the Consolidated Fund and add or subtract monies in transit. I thank you.

MR.KARUHANGA: That is exactly the information I have always laboured to get. When you are making an Appropriation Bill like this, it is important for he people’s representative to be informed how we did on the Consolidated Fund and each one of us should know about it. It is something that we just say money will be drawn from Consolidated Fund. We never know. 

I also would like to know from the Minister, when do you see us ever balancing our Budgets? When do you see yourselves ever balancing the Budget so that you say, ‘in five years time, we think we will be able to balance our Budget’? Our income will be equal to our expenditure and we shall have no debt. 

Then there is a point I want clarified. Now that you are doing the Appropriation Bill, what happens to Article 157 of our Constitution? Has it been addressed in this Bill? Because the Article says that “Parliament shall make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund”. What the framers of the Constitution must have had in mind must have been maybe the money you get for disaster management. But that is also provided for separately. So I would like to know whether this fund is reserved so that we have a reservoir account. Why are we not passing the Appropriately Exhalation Policy? 

Lastly, I know that the Public Accounts Committee looks at accounts after there is a post-mortem to the business.  Could the Minister of Finance tell us how we did in the year with some of our Accounting Officers? Did they do the right thing, are some of them subject to any inquiries? Are there any cases where the Accounting Officers as per the Constitution let down the Minister of Finance? Because the Minister of Finance sent these Accounting Officers to the various Ministries; for example the Judicial Service Commission does not appoint the Accountants in Judiciary. The Chief Justice does not take care of them. The Ministry of Finance manages them. So if we took a filing quiz and somebody misappropriated those funds, we would say the Judiciary is corrupt. Yet in fact the people managing those funds are from the Ministry of Finance. 

Without waiting for the report of the Public Accounts Committee, which will come in the other Parliament, could we know whether the Minister of Finance can give us some kind of indication whether he is happy with the Accounting Officers this year and if not where are glaring cases? Thank you.

MR.PINTO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I too rise to support the motion. First of all, on the matter of supplementaries, I happened to sit in the Committee when they were considering the supplementary, and as revealed by this House, we gave the Ministry of Finance a ceiling of some 3 per cent as an over run on the Budget in the supplementary. And this time the results are that the supplementary is well within if only slightly above 3 per cent. I think this is something that we must appreciate.  

I will raise two questions. One is under Vote 008. My colleague hon. Salaamu Musumba mentioned something about it. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister stood here and eloquently convinced this House that the Budget Bill which, we are pushing for as a Private Member’s Bill will be brought up and we succumbed to his request that it would be soon.  Now we are coming to the end of the Budget process for this year, which means that the new Budget process is starting. We would like to leave a legacy behind that Parliament plays a critical role in the consultations that ultimately formulate Government policy so that we leave the Ministry to allocate according to the resource envelope. But I think Parliament has got a big role to play in the question of equity, the question of balanced development, and the questions of priority areas.

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been eagerly –(Interjection)- may I finish, please. I beg your pardon, Mr. Speaker, I would like to finish my question so that I possibly get a comprehensive answer. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is eagerly awaited to inform this House as to the whereabouts of the Budget Bill. What steps will be taken by the Government to ensure that our cherished desire, which had led us to bring the Budget Bill almost to vote, which, through his appeal we agreed that he goes back so that it becomes the function of Government to involve Parliament? Can we get a definite time scale and specific answers about the Budget Bill?

The other is a constitutional matter on Vote 012 regarding the Ministry of Lands and the Land Act, which as you know, is a constitutional matter. I would like to know what provisions Government has in place to operationalise the Land Act. I belong to the Committee of Natural Resources, we have interviewed the Minister, who said it is a budgetary matter to operationalise the Land Fund, and that Government has –(Interjections)- I am still developing my point.

THE SPEAKER: Develop your point and come to a conclusion

MR.PINTO: Right now I want to know, Mr. Speaker. When we asked the Minister of Lands about the Land Tribunals at sub-county and district levels and about settlement and compensation, the Budget requirement for this year was Shs.25 billion. I understand the Ministry of Finance gave them below Shs.5 billion. Next year, because the problem will be bigger, they will require more than Shs.25 billion. They have been told that the Ministry of Finance will not be able to provide more than Shs.5 billion within that range. I am asking the Government to tell us whether the Land Act will be operationalised under these conditions if we require Shs.25 billion to compensate people, to operationalise the Land Act, to carry out Land Tribunals? Will you ever be able to fulfil the requirements of the Constitution regarding land? I can now receive the information and the answers from the hon. Minister.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, may I remind you that there is an amendment to the Land Act coming?  

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, according to our procedures, we are not allowed to speculate.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister has tabled here the regulations being considered by the relevant Committee, and they will be for your debate. Maybe at that stage you can go deeper into this particular problem.  

MR.PINTO: But Mr. Speaker, are you comforting me that there are funds to operationalise? This is a financial matter.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am just giving you this information that just in case you wish to go deeper into this matter, there is another opportunity.  

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I have a big problem in supporting this motion. For many years this Parliament has been told that Government operates a cash budget, and in the light of our circumstances we all appreciate that tactic. But every year the Ministry of Finance comes with a Budget in which they say, our total incomes, inflows from Uganda Revenue Authority, from the Donor Community, from Grants, from Gifts will be so much. Then this Parliament goes into great detail in the various Committees to see how this money has been equitably or almost equitably allocated for different purposes for development and administration in our Country.

Having done that, a few people in the Ministry of Finance suddenly arrogate themselves the power to give supplementaries, which are in excess of monies we have voted for some Ministries here. What frightens me is that, is the Ministry of Finance telling this House the truth when it says, “Our hen lays 21 eggs” when the hen actually lays 42 eggs? That is a very important matter, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me remind you that we have dealt with the issue of supplementary, and in my opinion we dealt with it fairly. That is why you passed the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. I would like you to confine yourself to the second Bill, in respect of which the Minister has moved the motion.

MR.NYAI: Yes, Mr. Speaker, whereas you are correct in that ruling, not so long ago you allowed hon. Ongom and hon. Minister Manzi Tumubweinee to seek clarification as to what they wanted in terms of supplementaries. It is in that light that I am bringing myself in line with this debate; that when we pass the Budget, where is the line?  Is the Budget accurate, or is there other monies elsewhere which people in the Ministry of Finance can dole out as patronage? Could this assurance be made to the country? 

I take note of the statement made by hon. Pinto that, as a Member of the Committee, he is satisfied that the supplementaries were only slightly in excess of three per cent, which they had allowed the Ministry. But where is that other extra money coming from? If we are operating a cash Budget and you come to us, “This is our expectation and we budget according to it”, where are you getting that money?  This is my worry and the worry of a lot of Ugandans.  

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that despite the fact that we are operating a cash Budget, we have been almost within what we presented here last Financial Year and we are just off by 3.1 percent. Therefore there is a need for what we have been doing to discuss the budget. I am not sure that Members of Parliament can have a budget where you can have the expenditure equal to what you focused on. By being off by 3.1 percent, I think we have done a good job.

Secondly, the Member is asking where we got the money. When we were contributing here in the House, we said that we re-allocated within Votes; that is, either from current to current or from current to development. That is technical. We also informed the House that some of the money we got through grants and loans. So this is how we got the money over and above the 3.1 per cent. Thank you.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful for the information by the hon. Minister of Finance. In fact it is that information, which shows how this Government’s expenditure is not properly controlled. If Parliament votes and passes a Budget in which there are line heads and then some people go and arrogate to themselves the authority of shifting of funds from one head to another.  There is no grant, which comes to this country without approval of this Parliament; those are all accounted for.  So, my worry is that I am quite sure the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, as Leader of Government Business, will make sure the Cabinet looks into this. Where does the Ministry of Finance get this power of excluding Parliament to start apportioning money? Is it patronage Mr. Speaker? I hope not. I thank you.

MR.WAMBUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I support - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Mr. Minister you have now moved a motion, it is now being debated and I give you an opportunity to wind up.  Proceed.

MR.WAMBUZI: I support this Bill but I am compelled to ask the Minister in charge of the Presidency why he has refused to listen to the cries of Balamogi about the issue of an ambulance which was promised in 1992 and then re-promised in 1995 and re-promised in 1996? We are now in the year 2000! I have checked carefully; it does not appear anywhere. I would like an assurance and clarification that as we pass this Bill, the Balamogi this time are going to get their ambulance.

Two, another point I want to mention briefly is the issue of corruption and embezzlement. I am directing this to the Chairman of the Committee handling this affair through you Mr. Speaker. I did not see any highlights on how we are fairing on the issue of corruption and embezzlement. I am told that the roads in Kenya are very much decayed compared to the roads in Uganda -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, I have to interrupt you. We are not at a stage of a general debate on the budget speech. We are really focussing specifically on the Appropriation Bill. If you could deal with that matter, we shall move forward.

MR.WAMBUZI: I am going to be brief. I wanted to ask the Minister of Finance that he has not told us in clear terms what percentage of money has been relegated to corruption and embezzlement and what measures he is taking in this new appropriation to tame corruption and embezzlement. We have noticed it in certain areas and it has not been highlighted either by the Committee or by the Minister. But I request you Mr. Speaker to allow me to ask the Minister to clarify on how we are fairing on that particular issue.  

Finally, I would have liked to ask the Prime Minister why the people of Nawampiti in particular for the last four years have had continuous failure of crops and are continuously having problems of food. But it appears the people of Nawampiti are not known in the Prime - (Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I really would not like to move a point of order on my Friend the Eng. Especially as we near elections and he is making a point about his Constituency. But you have drawn the hon. Member to the business of the House and you have ably explained to him what the business is about. The matter he is raising has nothing to do with the business at hand. Is the hon. Member in order to be allowed to continue after your advice on the same trend as before? And since you gave him the chance to resume the matter, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, I was really trying to assist you to avoid what has just risen. May I once again request you to deal with the motion, which is on the Floor?

MR.WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker, the point which I was trying to complete was that; is there any money in this Vote, which we are appropriating now, for disaster preparedness, for people who do not have food particularly people in Kamuli district? It is as simple as that.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry about this. But the point is this, hon. Wambuzi, I quite understand your concern for your constituency and that is your entitlement. But what I am drawing your attention to is that the figures we are talking about have already been approved by you. What we are trying to do is to write these figures into a Law as required by the Constitution. Otherwise you have already dealt with this very matter you are talking about.

MR.WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker, I was just seeking clarification. Is it wrong for me to say that you are asking me to say yes or no to this Appropriation Bill?  If at this stage you are asking me and I am asking the Minister, am I right on behalf of Balamogi to say yes when other people are not being provided for this items?  I think this is the question about which I am seeking clarification. If I am out of order, I will take my seat honourably.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. While I support the motion I am seeking one clarification from the hon. Minister of Finance.  From the Appropriation's Bills that are before this House, I do not seem to see the reflection of monies, which went to compensate the depositors in the banks, which were closed. May I get clarification from the Minister where such monies are got from and how they plan to recover the monies that were lost in the banks? Because we know that we had monies in smart fuel cards, has this money been recovered? And in the Co-operative Bank, in Greenland Bank, in ICB, how are you going ahead to recover this money so that you put back the taxpayer's money? Thank you.

MR.OPIO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I will start with hon. Baku’s questions. He raised an issue of some of the Departments being left out in the Movement Secretariat. I would like to apologise that it is true some were left out at drafting time and we are amending to reflect that. But the total budget is reflected in the Appropriation Bill. 

The difference between the numbers in the Budget Estimates book and the Appropriation Bill is because we have also raised a corrigenda in the Budget and that corrigenda is being reflected in the Appropriation Bill.  I will go over that again. There is a difference between the figure in the Votes book and the figure in the Appropriation Bill. We raise also corrigenda, which is now being reflected in the Appropriation Bill.  

Hon. Karuhanga raised very many fundamental issues, which we would have discussed sometime back. He asked how much is on the consolidated account. I am sure hon. Manzi answered that, as we know it is just like an account in the current account or savings account, you registered inflows and outflows. Your inflows can be higher than the outflows and then you will have a surplus. Sometimes your inflows are less than outflows and you may seek the request of your bank to see if he can give you an overdraft and then you utilise it. 

The Government also behaves in the same manner, when we have a surplus we use this surplus for public projects.  When we have a deficit we look for either grants from the rest of the world or in the old days you would create some money which we do not really do, support to do. So, at the end of the financial year we have our balance of payment position and this is reflected in the publication which we can read all of us there is always a balance of payment position which summarises all our activities both internally and externally. 

But internally we can have a deficit although as a general account we can have a surplus and as I said, we need more time may be to discuss one but that is in summary what we do in Government. 

Hon. Karuhanga was concerned about the accounting officers who may not have performed during the last Financial Year. We have the mechanism within the Constitution, that is, the Auditor General will audit all the accounts of various Ministries. After which he submits the results to the Public Accounts Committee, which will look at it and come up with recommendations.  So we cannot at this moment really say that all the accounting officers behaved according to the rules. But there is a mechanism; that is, the auditor general will audit and then present the audited report and Parliament will discuss.  

With regard to how they are performing now, we have assured you that using the commitment control system, there are very few Ministries, which are spending over and above of what they are supposed to spend. So we are confident that the system is working.

Hon. Karuhanga also raised the issue of contingency fund. It is very proper for him to raise this. According to the Constitution, we need to have a law in place which guides the contingency and we are going to work on that. It is not there but we must have it.  

The hon. Pinto was concerned about the Budget Bill.  As far as the Government is concerned, we discussed the Bill and we have already given the position of Government and the Ministry of Finance is ready to be called by the Committee to answer any queries on it. Otherwise, as Government, we have done our job. 

Hon. Dick Nyai was concerned whether it is actually necessary for us to sit here and discuss the Budget. I already have answered him by saying it is very important to have a Budget here and this is reflected in the fact that we have almost lived within the Bill for which we discussed here having only 3.1 per cent outside the Budget. 

I also want to state that it is not true that officers in the Ministry of Finance are the ones who are dictating when it comes to supplementary expenditures. Usually it is the Ministries, which initiate the request for technical supplementaries. They write to the Secretary to the Treasury to give them permission to shift from one Vote to another who responds positively unless it is against the rules.  So, it is not true that it is the small officers in the Ministry of Finance who are allocating the supplementary. 

Secondly, when it comes to those supplementaries that require extra resources, they are discussed by the Executive. It is not the people in the Ministry of Finance who say we must have this money. For instance, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs may say we need money to send people abroad to inspect the embassies. This is discussed and it is agreed that there is no money in the Budget for this. Then the Ministry of Finance is called upon to look for funds to make sure that the mission goes abroad. This is not a unilateral decision by the officers in the Ministry of Finance. So, I would like to get this point very point very clear to Members of Parliament that it is not the officers in the Ministry of Finance or the Ministers of Finance who unilaterally decide that there will be an increase in terms of supplementary.

There is a question that was put to us, ‘where is the Budget for fighting corruption?’ I would like to state that we have been discussing the Budgets of IGG, the Auditor General and the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity. All these Budgets are geared to make sure that monies are spent according to regulations. So, I would like to answer the Member that definitely, the Government is concerned and it has budgeted for this in this Financial Year.  

Lastly, hon. Babihuga raised an issue of the money which the Government has been compensating depositors in the collapsed banks. If the hon. Member looked at the supplementaries, she would realise that it was catered for there. When we discussed the supplementaries, we said that about Shs.90 billion was for this. 

For the land, I think I will ask the Minister of Lands to respond over and above what the Speaker gave as one of the answers. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to state that the hon. Speaker gave an answer to a question?  

THE SPEAKER: Answer to what?

MR.PINTO: He said this is in addition to the answer which the hon. Speaker gave. As far as I am concerned, you are chairing. Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I gave advice to you that there is likely to be another opportunity when you can delve into this matter further. 

MR.PINTO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. But he has not given me any answer about the money, yet it is a financial matter.

THE SPEAKER: He said I think – did you say somebody else was going to give it?

MR.OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, this is the time of appropriation.  This would have been raised earlier. Now we are appropriating what we passed. Does the Member really require me to again go back to the previous stages? I think that is what I meant. What we are putting here, we have already discussed Mr. Speaker.

MR.BAKU: Mr. Speaker, after the Minister reconsidered the two issues I raised, could we take it that it would be consequential amendment of harmonisation between the estimates and Appropriation Bill or I have to move specific Amendments as he considers the two points I raised.  

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, according to the regulations, you do not need to move a consequential amendment. It is going to be appropriated accordingly.  

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, would you like to respond?

MR.ABURA KENE: Mr. Speaker, I concur with the Minister and to inform the House that we have two Bills to be considered before the Sessional Committee on Finance. That is the NPART Bill and the Finance Bill. As the Minister has explained, we shall be calling them soon.  That is all Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have been advised that we still have quorum. I will now put the question that the Appropriations Bill, 2000 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

the Appropriations Bill, 2000

(Clause 1, agreed to)

(Clause 2, agreed to)

(Clause 3, agreed to)

(Clause 4, agreed to)

The Schedule.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Chairman, there is a small amendment I would like to move; that is on Vote 091 – Busia district.  Delete Shs.3,986,205 and insert 3,986,630, I beg to move.  We are just correcting the error.  

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am seeking further clarification from the Minister with regard to the Schedule, even though he stated that the figures in the estimates, which do not agree with what is in the Appropriation Bill will be corrected. I am seeking assurance from him because there are so many errors. For instance Vote 006 and Vote 032 and many other Votes. So the clarification I am seeking from the Minister is whether or not these will be corrected so that when one is reading the Appropriation Act, one can also refer to the estimates and get the figures correctly.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, we passed a corrigendum, which I hope the Member has. If you do not, we passed and every Member was given a corrigendum, which was added to the Vote. So, what is here is in line with the corrigendum.  So, the assurance he is seeking, I am giving to him that if you could read that document along with the corrigendum, you will come up with the same results as what is in the Appropriation Bill. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question on the amendment proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title.
The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME:

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the House has considered the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2000 and passed it with only one amendment. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the House be adopted. 
(Question put and agreed)

BILLS
THIRD READING

the Appropriations Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Appropriations Bill, 2000" be read a Third Time and do pass.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this brings us to the conclusion of the Budget process and I would like to thank you for your active participation, particularly those of you who have withstood long hours of sitting. I would like to encourage this to continue until business is completed. Thank you very much. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT BILL, 2000.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000” be read the Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?  

AN HON.MEMBER: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR.NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, this is essentially a procedural Bill, which seeks to answer the question, ‘when does a Bill become an Act?’ That is to say, from the time it has been debated and passed by this Parliament, when does it become a law in this country? So, to answer the question, the assent by the President. 

What happens if he does not assent? What then happens to that Bill? This is what really this Bill is about and I cannot do better than refer hon. Members to the memorandum. Everything is set there in the memorandum to this Bill. It says the policy and the reasons why we bring the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, after the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs moved that the Acts of Parliament Bill be read for the First Time, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This was in accordance with rule 99 of the rules of this House. 

The Committee held discussions with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and received technical advice from the Parliament’s Chief Legislative Counsel.  

The aim of the Bill is to provide for the format of an Act of Parliament; the date on which an Act comes into force and what is required of the Clerk of Parliament and the President after a Bill has been passed by Parliament.

Observations:
The existing law, which the Bill seeks to repeal, is the Acts of Parliament Act enacted on the 15th of February 1964. The Bill, however, substantially re-enacts the provisions of the existing law. Out of the 19 Clauses excluding the repeal Clause existing in the Bill, 14 are to be found in the existing law. Of the remaining five Clauses, one is the interpretation Clause and the other is the Short Title. In effect, therefore, the Bill only introduces three new Clauses.

Prior to 1995, a Bill became an Act of Parliament on signature by the President. Under the current Constitution, it is now possible for a Bill to become an Act of Parliament without the assent of the President.

The Constitution requires the Speaker of Parliament, the Electoral Commission and the Speaker of a District Council to issue certificates certifying that in amending the Constitution, the provisions specified in the Constitution have been fulfilled. No provision for this was made in the existing law for the Electoral Commission and District Council to issue such certificates because no such duty was placed upon them. There is, therefore, need to provide for a procedure for this new position. The relevant Articles of the Constitution are Articles 259, 260, 261 and 262.  

Article 259(1) reads as follows:
“A Bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in Clause (2) of this Article shall not be taken as passed unless-
    (a) It is supported at the Second and Third Readings in Parliament by not less that two thirds of all Members of Parliament; and 
    (b) It has been referred to a decision of the people and approved by them in a referendum.”
(2) The provisions referred to in Clause (1) of this Article are- 
    (a) this Article; (that means Article 259 itself);
    (b) Chapter One – Articles 1 and 2; 
    (c) Chapter Four - Article 44; 
    (d) Chapter Five - Article 69, 74 and 75;  
    (e) Chapter Six - Article 79 Clause (2);  
    (f) Chapter Seven - Article 105 Clause (1); 
    (g) Chapter Eight - Article 128 Clause (1); and
    (h) Chapter Sixteen.

260(1), “A Bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in Clause (2) of this Article shall not be taken as passed unless-
    (a) It is supported at the Second and Third readings in Parliament by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament; and
    (b) It has been ratified by at least two thirds of all members of the District Council in each of at least two-thirds of all districts of Uganda.
(2)The provisions referred to in Clause (1) of this Article are-
    (a) this Article – (that means this very Article);
    (b) Chapter Two - Article 5, Clause (2); 
    (c) Chapter Nine - Article 152;
    (d) Chapter Eleven - Article 176, Clause (1) and Articles 178, 189 and 197.

261.A Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution, other than those referred to in Articles 259 and 260 of this Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is supported at the Second and Third Readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.  

262(1). The votes of the Second and Third Readings referred to in Articles 259 and 260 of the Constitution shall be separated by at least fourteen sitting days of Parliament.
(2) A Bill for the amendment of this Constitution which has been passed in accordance with this Chapter shall be assented to by the President only if-
    (a)  It is accompanied by a certificate of the Speaker that the provisions of this Chapter have been complied with in relation to it; and
    (b)  In the case of a Bill to amend a provision to Which Article 259 or 260 of this Constitution applies, it is accompanied by a certificate of the Electoral Commission that the amendment has been approved at a referendum or, as the case may be, ratified by the District Councils, in accordance with this Chapter.
    (3) Where the provisions of Clause (2) of this Article are complied with in case of a Bill to which Article 259 or 260 applies, the President shall not refuse to assent to the Bill. 
    (4) Where in case of a Bill to which Clause (3) of this Article applies the President- 
(a)refuses to assent to the Bill; or 
(b)fails to assent to the Bill within 60 days after the Bill is submitted, the President shall be taken to have assented to the Bill and the Speaker shall cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and the Bill shall become law without the assent of the President.

Recommendations:
The Committee recommends that where a Bill seeks to introduce a few changes in an existing law, Cabinet should amend the existing law rather than repeal and re-enact. Such procedures deprive us of an easy understanding of development of law and reasons for amending a law at different times. It becomes difficult to trace amendment effected on a law as repealed legislation is often discarded. In any case it is cheaper and it takes less time to consider three Clauses than go through 14 clauses.

Since the Constitution introduced new matters which are not catered for in the existing law, Amendments are necessary to provide for procedures to give effect to the constitutional provisions. In this respect the Committee supports the policy behind the Bill and, subject to the Amendments proposed by the Committee and any other from hon. Members, recommends that the Bill be enacted into law. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

MR.OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County Nebbi): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this motion and the report of the Committee with regard to the Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000.  

When you look at the manner in which Bills are brought to this House, debated and passed into law, one would rightly say that this Bill is very important because it will regulate the manner in which the Bills we pass are enacted into laws.  

I would like to agree with some of the observations made by the Committee; that since this Act is seeking to introduce only two Clauses there will not be any need to come up with a completely new Bill. But looking at the way our laws should evolve, I feel there is no harm in having what may now appear to be a re-print because when you are only including two provisions it may appear to be a re-print with the inclusion of the two provisions. And personally, I would have no objection to that. I support the Bill in its current form.  
Indeed the constitutional provision Article 91(1) reads “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercise through Bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President.” And particularly sub-clause (2) reads; “A Bill passed by Parliament shall, as soon as possible, be presented to the President for assent.”  
This is a constitutional provision but ‘as soon possible’ does not give a time frame. Then when you look at Part II page 5 of the Bill paragraph (d), it reads; “cause the copies to be presented to President for assent”. This is Clause 9(1)(d) which reads; “as soon as possible after a Bill has been passed by Parliament, the Clerk shall cause the text of the Bill as passed to be sent to the Government Printer who shall print four copies of the Bill on volume or on paper of enduring quality and send the copies as printed to the Clerk. And on receiving the copies the Clerk shall- (d) cause the copies to be presented to the President for assent”.  
I would have wished that in this Bill we give a definite time frame because it is within the powers of this House to do so. That when a Bill is discussed and passed into law and it is printed, it should not be left with the Clerk for maybe, two or three months before presentation to the President for assent. 
According to the constitutional provision, the President should assent to the Bill within 30 days upon receipt.  But there is no time frame indicated for the Clerk to act. So, I would have wished that the Committee looked at this aspect so as to ensure that these Bills do not delay.  

The Sixth Parliament has passed many Bills and the Acts of Parliament Bill should also consider provision whereby either the Clerk or the Government printer could be encouraged, if not compelled, to print as many of these Acts as possible so that Members have access to these laws. I remember this very House made an appeal to the then Prime Minister, hon. Kintu Musoke, who made an undertaking that his office would ensure that all Bills passed into law would be given to all Members of Parliament. 

Unfortunately, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs are not here. But I hope one of the Front Bench Members will take note of this and maybe react later on. But since the time of the current Parliament is running out - we maybe having five months to go, could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister do the needful since it was his undertaking.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe I will give you this information. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister or the Office of the Prime Minister has said, and I think rightly so, that that undertaking being prior to the constitution of the Parliamentary Commission, it is now the responsibility of the Parliamentary Commission to produce these copies. That is the position with Prime Minister. But it is your liberty to pursue it with him, I bet you will get the same answer.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since you are also the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, and I am not allowed to address this question directly to you, I am sure the Commissioners will do their best to ensure that one of the gifts we Members of the 6th Parliament will get when we are leaving on the last day of Session, will be parcels containing all the laws we passed. Sometimes when you leave a place, the gate is normally closed to you. So, when we leave, we should be able to carry our parcels. I hope there will be a commitment for this undertaking.  

I once again thank the Minister responsible for this Bill for the provision regarding issuing certificates for all Bills passed by Local Government. These will authenticate all the laws passed by Local Government. Because as of now, many Local Councils have passed bye-laws which are meant to strengthen local administration; and some of these bye-laws actually rot on the shelves of the offices of the Chairpersons and those of the Clerks or the Speakers of the Local District Councils.  

But I would have wished that a similar Bill is provided for all laws and I believe that such a system of authentication when gazetted and the gazettes made available, many Local Governments may wish to compare notes. For instance, just for argument’s sake, if in Nebbi district, the Local Government has found it difficult to enforce a law on increase of the number of water wells, and I know that in Rukungiri a law on the same was used well and empowered the population on water. Definitely, they would borrow from the experience of the people of Rukungiri and use a similar law to effect such provisions in the district.  

So, when these certificates are being issued, we should also provide that they must be gazetted and the gazette should be made available so that all Local Governments countrywide and libraries should have access to the gazettes. 

I would like to end by stating that the issue of our operationalisation of our laws should be taken seriously by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We pass laws here; the Sectoral Ministers responsible for those laws should be able to implement them effectively.

I am going to submit to the sector Ministers questions with regard to how the laws we have passed in this Sixth Parliament are being implemented; and I hope when the question reaches these Ministers they will be able to act appropriately. On this note, I support this motion and I look forward to making some Amendments when we are at the Committee Stage. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether I heard you right that by virtue of this Bill, there will be issued certificates authenticating Bills both here and in the districts. I hope I misunderstood you because this is really in reference to certain provisions of the Constitution.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate your concern about Bill. This Bill is with specific provisions of the Constitution and my concern was that if we were able to have a system which could authenticate laws and ordinances and bye-laws of other Local Councils, it would also help us to have a reservoir of first hand information. I made reference particularly to the aspect of a law regarding gravity water scheme as to how it should be maintained; how a district can benefit from the experiences of other districts by comparing local legislation. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are there any contributors?  Well, maybe it is a convenient time –(Interruption)

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, I only want to comment on the issue raised by hon. Okumu Ringa about giving a timespan within which the Clerk of Parliament should certify and send the Bills. But this is subject to whether we are now standing it over. It is subject to whether we are adjourning now, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see any contributions on the Floor, but I will definitely give you an opportunity to respond at an appropriate time if the hon. Members confirm to me now that there are no more contributions forthcoming. I am inclined to adjourn the House. Yes, the House is adjourned to 2.00p.m. Tuesday next week. The reason for doing so, hon. Members, is that we have a workshop tomorrow and Friday. I think you have been circularised and it is an important subject to do with our economy; and as many of you as can make it, please, you are encouraged to do so.

Secondly, I have been requested to announce that the Uganda Parliamentary Prayer Breakfast Group has invited all of you to the Annual National Prayer Breakfast to be held at Sheraton Hotel Ballroom on the 8th of October this year at 7.00 a.m. and it will only cost you Shs.25,000.  The tickets can be obtained from the hon. Tim Lwanga, Member of Parliament for Kyamuswa. Thank you very much.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.00p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10th October, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)

