Tuesday, 3rd October 2000

Parliament met at 2.26p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Members for their contribution to the debate on the supplementary expenditures – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister it is Item three. Do you have your Supplementary Appropriation Bill? Yes, and you have the Order Paper? Look at Item Number Three.

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker sir, I apologise. I thought we were starting off where we left but I know we have to work according to the Order Paper. 

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2000" be read for the First Time. I beg to move Mr. Speaker.

MOTION FOR PARLIAMENT TO DISSOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES II AND III FOR THE FISCAL YEARS 1998/1999 AND 1999/2000

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister we are now on Item four.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for their contribution to the debate on the Supplementary Expenditures. During the debate, several members raised issues, which I would now like to respond to.

I will start with hon. Kakungulu’s issues. First of all, you sounded very sceptical about the Government’s seriousness with regard to the Alleviate Poverty programme. Government is very serious about the programme to alleviate poverty and I think what we should do is to have more seminars/workshops to explain to people the efforts Government is making to alleviate poverty and the measures put in place to reduce corruption in this country.  

Hon. Okulo Epak was concerned about the corruption in the districts. He says that the officials at the district are stealing funds, which are aimed at alleviating poverty.  I would like to state that the Government is so concerned about it as well. And Government has put in place institutions to make sure that the corruption at the district is reduced. The Government has put in place the following institutions: 
    • the IGG’s office, 
    • the Auditor General’s office, 
    • the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, 
The Ministry of Finance and Government as a whole has put in place funds to assist all these institutions to fight corruption. For instance, we are going to put five per cent of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) for this purpose. So we are very serious about fighting corruption at the districts as well as the centre.  

Hon. Chebet Maikut raised several issues. I would like to respond as follows: First, the Government has put in place a Commitment Control System, which is becoming very effective in making sure that the Ministry spends within their budget and the results are very positive.  Therefore, we can take comfort in this system. 

Secondly the Ministries which spend outside their budgets have to face disciplinary measures through what we have put in place. The Member was of the view that there should not be Supplementaries. I would like to say that there are Ministries, which by their nature can not avoid having Supplementaries. For example, the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness, by the name of this Ministry, you can never focus with 100 per cent the amount of money, which you would require. So, by nature this Ministry is most likely to ask for Supplementaries or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is used as a holding Ministry for contingencies and for funds for which the users are not identified. Therefore, the Ministry holds these funds until such a time when the user-Ministries are identified. So we cannot as the Ministry of Finance avoid keeping some money for Supplementaries. It is not possible, therefore, to fulfil hon. Maikut’s request that there should be no Supplementaries in all the Ministries.  

With regard to the Budget Bill, I would like to state that the Cabinet has already discussed it. We are waiting for the Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to call us to come and discuss the Bill.

Hon. Okumu Ringa was of the opinion that three per cent is mandatory. The three per cent was a recommendation by the Sessional Committee, which was adopted by this House and therefore we are following this and this year our Supplementaries which required extra resources amounted to three per cent, to be exact 3.1 per cent. So we have managed to live within our agreement with Parliament with regard to Supplementaries which require extra resources.

Hon. Okumu Ringa was also concerned about the Ministry having paid attention only to foreigners when it came to paying domestic arrears. I would like to state that if we look at the notice on our Supplementaries, you see so many domestic arrears, which are due to the locals and not to foreigners. For instance, table two, on page one, Vote 002 State House, we paid domestic arrears. Again 006 Foreign Affairs, we paid domestic arrears. Page three, Vote 016 we paid domestic arrears. These are just examples to disprove the fact that the domestic arrears we paid are only to foreigners or to Mehta.  

Also, hon. Okumu-Ringa would have wished us not to be presenting Technical Supplementary Expenditures in the House. As the Speaker advised yesterday that this is a Constitutional matter, and if you spent on Votes or reduced although they are technical expenditures, we need to bring the Technical Supplementary Expenditures to the House for discussion and approval. So, this is a constitutional matter.

Hon. Masiko wanted to know if there were any Supplementary Expenditures for the Ministry of Defence.  I would like to say, yes, there is Vote 121, which is for taxes under Capital Expenditure, and it is about Shs.1 billion, which is only under Defence. 

She also raised an issue about having Supplementary Expenditures for P.S.I. I have already answered this one. I said, we decided through a resolution of Parliament that the importer should be paying directly to the P.S.I and that the P.S.I. would be claiming after they have done the work. So, we put money aside so that when the P.S.I claims, the Government pays them for the work done.

Hon. Bamwanga misunderstood me when I stated that some of the extra funding for Supplementaries arose because of the new exchange rate. I was not really so happy that there has been depreciation of the shilling. But I was stating the fact that when your Budget is financed using convertible currencies, when your currency depreciates, you have more money because the currency is now exchanged with more money domestically. So, it was not that I was excited that because of depreciation, we have found extra funding for shortages in our Budget.

Hon. Omongole raised an issue, which was answered by hon. Manzi when he was talking about our failure to predict with certainty the amount for disaster. Hon. Manzi informed him that it is not possible to predict with certainty the money for disaster. Also the Speaker answered his second question when he was concerned about saying that we should get rid of this practice of Supplementaries, and he was told that this was according to Article 156, Clause (a) and (b) of the Constitution.  

On the question whether Shs.2.4 billion was spent on transport and stores alone, again we gave this answer when I consulted the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. She informed me that the Shs.2.4 billion was used for transport, storage and the cost of the food for relief.

Hon. Kaweesi and several other Members wanted to know why Sessional Committees should not discuss Supplementary Expenditure before expenditures are made. What the Ministry is doing is within the Constitution, which requires that the Ministry can spend and then report to Parliament within four months after it has spent. So, we are within the Constitution.

Hon. Ongom raised two issues: first, why the Government has not bought the Okello house instead of renting it.  From reliable sources, I have been advised that Mr. Okello does not want the Government to pay for this building, but we are still negotiating. If he ever changes his mind, the Government will buy it. As hon. Ongom said, it is very difficult for somebody else to be in that house when it is just next to the State House.  So, we must rent it if he says he cannot sell. But we are continuing with this idea of buying the building instead of renting. We agree that your advice is cheaper in the long run.

Hon. Ongom raised an issue for which I have brought documents; they can be circulated. He was concerned that the Government has not fulfilled one of the conditions that it would carry out the investigations and discuss with Mehta and report to the House. Government has been doing what was requested of it by the resolution of Parliament and I would like to read what is just a two-page answer.  
“Following the resolution of Parliament on Mehta claim dated 4th May 2000, a Committee was constituted to discuss with the Mehtas. The Committee was headed by the P.S.D.S.T, Mr. C.M. Kasami, the Director, Legal Advisory Service, Ministry of Justice, Mr. L. Tibaruha, and Mr. Tukei M. of Ministry of Finance.  

The Committee held a meeting on the 9th May 2000 with the team from the Mehtas, composed of the following: Mr. S.C. Shama, Regional Director, African Operations, Mr. M.D. Hege, General Manager, Accounts and Company Secretary; and Mr. U.V. Sindak, General Manager, Audit.  

Mehta Group had submitted a claim in respect of UGMA for US$41 million. The calculation was based on the same principles as those used in the calculation of the claim on the cable, that is, -(Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister is now pretending to submit a report to the House, a report, which the House asked to be substantive. He is now giving the report as part of his answer to the general debate. The procedure I would like guidance on is; how is this matter going to be handled? Are we going to re-open the discussion afresh so that we can discuss this report? Since he is giving it as part of his general answer to the debate, which Members have already debated, how are we going to handle this report?

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right, hon. Member. I would have expected the hon. Minister to state in his response that actually the negotiations took place but what did not take place, I think that is the point you made, that no report was brought back to the House. And that would then be a matter which he could apologise for or make some other statements, but not certainly use this opportunity as if to present that report, which should have been presented much earlier on. Or if it is not yet complete, will be presented at an appropriate time.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to supplement the procedural question that my Colleague has put forward. This concerns other matters that we have asked the Minister to clarify on, for example, the matter of the sale of UCB. It is a matter of great concern to us; we wanted to know whether it was going to come for debate here. We know there were consultants that were engaged in UCB; they were given US$480 million to do consultancy work for privatisation. We know that work is going on to privatise UCB. Is this report going to be tabled to the House for us to debate on the privatisation of UCB as we had demanded that it should be brought for full debate here?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, was this the matter which was raised in the general debate?

MR.PINTO: Yes, Sir, it has been raised several times in the general debate.

THE SPEAKER: In this particular general debate?

MR.PINTO: At least I raised it in the Committee and it is not appearing in the report.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us proceed this way. I have already advised the Minister, I hope he will take my advice, to merely say that, yes, negotiations as per resolution of Parliament took place, but unfortunately, a report has not been made to Parliament, depending on whether these negotiations are complete to have warranted an earlier report. If they are still continuing, you will be in position to say so. But I do not think he should drag the House into that particular report at this stage.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, there is a small problem. Hon. Omongole and hon. Ongom have proposed an amendment to the resolution to do something or to delay and stop - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Karuhanga there was no such a proposal - (Interruption)

MR.KARUHANGA: My proposal was that maybe the Minister could be given a chance to say it and then we debate it.  If there are technical reasons - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us do this. Let the Minister respond to the questions and if you like to take a decision one way or the other; that will come later. Do you not think so hon. Karuhanga?

MR.KARUHANGA: If there are technical reasons, then you will see accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: But I do not think there was any such a proposal on the Floor. A proposal on the Floor would have been in form of a motion. Why do you not leave it to the person who had those ideas to decide what he wants to do?  And that is the hon. Ongom. Yes hon. Minister.

MR.OPIO GABRIEL: Mr. Speaker, thank you for your wise advice. I would like to limit myself to responding to the issues raised and one of them having been by hon. Ongom with regard to the payment of Metha, which appeared in the Supplementary Expenditures. 

Hon. Ongom read a resolution, which I now have. Maybe just to refresh Members, it said that, "Therefore Parliament resolves as follows; 

That considering the inequalities in the deal, Government should negotiate with Metha payment in relation to UGMA"  - Government is negotiating. 

"That Government may, depending on the outcome of the negotiation mentioned above, go ahead and compensate Metha" - Government has not completely compensated Metha. Government only paid part of the amount which is about Shs.17,000,000,000, which was due to the fact that Metha had commitments and we guaranteed, as Government, that payment to the lenders and also to make sure that the Tropical Bank is well capitalised. But the point we would like to raise here is that out of the Shs.41,000,000,000, which Metha has placed on the table to negotiate to be paid, the Government has only paid Shs.17,000,000,000 and this is a smaller percentage with regards to how much he is claiming. 

"That Government avails a copy of the report on the investigation of Metha claim to police for further investigations; 

That Government reports to the House the outcome of the negotiation with Mehta within two months from the adoption of the report".  

I would like to apologise that it has taken more than the time but the Government is still negotiating with Metha with regard to this demand for US$41,000,000. 

This is my response to all the issues that were raised by Members of Parliament when they were considering the supplementary expenditures as laid before the House. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman do you have something to add to what the Minister has said?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNINTG AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Abura Kene): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me start by the thanking hon. Members for their lively debate to this Supplementary Schedule Two and Three. A lot of issues were raised and debated. This means that the Minister should take note of the concern raised by Members especially the large amount of money paid out as supplementary. The Minister should improve on the budgeting process so that these are covered in the Budget proposals. The Minister should adhere to the Commitment Control System, which they have introduced so as to avoid bringing in Supplementaries always. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: I seek clarification from the Chairman Mr, Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: From whom?

MR.PINTO: From the Chairman as he was on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: The Chairman has finished.

MR.PINTO: But Mr. Speaker, this is clarification I am seeking for us to reach a conclusion on the supplementary costs. 

THE SPEAKER: Alright.

MR.PINTO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to ask our chairman of the Committee whether he is satisfied with the position that the Minster has given regarding (a) the question I have put on the sell of UCB?  
(b) the present situation where we heard information that Uganda’s fuel reserves were to be sold. Have they been sold? If so, for how much, and where is the money? 

You see we can withhold our consent, we want to be clarified. These are matters that we hold dear to us. We can only ask these questions through our chairman because we raised them in the Committee. The Minister has not answered because he thinks he is beyond the general debate. But we took opportunity to participate in the Committee to give our opinions and to sound our concerns. I want to ask if he is satisfied, and if he is not, to tell what steps he is taking as our chairman to get commitment and definite answers from the Minister, if the Minster is not prepared today. But we cannot sit back and wait for UCB to be given away as it has been done in previous efforts. We cannot sit and not know that we have strategic reserves of fuel, and if they are being sold, how much? We cannot sit here and not know the ingredients of the economy as it is, although we would like -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, are you opening up a debate?

MR.PINTO: I am asking my chairman.

THE SPEAKER: But you see, you can ask the chairman through the Chair.

MR.PINTO: The chairman through you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is not fair to raise issues at this point, which were not addressed in the general debate. It is not fair for the chairman to respond. I think you can raise these issues on some other occasion.  The chairman came here to respond on the basis of the discussion. But if he has an answer I have no problem.

MR.PINTO: I beg your pardon. We raised these issues in the Committee. If they are not appearing in the report and they have not been addressed, where else shall I go if not through you and to the chairman? Mr. Speaker, guide me.

THE SPEAKER: What happened to the report? You were a Member of the Committee.

MR.PINTO: The Committee is silent on those issues, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but this is a report of your Committee.  It has come here and you have recommended appropriately.  Now, how can we start opening a debate on issues which were not countenanced and which are not reported on?

MR.PINTO: I am asking him if he is satisfied and to tell me. Mr. Speaker, I want you to give him a chance to tell me.

MR.BAKU: I am happy that hon. Pinto has taken the Floor, but I was wondering whether it was in order or whether procedurally correct for him to raise matters, which have never been raised before this Committee. When we debated this matter yesterday, there was no minority report; there was no dissenting opinion from the Committee. We acted on the pages of the report, which was before the House. Could it be really correct to go into the background of the kitchen work of the Committee when it has never been brought up formally before this House? 

MRS.ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and I wish to confirm that we talked about the issue of Uganda commercial Bank. We had before us a team of Uganda Commercial Bank officials including the Minister of Finance who came forth to brief us about all these issues. If a Member of this House stands on this Floor to ask a question pertinent, I think he is entitled to an answer. I think the hon. Minister should be in position at least, to clarify some of these issues even if they were not put clearly in the report of the Committee.

MR.NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking guidance on a procedural point. We interact with the Executive through Sessional Committees, and if those matters are not covered in the Committee report, particularly the report which is signed by five out of 17 members; and if the matter is of such interest to the nation and touches the core of our economy; would it not be fair for the Executive, particularly through the Leader of Government Business, who is here, to answer on behalf of Government rather than allowing the Speaker to protect them in this matter?

THE SPEAKER: Let me respond to hon. Nyai’s position. I was not protecting the Executive, far from it. I think that statement is not fair and it is not borne by actually what happened because I was dealing with the chairperson, and not the Minister. I was saying that, it was unfair to the chairman to raise issues which were not raised in the general debated which was prepared to come and answer, that is the statement I made; and I do not think that was a protection of the Executive. If anything, it was a protection of the chairman. I do not know -(Interruption)  

MR.NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, if you misunderstood me because of the last part of my statement, the position I understood you to take was that since hon. Pinto did not raise these things when the report was written, therefore, he should not raise them here. And I am asking you to exercise your brilliant wisdom that in this matter which affects the national economy, I think it is only fair for the people of Uganda through this House to get a clarification from Government. It cannot only be from the Committee -(Interruption) 
  
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, I understand your position, but for you to say I was protecting the Executive, I think that is a statement which -(Interruption)

MR.NYAI: No, but Mr. Speaker, you did not hear me. I said the last part of my statement that instead of you protecting the Executive was just in a matter of cheering up the House. It was not meant to disrupt you from your wisdom and I withdraw it.

THE SPEAKER: And you withdraw, what do you say after that? Hon. Dick Nyai, you withdrew statement and what else?

MR.NYAI: No the point I made earlier which I was seeking your guidance on is that, the matter being raised by hon. -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I understand that perfectly well, and I had even said – hon. Dick Nyai?

MR.NYAI: All I said was I made my last part of my statement to cheer up the House it was not meant seriously. If you took seriously, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, I am surprised that by making such a serious allegation against the Chair, you are taking it as merely cheering up the Members? Is that a very serious proposition? 

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I think let me make myself very clear here. I made the statement -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us do this, you have withdrawn the statement, what else?

MR.NYAI: I have withdrawn the statement more than three times, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: And what else?

MR.NYAI: What else do you want me to withdraw, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order.

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA: Mr. Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Dick Nyai to engage in direct dialogue with the Chair to the detriment of this House? 

THE SPEAKER: You see there is one thing, which I understood. Hon. Dick Nyai does not want to be heard to apologise for the statement he made. I will take him for that.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Pinto is pertinent but it was discussed in a separate motion which was before the House when the Minister responsible for finance presented to this House a motion to borrow US$48.5 million to finance the restructuring of the privatisation process. When I look at the motion we discussed yesterday, it has no specific reference to the privatisation process. The motion before the House now, if you may allow me to read, is with regard to discussing Supplementary Schedules -(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, let me hear you what are you talking about.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Let me finish. So the guidance I am seeking is, can we stick to the motion on the Floor so that we are not derailed? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: the matter which hon. Pinto raised was to do with the sale of UCB and privatisation generally. My advice then was that it would be unfair to require the chairperson to respond to those issues when they were not raised during the general debate. But I also said, if the chairperson had an answer, he could do so. Now, I do not know why you are opening a debate on a matter, which really is not an issue. If the chairperson is ready and willing to answer, he has the Floor so that we can proceed.

MR.ABURA KENE: Mr. Speaker, the sale of UCB was discussed in the Committee not the one dealing with supplementary, it was discussed earlier on and the discussion is still going on. We have not yet completed. I think we need time for that. 

The sale of fuel reserve was reported in the Committee.  It is a matter to be handled with the Ministry of Energy and Power. So we have not yet got the report from the Ministry of Energy and Power on the issue of fuel reserve. It was reportedly sold but there is no clear position on it yet until we get it from the Ministry of Energy and Power. That is all Mr. Speaker. I thank you.

MR.PINTO: So you see Mr. Speaker. We are left in the open. We have no answer (Laughter.). 

THE SPEAKER: He has answered.

MR.PINTO: He has tried, he does not have an answer (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: I had not given you the Floor Hon. Pinto.  I just heard you firing from the microphone. Now hon. Members, I am afraid we are not in a position to go to the next stage.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt. I am seeking clarification. All this time we have been talking about UCB, it appeared to me that we were supposed to get an answer, which would be taking us forward. It seems to me that either hon. Pinto misunderstood the chairman or the chairman did not get on with what we were doing. 

I know that hon. Pinto is not a Member of the Finance Committee but he visited the Committee and made a contribution there and he expected to get a report when the chairman was making a contribution. Since he is not allowed to sign, he was sitting here waiting and nothing came. So he brought it as a Member requesting for information. Now, it seems to me that the chairman has promised that although the matter was raised in the Committee, they never actually addressed it. Hon. Pinto and the rest of us are now wondering what next! 

If hon. Pinto is making allegations that there was a consultant who took US$480 million and from what he said, this is a consultant who was hired individually and things like that. And if the fate of UCB is depending on the hands of that consultant, it is a matter of concern. The Minister in charge of Privatisation is a historical Member in getting this concern on UCB (Laughter.). So, surely it is only fair that a response from Government on this must come out. You know some of us who are chairmen of these Committees get bombarded for innocent reasons. Now what would you expect our chairman to say? Could we probably call upon the Minister for Privatisation whom we trust very much in this area to throw light on it?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Procedure.

MR.KARUHANGA: The hon. Member has already been heard. He cannot be heard twice.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, you must conduct yourself in accordance with the rules of the game. Your Colleague is still standing, he is still making a point and you should respect that please. Have you finished?

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I was just really requesting the office of the Minister in charge of Privatisation to calm our nerves on this matter because UCB has been a thorn in his own flesh. So we would like to know whether he has got a statement to make on it or to tell us that the matter is going to be handled later so that we know it is a promise which Members of the Committee on Government Assurance can then take him on. At the moment if we are left in this ambivalence, it is a problem.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweine): Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. The issue of UCB is complicated and it was discussed in the Sessional Committee but it was not finalised as the chairman has clearly said. 

Uganda Commercial Bank was privatised 49 per cent about three years ago and there were problems between the investor and the Government with an option of buying two more shares. There was disagreement between the Government and the investor. Secondly, there was some element of mismanagement of Uganda Commercial Bank. So, last year, the Bank of Uganda using the powers given to it in the Financial Institutions Statute, section 32 and 34, entered Uganda Commercial Bank and put it under statutory management. Up to now Uganda Commercial Bank is still under statutory management of Bank of Uganda. So the use of the word privatisation really should not arise now because you cannot privatise what is being held by the Central Bank. It is the central bank, which knows what will be done to Uganda Commercial Bank given its importance in the economy and its strategic existence in the system.  Therefore –(Interruption)

MR.PINTO:  I seek clarification Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, why do you not –(Interruption)

MR.PINTO: If I do not understand, I cannot follow.

THE SPEAKER: I will give you an opportunity. Let him finish.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: So, as far as we are concerned now in the Ministry of Finance, the shares of Government are held by the Ministry of Finance and the other shares are held by Westmont. There was a case in court, which Government won and there is now arbitration proceedings in London to establish what actually happened. That is the part which Government is playing but the part that relates to either sale or liquidation or anything about the bank is strictly under Bank of Uganda. Uganda Commercial Bank therefore, is not in the purse of the Privatisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance in terms of what comes next.  I thank you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I rise on a point of procedure. Rule 45(1) of our rules of procedure reads “Amendment to Motions”. Sub-rule 1 reads, ”When any motion is under consideration in the House or in a Committee, an amendment may be proposed to the motion if it is relevant to the motion.” The motion we are discussing is Supplementary Schedule.  

THE SPEAKER: Let me answer you. There is no amendment to this motion. What is happening is, - hon. Member, are you listening? One hon. Member has sought information, which appears to have been on an issue, which was not arising from the debate on the Floor. The question was that it became apparent that this was one of the issues, which was countenanced at the Committee’s deliberations and nothing was said about it in the general debate. So the hon. Member was wondering whether the chairperson could say something about it in particular to the question which he had asked. That is where we started and no amendment has been proposed at any stage as far as I understand. 

The second point raised by hon. Karuhanga was that the Minister responsible for privatisation should at least throw some light on the issues which the hon. Pinto had raised and this, I think, is where we are. There is no amendment to the motion. Are you satisfied?

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied but I had not yet finished. The point I was raising was that the issue is very important; it could be discussed under a substantive motion so that we can dispose this matter.   That is the issue I raised under rule 45(1) and (2).  Those who have it can read. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You still have a point?

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, to thank you for bringing hon. Okumu-Ringa back on line, I think now he has understood.  The sale or no sale of UCB, compensation and otherwise have a lot of bearing on the Supplementary Schedule. Government is given a Budget and authority to spend according to the Budget proposal. When it goes beyond that, they come to us that they have spent extra and some of this money may be in compensation like the compensation in depositors of UCB or Westmont or otherwise. My concern lies purely on that.  

The Minister in trying to answer said that there was mismanagement. First of all, there was a sale, which was bungled. There was mismanagement in UCB, they went to court, and Government won. Then there was arbitration to decide what happened. My question is; was the case won not knowing what had happened? I need some answers to this. 

Furthermore, the Minister said right now the case of disposing UCB does not lie with Government, it lies with Bank of Uganda. It does not lie with the Privatisation Unit. I would like to find out whether such an asset, such a matter of grave national concern is satisfactorily answered by the Minister saying that we shall wait for what Bank of Uganda is going to decide to do when -(Interruption)

MR.KARUHANGA: I want to inform the hon. Pinto that in fact, the consultant who was hired to look at the privatisation of UCB as it is now did not come from Bank of Uganda. The Ministry of Finance sanctioned him.  So then, how can Bank of Uganda now be the one to be apportioned the blame when it was the Ministry of Finance, which did so?

MRS.ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to give further information that Bank of Uganda at the moment is insisting that Uganda Commercial Bank should be sold now.

MR.MIGEREKO: The supplementary information I would like to give is that the other day when we were considering a loan request of US$48.5 million for the privatisation exercise, one of the items that was supposed to be financed under this loan was the re-privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank. I thank you.  

MR.PINTO: In the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, US$480,000 had been spent to engage a consultant to show us the way to privatise. Now we are borrowing some more and this item reappears. The Minister is telling us that the matter is in the hands of Bank of Uganda. Are we going to sit here and wait for the action of Bank of Uganda, which may be to sell or not to sell without us having an in-put in a matter of national concern?  

Under the circumstances, I would like to put the Minister of Finance on notice that this House is going to move a resolution that until that report of the privatisation is fully debated and we are clear of the circumstances, they should be restrained from selling so that we know which way to go. And whatever action we take is the interest of this country.  

THE SPEAKER: Now, I take it that what you are proposing, hon. Pinto, is that at an appropriate time you will bring a motion to cause this matter to be debated.

MR.PINTO: With your permission, I even can move this motion now -(Interjections)- I am ready.

THE SPEAKER: Let us do this. We have -(Interruption)

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the UCB issue came outside the topic we were discussing; it was actually addressed to the chairman of the Committee who promised that the Sessional Committee had already received a request from Mr. Pinto to look at this. Would it not be in order to refer this matter to the Sessional Committee so that it makes a proper investigation and decided what to do instead of just jumping here with a motion? Whether they want to come to the House or whether they want to sort it out there, I think we should refer the matter to the Sessional Committee. I was proposing, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, but subject to his notice that at an appropriate time he may wish to bring a motion to debate the issue. I think the two can be worked out together. 

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am subject to your guidance and to the advice of my colleagues. The best way to move forward is for the House to be convinced. So, this matter could go back to the Committee if you agree that if it is referred, it will be fully digested. Then when we come here, we would have a fully thought out and digested response. But now we caution the Minister that he should not move in haste. That Uganda Commercial Bank is a national asset to which we attach a lot of importance and we do not expect any process of sale to proceed until the matter is fully debated. If this is acceptable to you, I submit, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think that concludes this aspect of the matter, but it does not conclude the debate on the Minister of Finance’s motion. I am advised that we are not in a position to move to the next stage where we are supposed to take specific decisions on the motion. In other words, we do not have the necessary quorum. I will, therefore, suspend proceedings for 15 minutes and see whether we can realise a quorum.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 3.23p.m and resumed at3.44p.m)

THE SPEAER: Hon. Members, we are now in quorum and we can therefore, proceed with our Business.  

MR.ERUSU: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, but I want us to go a little bit backwards because I will seek clarification from both the Minister of Finance and Chairman of the Committee with regards to the strategic fuel storage in Jinja. Earlier on, the chairman of the Committee told us in this House that negotiations for the sale were going on. But I read in The New Vision newspaper today on page five that the Fuel Reserve tanks have already been sold. Now I am in confusion and I seek clarification about what is what. Are the fuel tanks already sold or negotiations for the sale are still going on? And if they are sold, how much has it been sold, where is the money and who authorised the sale?  

THE SPEAKER: Have you seen the article he is referring to?

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I read the article about the sale of fuel tanks but I was not very sure that it was true because I am not aware of anytime we advertised for sale of fuel tanks in Jinja. I did not even know when a decision was made by Government to sell the fuel tanks in Jinja. So, we are still investing to find out where the writer of this article got the information from and to whom these tanks were sold and how they were sold. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will put the question to the motion that Parliament dissolves itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of Supplementary Schedules Two and Three for the fiscal years 1998/99 1999/2000.

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NUMBER TWO OF 1999/2000

VOTE 001 – OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.3,374,505,000 be provided for Vote 001 of the Office of the President.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 002 – STATE HOUSE:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that the sum of Shs.1,155,000,000 be provided for Vote 002 of State House.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 004 – OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.2,600,564,000 be provided for Vote 004 of the Office of the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 005 – PUBLIC SERVICE:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.51,311,000 be provided for Vote 005 of the Ministry of Public Service.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 006 – FOREIGN AFFAIRS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.8,449,618,000 be provided for Vote 006 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 007 – JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.2,400,000,000 be provided for Vote 007 of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 008 – FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.24,469,532,000 be provided for Vote 008 of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I circulated an amendment on this Vote on the Supplementary and we discussed it. I commented on it yesterday and I wanted to move this motion at an earlier stage, which passed before I could get your attention. But I think this is now the appropriate stage to raise the matter. 

I had wanted to move an amendment that the Parliament withholds its approval to part of the Shs.24 billion, which was stated as payment to Mehta. But I would probably withhold this amendment if I could only get certain guarantee from the Minister. First, I have perused through the preliminary report, which the Minister purported to have brought to the House and I have noticed that there are negotiations still going on. One of the meetings is supposed to take place tomorrow and I presume that perhaps negotiations will be concluded soon. We have also been informed here that there is Shs.17 billion that was paid to Mehta. It was not the whole story that Mehta is actually asking for Shs.41 billion, therefore, it means there is still some substantial amount of money left to be paid to Mehta. 

For that reason, I would like to get a promise from the Minister before I move my motion. If I can be promised that this report will be made to the House as soon as possible as required by the previous resolution of the House. 

Two, that while the negotiations are still going on, no further payment should be made until a final decision is arrived at and a report made to the House so that the matter is clear. I understood from the Grapevine that some of the payments are being made without the knowledge of the Minister. But I think while we cannot take that as proof, I suggest that the Ministry takes a very serious view on this kind of thing and that they take all the people responsible seriously. 

I would like now to ask the Minister to promise the House that they will give this report very quickly to the House as soon as possible. I do not know whether the House would like to have a time factor tied to this. But secondly, that no further payment would be made before the negotiations are finalised and a report made to this House. I would like to have further reaction from the Minister and I reserve the right to move the motion if I am not satisfied.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, the matter being raised by hon. Ongom is not a case of this Parliament trying to make the work of Government difficult. It is a clear case where Parliament made a resolution that before payment to Mehta there would be negotiations with Government, and this House would be informed. Instead Mehta was paid, Government was not informed, and Parliament was not informed. Hon. Ongom has now kind of put a condition and wants a ministerial commitment that no more payment to Mehta until we get a report here. If there is any payment pending to be paid, it must be stopped. Negotiations with Mehta must continue until we get a report as the Minister promised. I think that is a humble request; we do not even need to go to a resolution. All we want is a ministerial statement here and you stand for it; because if you do not do it, if you change it as you changed the resolution, it will really be asking too much of the House. So, all we need is to get a ministerial commitment to the House now.

DR.KAKUNGULU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I stood here on the Floor and categorically asked the Minister how much the Government of Uganda owed Mehta. The Minister said Shs.15 billion and that was paid. I am surprised today to see that he is bringing a Bill of Shs.41 billion.  What is the true picture?  

MR.MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Hon. Karuhanga has suggested that the Minister makes a statement here, but I would like to get some clarification. If the Minister failed to go by the resolution of Parliament the other time and went ahead and paid, how much will he be bound by a mere statement and be able to go by our wishes if he failed to go by the resolution?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think hon. Ongom was mindful of a provision in our rules of procedure and watered down his initial stance when he was contributing. Rule 113(10)(a) of our rules of procedure states that “When the House is in Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates, upon the completion of consideration of a Vote, the Chairperson shall put the question that the amount proposed be provided under the Vote”. That is what we have been doing.  

Secondly, “After a Vote has been disposed of, it is not in order to refer to that Vote in proceedings on a motion relating to another Vote except for the purposes of example or illustration”. This again is not what you had in mind. I think what you had in mind is this, that “Ihe Committee shall not attach a condition or an expression of opinion to any resolution approving a Vote”. I think that is why you are suggesting that you will be happy if the Minister made a statement instead of you pushing for a resolution which, of course, becomes different in terms of what the Minister can do or cannot do.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, may be before the Minister makes his statement, I think it would be important for the House to know from the Minister on a matter of critical importance to this country. Government has raised a number of guarantees to Mehta in millions of dollars, I think close to US$200 million. These guarantees also have to be paid. Here is the same Government again paying money to Mehta. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is, how much have we raised as guarantees to Mehta which the Government of Uganda has to pay? Because this is money that the taxpayer of Uganda has to pay.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I do not know, but the Minister will respond. I think there seems to be an undertaking that when the negotiations with Mehta are completed, there will be a report, which will be filed in this House for discussion. I do not know, will that satisfy you?  Otherwise, the Minister is there to respond.

MR.OPIO GABRIEL: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After consulting with the technocrats, because I did not want to make a statement here when some more money has been paid, so, I would like to take an undertaking that we fulfil what the resolution here said, that we come and report on the investigations. Also, no more money is going to be paid until we present here our report on this matter. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I am satisfied. I know that many people are not satisfied but personally, I am satisfied –(Laughter)- and I am holding the Minister responsible for his statement.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.24,469,532,000 be provided for Vote 008 of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 010 – AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.312,071,000 be provided for Vote 010 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 013 – EDUCATION AND SPORTS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.654,456,000 be provided for Vote 013 of the Ministry of Education and Sports.

                     (Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 014 - MINISTRY OF HEALTH:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.1,486,177,000 be provided for Vote 014 of the Ministry of Health.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 016 – WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of  Shs.404,525,000 be provided for Vote 016 of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 019 - BUTABIKA HOSPITAL:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of 303,000,000 be provided for Vote 019 of Butabika Hospital.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 022 - INTERNAL AFFAIRS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.459,700,000 be provided for Vote 022 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

                    (Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.80,000,000 be provided for Vote 023 of Mulago Hospital.
(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 024 - MAKERERE UNIVERSITY:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.1,341,900,000 be provided for Vote 024 of Makerere University.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 027 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs.129,442,000 be provided for Vote 027 of  the Ministry of Public Service.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 028 – TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.381,966,000 be provided for Vote 028 of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 029 - ENERGY AND MINERALS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.311,123,000 be provided for Vote 029 of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, my Colleague asked a question about the petroleum matters here under Vote 029. On the forth line of the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, you will see the Petroleum Department. In the details indicated to us in the Committee, an extra Shs.93,623,000 was to be spent or had been spent in that Financial Year, to cater for the operations of the Jinja storage tanks. We therefore, asked the question, how much more are we going to spend in the coming years? 

The answer we got was that there would be no expenditure under that Vote because that operation was going to cease, therefore, the petroleum was going to be sold off and privatised. How could then the Minister who replied to my Colleagues, say that he does not know the source of this information, when the source of information was given by Ministry of Finance to our Committee and it is on record? Could I now get clarification that there is such a Vote as Petroleum Department and that an extra amount of US$93 million is being appropriated now in the Supplementary and that there will be no more expenditure in the Budget for storage of petroleum? Could we have this to avoid this ambiguity?

MR.OPIO: Mr. Chairman, to the best of our knowledge, we are not geared to spending reasonable amount of money on the exploration of petroleum in the Western Region. As far as the tanks are concerned, that is a requisition we get from the Ministry of Energy. We study it and request that they apply that money for that. But I promise that we are going to sit together with the Minister of Energy and we shall reply to hon. Pinto’s question next week. I thank you.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I am informed that - I do not know whether my information is correct, but I feel I should bring it out. That the people exploring petroleum cannot access the place and bring in the big tanks they are supposed to bring in for drilling because there is no road and no money is voted to construct that road. Can the Minister clarify whether this is going to be possible?

MR.OPIO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to state here categorically that there cannot be any such answer when we are expecting the league to arrive at Mombasa by December and we are prepared to make expenditure to make sure that the league reaches the place of destination. I thank you.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I happen to belong to the Committee on Natural Resources. We got assurance from the Permanent Secretary that in the process of bringing the league, some emergency road works will be made such that this league which is coming in a convoy of 16 trucks will reach the exploration site and work will go on. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.311,123,000 be provided for Vote 029 of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 030 – GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: You are many in the House I am not hearing the chorus properly. I now put the question that the sum of Shs.88,638,000 be provided for Vote 030 of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 031 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.393,952,000 be provided for Vote 031 of the Inspectorate of Government.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 032 – HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.105,551,000 be provided for Vote 032 of the Health Service Commission.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 038 – UGANDA POLICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs.3,568,313,000 be provided for Vote 038 of Uganda Police.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 039 - UGANDA PRISONS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a sum of Shs.1,430,335,000 be provided for Vote 039 of Uganda Prisons.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 040 - EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.135,601,000 be provided for Vote 040 of the Education Service Commission.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 042 - MBARARA UNIVERSITY:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.51,744,000 be provided for Vote 042 of Mbarara University.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 045 - DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.80,000,000 be provided for Vote 045 of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 048 – JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs.28,595,000 be provided for Vote 048 of the Judicial Service Commission.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 051 – GULU DISTRICT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.123,000 be provided for Vote 051 of Gulu district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 053 – MBALE DISTRICT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.12,500,000 be provided for Vote 053 of Mbale district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 055 – JINJA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.200,760,000 be provided for Vote 055 of Jinja district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 058 – MASAKA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.25,470,000 be provided for Vote 058 of Masaka district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 061 – KABALE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.567,000 be provided for Vote 061 of Kabale district. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 066 – IGANGA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.45,088,000 be provided for Vote 066 of Iganga district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 067 – KAMPALA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.224,356,000 be provided for Vote 067 of Kampala district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 073 – MUBENDE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.226,000 be provided for Vote 073 of Mubende district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 075 – RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.3,648,000 be provided for Vote 075 of Rukungiri district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 076 – SOROTI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.1,062,000 be provided for Vote 076 of Soroti district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 077 – KALANGALA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.1,129,000 be provided for Vote 077 of Kalangala district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 078 – KIBAALE DISTRICT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.388,000 be provided for Vote 078 of Kibaale district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 080 – KUMI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.185,004,000 be provided for Vote 080 of Kumi district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 081 – MASINDI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.270,000 be provided for vote 081 of Masindi district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 083 – MOROTO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.3,153,000 be provided for Vote 083  Moroto district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 084 – NTUNGAMO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.98,000 be provided for Vote 084 of Ntungamo district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 085 – KAPCHORWA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.770,000 be provided for Vote 085 of the Kapchorwa district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 088 – PALLISA DISTRICT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.2,192,000 be provided for vote 088 of Pallisa district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 090 – BUGIRI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum Shs.153,000 be provided for Vote 089 of Bugiri district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 091 – BUSIA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.247,727,000 be provided for Vote 091 of Busia district.
(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 092 - KATAKWI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.804,000 be provided for Vote 092 of Katakwi district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 093 - NAKASONGOLA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.4,678,000 be provided for Vote 093 of Nakasongola district.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 094 - SEMBABULE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.11,103,000 be provided for Vote 094 of Sembabule district.

(Question put and agreed to)

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE

HEAD 105 - PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.228,000,000  be provided for Head 105 of the Ministry of Public Service.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 106 - FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.20,000,000 be provided for Head 106 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 108 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.194,040,000 be provided for Head 108 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 110 - MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs. 1, 571,704,000 be provided for Head 110 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 112 - MINISTRY OF LANDS, WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.290,428,000 be provided for Head 112 of the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 113 - MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.2,203,156,000 be provided for Head 113 of the Ministry of Education and Sports.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 114 - MINISTRY OF HEALTH

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.355,500,000 be provided for Head 114 of the Ministry of Health.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 121 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.1,251,062,000 be provided for Head 121 of the Ministry of Defence.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 123 - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.3,817,459,000 be provided for Head 123 of Mulago Hospital Complex.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 125 - MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs. 568,750,000 be provided for Head 125 of the Ministry of Local Government. 

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 128 – TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.187,635,000 be provided for Head 128 of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 130 – GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.63,000,000 be provided for Head 130 of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and social Development.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 131 – INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.25,000,000 be provided for Head 131 of the Inspectorate of Government.

(Question put and agreed to)

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NUMBER THREE OF 1999/2000

VOTE 002 – STATE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.74,000,000 be provided for Vote 002 of State House.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 008 – FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC PLANNING

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.79,024,000 be provided for Vote -(Interruption)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Minister, the figure we have seems to differ from what you have read. Was there a corrigendum? This one reads Shs.79,021,000.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are correct! The figure from the document, I think, which you have is a correct one, and therefore, I will read it again right from the beginning.  I now put the question that the sum of Shs.79,021,000 be provided for Vote 008 of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 022 – INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.55,800,000 be provided for Vote 022 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 023 – MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.438,644,000 be provided for Vote 023 of Mulago Hospital Complex.  

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 115 – PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of Shs.6,639,000 be provided for Head 115 of Parliament.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Opio): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedules Two and Three of 1998/1999 and of 1999/2000 and passed them without amendments. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that means we have concluded that bit of our business, I would like to thank you for that. We would have gone a little further to take advantage of the numbers in the House and proceed to deal with another Bill, but unfortunately we have a function which is awaiting many, if not all of us. That function is within about five minutes. It will be at the Parliamentary Members Lounge; it is really the launching of Amani. Amani is a swahili word “peace”. But it is a lot more than simply translating it from the Swahili into English. It is to do with what we Parliamentarians can do to bring about peace into the Great Lakes Region. We know that the Government or particularly, the Executive has had a go at it and it is still doing so, but I think as we have always expressed here, we should not leave these things to the Executive alone. Parliamentarians should be seen to be taking a very active part in the process. So we shall have an opportunity to launch Amani, this afternoon in the Members' Lounge.

I will therefore adjourn the House to 2:00 O'clock tomorrow instead of 10:00 O'clock in the morning. Thank you.

(The House rose at 4.55p.m and adjourned until Wednesday, 4th October 2000 at 2:00p.m.)

