Wednesday, 6 October 2010

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. There was a Member who wanted to make a statement, but she is not here. So, let us proceed with another item on the agenda.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Minister. Can we hear the Member? She had a statement but she is late. Let us first get her statement and then get yours later.

2.49
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I stand here to present something of national importance. I am concerned as a Member of Parliament for Ayivu constituency from Arua District, and a citizen of Uganda. The issue at hand is that there has been continual killing and brutality of the traders of Uganda in Sudan. 

Our traders who work in Sudan are being attacked. Just last Sunday, two of our traders were killed. The first information that reached was that eight of them were killed and the traders in Arua wanted to organise a demonstration. They were asking the Government to close the border between Sudan and Uganda. This is because of the continuous torture, brutality and mistreatment of our traders who work in Sudan. 

It is not only this time, but it has been continuous. Almost every three months, there are stories of traders having been looted; their items impounded; the women being raped; the items of the traders being taken for free. When the traders ask for their payment, at times they are shown the gun.

As a citizen of Uganda and a Member of Parliament for Ayivu, which is within Arua District and where there are very many of my people working as traders in Sudan, I feel it is unfair. The Sudan Government should come up to treat our traders as human beings because they are taking them produce, shortening problems for them instead of coming to Uganda to buy food items and other materials for building and so forth. Our traders are doing a very good job to take items to Sudan. The Ugandan Government has participated so much in establishing a good environment for the people of Sudan and I believe that the Sudanese should appreciate what Uganda has done for them.

Mr Speaker, you will remember in this House that one time we passed money for going to build a market in Sudan and this was done because Uganda’s Government would like to contribute towards our traders in Sudan. If Uganda has done that, why can’t the Southern Sudan Government work in harmony and treat our people as human beings?

I feel the Uganda Government has done a lot of good work in Sudan and we should live in harmony. The boundaries established by the colonial government should not separate the people of Sudan and Uganda. Several times in 1997, we the people of West Nile and those of the Northern region went to Sudan and we have been keeping them and they have also been living in harmony in Uganda. So, what is the problem? (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. I had a friend who had similar problems in Sudan. He was invited by a General and they drove out of Sudan and when he reached about 20 kilometres, they slaughtered a bull to welcome him. They did a ground breaking ceremony for building a school and slaughtered the bull to create an impression that this man had been accepted by the community as the contractor. They then collected goods worth over Shs 80 million on credit to build that alleged school and to date that person has not been paid.

The information I want to give is that from the little research we did when we were following the case of this client, the harassment in Sudan is interestingly only on Ugandans and not Kenyans. So, we tried to find out why and we found out that in Sudan if there is any single incident on a Kenyan citizen, the embassy closes and the Sudan Government goes on their knees to Nairobi to beg them to re-open, but when an incident happens to a Ugandan, business continues as normal.

So, the harassment in Sudan is specifically on Ugandans. So, I would really like to appeal to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to maybe pay a courtesy call to the Kenyan Embassy in Sudan and find out how they have managed the situation because the harassment in Sudan is strictly on Ugandans and not Kenyans, which means there is something we have not done, which probably other countries like Kenya have already done. That is the little information I wanted to give.

MS ANGUFIRU: Thank you very much for that relevant information.

Mr Speaker, we the people of Uganda are not happy with what is happening in Sudan. We are tired of our people being mistreated, mishandled and brutalised in Sudan. The items they take to sell are at times just taken for free and when they want to receive their money, they are shown a gun. I would like the people of Uganda to seriously discuss this issue with the people of Sudan so that when our people go to trade, they live happily. Thank you very much.

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Rt hon. Speaker, hon. Angufiru is raising a very serious matter concerning the killing and torture of Ugandan businessmen and businesswomen transacting business in Sudan. This goes counter to the spirit of good neighbourliness let alone Pan-Africanism.  I will be taking up this matter with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and I will keep the House updated on the developments. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.58
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Mr Speaker and my colleagues, Members of Parliament, you will recall that the country has been experiencing fuel supply constraints over the last three weeks. On our part as a ministry, we have endeavoured to explain to the public about the fuel supply situation. In that regard, I wish to brief the House this afternoon on the progress made by the Government to resolve the problem.  

As a way of introduction, I wish to inform this House that Uganda today consumes a total of about 94,248.9 cubic metres of petroleum per month of which 25,109.9 is petrol, 54,913.4 is diesel, 5,082.2 is kerosene and 9,143.4 is jet fuel. This consumption has increased by 11 percent, that is, 1.131 billion litres, which is approximately about 1,000 cubic metres in 2008 and another 1,257 cubic metres in 2009. In that regard, therefore, any disruption in the supply chain is grossly felt in the country mainly due to limited fuel reserve capacity at the moment. I shall revert to the point of strategic reserves later. 

However, the current fuel supply constraint is caused largely by external factors. In the first instance, in the month of August, a huge consignment of cargo imported by one of the oil marketing companies into the region was found to be off the required specifications and consequently the product was not allowed entry into Kenya and Uganda. Since this region imports sizeable cargo of petroleum products twice a month, the off-specification cargo created disruption. 

On the other hand, there are issues related to transportation of petroleum products between Mombasa and Uganda, which were of late constraining products flow into Uganda. These issues are: 

•	Congestion at the Port of Mombasa, which is being largely caused by several small ships landing with products at the port in order to fill the vacuum that is being felt in the hinterland; 

•	Congestion of products within the pipeline as products are being held by middlemen and speculators who wait for prices of fuel to go up;

•	Inability of the Kenya pipeline to supply adequate products at Eldoret and Kisumu even if there is congestion, because it has limited pumping capacity to satisfy the Western Kenya market as well as Uganda and the rest of the region.    

The other challenges being experienced in the supply of petroleum products into Uganda include: Lack of a robust railway network; the time it takes the ships to bring products to the Port of Mombasa from the Middle East has been increased from 10 to 20 days due to Somali Pirates in the Horn of Africa; and the long time it takes to bring products through the Southern route in Tanzania.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you will appreciate that some of the problems being faced will be addressed in the short term while others are of a medium and long term nature. 

To address the short term administrative issues like congestion at the Port of Mombasa, congestion within the pipeline system and general clearance of Uganda cargo by my ministry, my ministry dispatched a high level technical team last week to discuss, recommend and agree with the Kenyan counterparts on appropriate measures. In that regard, the following measures have been agreed on:

1.	Uganda will be allocated dedicated space or (ullage) in the Kenya pipeline system, which will serve the oil companies operating in Uganda. This will address the issues of speculation. 

2.	An open tender system is being introduced in the import of petroleum products into the country. The open tender system has worked very well in Kenya since it was introduced and has helped to organise the oil marketing companies as a single unit.  The measure will ease the congestion at Mombasa and ensure that the products coming into Uganda are not held offshore for a long time, which has been the case thereby, not only attracting demurrage, but also disrupting the supply of products. 

In addition, to the above measures, Mr Speaker, I wish to advise the House that Government is carrying out the following:

a)	Addressing the development of alternative supply route through Tanzania.

An appropriate incentives structure involving taxes rebates is being worked out in order to harmonise the landing price for products through either Kenya, which is through Kisumu or Tanzania. We are aware that our neighbours in Rwanda have of late introduced these incentives and the companies have responded positively. 

In addition, using the provisions of the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003, we intend to obligate licensed companies in Uganda to import some of their products through the Southern route, that is, through Tanzania because it is actually expensive to bring fuel through the Southern route. So, we are negotiating with the Ministry of Finance and the oil companies to compensate them by reducing on the tax and enable the oil products arrive here at the same price as when brought through Mombasa; that is what we are trying to negotiate.

b)	The strategic storage facilities 

This area is being carefully studied and developed in order to link the short-term measures to the importation of petroleum products with a long-term plan for petroleum supply through oil production in Uganda and development of a refinery. 

In that regard, the Jinja Storage Depot which is due to go through rehabilitation, refurbishment and restocking will be turned into an operational depot to link with the Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline Programme.   

An inland strategic storage facility is to be developed at Nakasongola. The whole system will be linked to the production area in the Albertine Graben through a network of pipelines.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to thank you for the support you are giving my sector to manage the challenging petroleum industry in the country. The problems of supply are complex because they are not in our control. However, efforts have been made to ensure that they are controlled. The situation is normalising very fast and products are coming into the country. Discussions with the companies using the southern route confirmed that they have intensified the usage of the route through Tanzania. That is my statement on the subject.

3.07
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I need some protection from the honourable ministers here. I thank the Minister for the statement as he promised yesterday. I find this statement lacking when I consider the report we got yesterday because the issues that the Minister is trying to raise are not new. There are things, which I think should have been worked on much longer than now. The Minister laments that the railway line has been unattended to by this Government and yet it is central to the transport sector. The Government has not rehabilitated the railway line but let it to go to waste. The Minister highlights the success stories in our neighbourhood where measures were put up and they are not facing this crisis.

This is not the first time a crisis is happening in our country; we always get this annually. We have all lined up for fuel at one point or the other and it is very disturbing. How long does a country like Uganda take to learn or to act positively for the good of the citizens? You make statements and you do not act. We are tired of listening to statements here and nothing is done thereafter.

He is talking about trying to put the operators in one unit. There are too many petrol stations in this country and the majority do not have fuel. What was the point in licensing so many petrol stations when they cannot serve the purpose they are there for? It is a big shame that this ministry can license petrol stations to open near schools without considering the security of Ugandans.

I have listened to the Minister of State for Energy making a statement in the media and he claimed that our reservoir is undergoing rehabilitation. We are concerned that fuel was siphoned from our reservoir in Jinja and nobody has been held accountable. I want to know when that storage facility ran out of fuel again after we had instructed the ministry to restock it. I want the minister to be very serious about the lives of Ugandans. The fuel shortage impacts all of us, for example it affects me because I need to transport children from Kit gum to Kampala. It is sad that we are failing to see transport as the pillar of production in any economy.

3.16
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County, Kitgum): I am seeking three clarifications from the hon. Minister. I would like to know who meets the cost of transporting fuel upcountry. I came from Kitgum two days ago and petrol was going for Shs 4,800 per litre while in Kampala it was between Shs 3,200 and 3,400; why is there a big difference? I was discussing this crisis with some friends and they told me that consistently during the run up to the general elections, there must be a fuel crisis and the people who follow this are saying that the flow of fuel is deliberately restricted to push the price up to get more revenue for government. I would also like the Minister to clarify on this.

Lastly, since the road licence was abolished, Government now gets money from the petrol dealers. I would like the Minister to inform the House - out of the price of a litre of Shs 3,200 how much of that money goes to Government? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Lukwago.

3.18
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for this statement but I would say that I am a little bit disappointed because this crisis has been with us for some time and the Minister has really dragged his feet on this issue. This statement was long over due and the Minister ought to have given the country this position much earlier. But now that he has made this statement, I am all the same duty bound to thank him for the clarification he has given. Having said that, I would to raise two or three issues:

The first is that the Minister is painting a gloomy picture. Actually when you read this statement, I do not get any hope that the crisis is about to be solved because most of the measures that the Minister is proposing here, apart from lamenting, are long term.

If you tell me, like hon. Anywar has said, and I wish to re-assert this; about the robust railway that we have to wait for; for how long shall we wait? Here on the question of speculators on page 2 (4)(b), that congestion of products within the pipeline as products are being held by middlemen and speculators who wait for prices to go up, the Minister should have been honest enough to give us the particulars of these speculators. The oil dealers are known –(Interjections)- no, we need to get this information as a nation. Who are these people who are responsible for this crisis and cashing in at this critical moment when everybody is suffering? Who are these people? 

If they are companies – hon. Minister, if it is Shell, for example, that has indicated that it is winding up business in East Africa, you tell us because it is a big irony that if you are to get fuel in this country, I think it is small time dealers where you would find it. With big time companies like Shell and Total, you will hardly find fuel. Why? If these are the speculators, you tell us and we blacklist them. If these are the speculators, let the Minister tell us.

Why is it that every time the prices shoot up, there is no hope of suppressing them? In 2007, following the violence in Kenya, the pump prices would go up to Shs 10,000 but since then - actually by that time, a litre of petrol cost less than Shs 2,000 and it never went back even after the situation normalised in Kenya. So in this particular case, the minimum is Shs 3,300 and it will never go back to Shs 2,000. Why? Even after all these measures!

Finally, at a time when we were facing this crisis, the Minister is again enforcing a draconian policy of phasing out single pump stations to compound the problem. Why are they being phased out at this critical moment when big time suppliers like Shell and Total are hiking prices? Why are you compounding the situation? 

Hon. Minister, please, we need concrete measures and we know you have failed to rehabilitate the reservoirs and to address the question of the pipeline. We want immediate solutions to this problem. We know the railway line is not going to be constructed tomorrow or even the other day – that is not going to happen. So, we want immediate solutions to this crisis. I thank you.

3.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you. I would like to express my disappointment with the Minister’s statement. I do not know whether the Minister cared to read the statement he brought to this House about three years ago because it is more or less the same statement, word by word. 

I think it is very disappointing that the minister chooses to reproduce that statement and then inadvertently admits to this House that his ministry has not moved in any direction to try and resolve the issues of fuel when they hit the country.

At that time, the Minister promised this country that he was working on fuel reserves – that is what they told us; that they were rehabilitating the fuel reserves and that some time in the not too distant future, we would have these functional. 

Unfortunately today, the Minister has come here to promise a study and that it is due to go through rehabilitation. So which is which? In 2007, you said you were working on them. Now in 2010, you are saying it will go through rehabilitation. 

What exactly is the Ministry of Energy doing for this country in regard to fuel reserves? The two statements coming from the same Minister are totally different - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I thank you so much for giving way. Last week, the Committee on Government Assurance made a trip to all the four fuel reserves in Uganda. We found nothing in Kasese, Gulu, Nakasongola and found a shell structure in Jinja. I am sorry I am pre-empting the committee report but in Nakasongola we were embarrassed. We were just shown some hill –(Laughter)- that looks like a forest. So, there is nothing. 

In Gulu, we just found a warehouse for World Food Programme and so there is totally nothing and no one should deceive this House that there are reserves in the four regions of Uganda. It is only the one in Jinja which is even being privatised to one of these companies importing fuel. That is the information I wanted to give. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: I thank you honourable colleague. I think I want the Minister to take this matter very seriously. It does not help this nation to say one thing this year and come back with another thing next year.

The second concern I have is about the southern route and this issue of the alternative route is something that has again come up for a long time and here now, the Minister is again promising – I think they are just “dialoguing”. Clearly for two years you can only report on “dialoguing”! 

As a Government, can you not do something beyond just “dialoguing” and start getting supplies through the southern route? Last time, when the Minister came here, his problem was the pipeline and Mombasa. So we thought that the ideas that the House gave you at that time in regard to developing an alternative route through Tanzania were useful to you. Unfortunately, three years down the road, the Minister has returned to repeat the same things. So what is the use of this statement?

I also find the vagueness disturbing, that the Minister cannot tell us which fuel company imported in the month of August some products that did not meet the required specifications! Is it like the petroleum agreement, which has secretive clauses? What is the secret behind this company that Ugandans cannot even get to know the company that has caused them this much pain? 

I do not know why the Minister has not commented about the load shedding –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, let me tell hon. Byandala that some of the electricity that we get in this country is generated using fuel and of recent I have learnt that Umeme is reinstating load shedding because the fuel supplies are not enough. So I thought that the Minister would help us know more. He said that the situation is normalising; is load-shedding what the ministry is calling normalising? We were kind of used to this load shedding after all; so is that what you call normal for this country?

Lastly, my colleagues have already said this; the prices do not go down. So what is your plan to rescue us from the exploitative prices? We have been buying fuel at Shs 3,200 and even if supplies come next week, the prices have never gone down even when the supplies improve. What plan does this Government have to stop the people at the pumps from continuing with these prices as if the supplies were inadequate? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Mutundwe Parents, Day and Boarding School. They are represented by hon. Issa Kinkungwe. You are welcome to your Parliament. 

3.30
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his statement over the price increase. It is already evident that the price increase has lasted for three weeks or more and the measures that the minister is putting to address this problem will never bring down these prices. 

I think hon. Onek is a bit unfortunate; when he was Minister for Agriculture, things were very bad for him. Now he has come to this ministry and things are getting worse -(Laughter)- let me pray that it is not a sign that he is on his way to the exit. So can the Minister tell us when –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the gentleman on the Floor, hon. Charles Angiro Gutomoi, also happens to be hon. Onek’s brother-in-law –(Laughter)- is he in order to stand on this Floor and say that things were bad for hon. Onek, his brother-in-law during that time, and that now it is getting worse without substantiating? If things were bad domestically, their relationship has nothing to do with Parliament. (Laughter) Is it, therefore, in order for this Member to discuss personal matters with his brother-in-law in Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: It is out of order; proceed.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise guidance. However, I thought the first thing the Minister was going to do was to apologise, but he has not done it. I wonder if he will do it finally when he comes to respond to our observations. How come in the papers they indicated that the prices would go down within one week, and after three weeks, now, nothing has happened? Is the Minister aware of these reports in the press and what measures has he put in place against them if indeed they are not in line with his ministry’s effort?

I think this price escalation has been business as usual – and this is not the first time. I remember, when we were approaching 2006 elections, prices went up and they never came back to normal. Now it is being repeated. So we need to be assured on why it is happening and how it will be arrested. 

I also request the Minister to explain to this House; while the prices are going up, does the same apply to the revenue attached to fuel? Has Government also increased the revenue collected from fuel? If that is not the case, then to whom is that big difference going? Is it going to his ministry or to other purposes? 

Let the Minister assure us, when are we going to get out of this problem? Even the measures he has given here do not indicate how long it will take the Government to address it. Even a problem like the congestion at the Mombasa Port and that of the pipeline and so forth are not happening for the first time. So the Minister should have followed up these issues as soon as he learnt about them to help the suffering citizens of this country. 

Lastly, when you take the case of Kenya, where I was recently, I think something is wrong somewhere in Uganda because the companies, which are bringing these products, say things are normal. But here, there is an abnormality. Why? Because when he is talking about the technical team having gone there - where is the report of the technical team? What does it say? If the technical team had gone there for the first time I think that would have been a serious matter. But these people are aware of what is being brought at Mombasa and if we are talking about alternative routes in Tanzania, how long have we talked about this? This has been so with this regime. Thank you very much.

3.37
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister for this brief. 

First and foremost, I would like to associate myself with the statement presented by hon. Alice Alaso regarding issue No. 3 on page 1 of the ministerial statement. 

This House and this country should not be taken for granted. It is only proper that the Minister tells us which company this was, which imported products that were other than the specified ones and from which country, whether from Uganda or Kenya. Also, we would like to know the type of products. Maybe it was jelly or body lotion under the name of petroleum products. We demand that the Minister clarifies by being more specific.

On page 2, issue No. 4(a), the Minister talks about congestion at the port of Mombasa and in the rest of the statement. I want to dispel this statement and challenge the minister. I want to inform hon. Members in this House that oil and ammunition are not treated like sugar and rice at the ports of entry. So, it is not true that there could be any tricks that can delay an allotment of fuel to another country through a port. This is not true. The minister should find another explanation or something else to place under (a) -(Laughter)

Ugandans are also interested in knowing the difference between the issues in Uganda and other countries. The fuel we use comes through Mombasa and, therefore, it is the same fuel used by Kenya. The minister has not given us the comparative figures. Actually it is Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda. We have not been educated about the status of fuel in Kenya and Rwanda. On the other hand, Tanzania uses the same water channel that is infested by pirates. The minister has not bothered to tell us the situation in Tanzania. I think it is unfair for senior ministers to come to the House, present these short statements and go away leaving us to explain to our colleagues in other countries what our minister meant while on the Floor of the House.

The honourable minister talked about the railway line and my colleagues have talked about it. I think it is an insult to come to this House and you are minister in this Government telling us we have a problem with the railways. It would be from this side where people would ask why there is a problem. Probably, there were deliberate policies to destroy the railway in favour of other things. These other things are available in Uganda today. Right, you have many uniforms of the Army and Police. Probably this is the preference. But to come here and cry with us is actually cheating us.

My last point is on page 3, issue No. 7. In issue No. 7, the Minister is talking about a tender system to be re-activated and identify a company that is supposed to bring fuel to this country. If the minister is unable to explain mechanisms that have been undertaken to wipe out corruption at every level in Government, this issue would simply be useless because it will not bring products to Uganda. It will not bring results at all. 

The House is interested in knowing that at the beginning of this problem, major multi-national companies were squeezed to the wall in favour of small retail companies naming themselves every name in every corner. These companies complained to Government and Government did not listen to them deliberately. Today we are having trouble because the companies, which were given the money to bring fuel to Uganda, are just incapable by their own standards. They are not able to cope with international competition. The minister should explain this matter in more detail.

We are also interested in knowing the tax element on fuel. How much is taxed on every litre of fuel so that we know if it is a problem of the systems or it is a problem of collecting taxes. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have any final points to make? It is okay if you have.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were many contributions, which I took note of and I want to state that the statement I made today is not a repeat of what was done three years ago. I was not in the ministry three years ago. This statement is my statement. 

Then number two; I travelled to Mombasa. I saw the restrictions, the problems – if you could listen, that will be very helpful. I went up to Mombasa and saw the systems myself. It is true I have been sending delegates there. The latest was last week. I sent my people there who came up with these difficulties. We are working out alternatives for mitigating the challenges we are facing because of the restrictions through Kenya. This is what we are working on. 

When I quoted this one example, it is not something which happened a long time ago. It is a new experience. Rwanda just introduced - we are also thinking about that. We are negotiating with the Ministry of Finance because the taxes are levied by the Ministry of Finance not the Ministry of Energy. If the Ministry of Finance can agree to bring down tariffs on fuel coming through the southern route then we could use the alternative route and reduce the fuel shortages here. We are working on that with the Ministry of Finance. We shall find a solution. 

I want to assure you that I do not lie; I am giving you factual information. I really thank you very much for listening to me. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Matter closed. (Laughter)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Otto, you debated yesterday -(Laughter)- that is not according to our rules. You cannot debate twice on the same subject matter. Okay. It seems the debate closed. 

The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.47
Clause 1

MR ASTON KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend sub-clause (1) by inserting the number 10 between numbers 3 and 17 and by deleting the number 10 in sub-clause (2) and the reason for doing so is that the provisions in Clause 1 cannot be retrospectively applied because some of them could impose financial obligations to taxpayers and this is not practical to implement for both taxpayers and the tax administration.
 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 3(a) of the Bill to read as follows: “The commissioner shall issue practise notes for the purpose of interpreting and guiding the taxpayers in regard to the implementation of sub-section (3).” I beg to move.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee because what I know is that the practise notes are just administrative tools for the Commissioner-General and there are ways in the other laws which are relevant. So, I do not know whether they will be put in the law each time the commissioner or the Commissioner-General comes because the regulations are there. 

Two, they are not binding on a taxpayer. So, what I think Parliament can do is to pass a resolution but not in the law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING & ECON. DEV’T (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Chairman, practising notes are already provided for under the Income Tax Act. We are amending clause 3, which reads as follows: “A taxpayer who intends to change the taxpayers’ method of accounting shall apply in writing to the commissioner and the commissioner may, by notice in writing, approve the application where he or she is satisfied.” 

So, the reasoning of the committee on which we built consensus with the ministry is that we shouldn’t give the Commissioner-General discretionary powers to determine the method of accounting or to reject it. It was found fitting that a practise note, which is already provided for in the law, will guide the criteria of when and how to change the method of accounting without jeopardising tax assessments and it was found proper. We stand by our amendments. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I rise to give information in support of the committee. If you look at the Value Added Tax Act, the powers are with the Commissioner-General to give or to grant a taxpayer when he wishes to elect for a specific accounting method. So, this is in conformity with other laws that exist. In the case of the Value Added Tax Act, it is about three methods. So, if a taxpayer wants to elect the specific accounting method, he must seek permission from the Commissioner-General. This will also help the Commissioner-General to prepare when time comes for auditing – when they are sending officers there, they will know that this firm is handling this business based on this accounting method. So, I really support the position of the committee because it is applicable in the Value Added Tax Act. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, Section 160 of the Income Tax Act provides for practise notes to be issued by the Commissioner-General and this is overboard on all income tax matters. So, it is not necessary that you repeat it for a particular income tax because what we are doing is an administrative procedure. So, it will be wrong for Parliament to actually pass a law on administrative procedure which is already provided for to go overboard – 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, actually the explanation is not wrong. If it was then we could - but I think what you are saying is that there is already an umbrella provision that would cater for what we want to have under the proposed amendment. That is not necessary because it is covered by the provision which he has read. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 3, to which Members should draw their attention, seeks a taxpayer to seek authority from the Commissioner-General if he or she wishes to change his method of accounting. The committee, in its wisdom and in agreement actually with the officials - and I am surprised they are opposing this; we reasoned that I may want to change my method of accounting for justified reasons and not for purposes of tax evasion. If I apply to the Commissioner-General at his or her discretion and I am denied then I have no other mechanism to raise the matter. It was agreed that to resolve this ambiguity, a practise note is – 

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you lose if it is not deleted simply because we have refused your amendment?

MR TUMWEBAZE: The fear of giving the Commissioner-General discretion of powers remains. In our wisdom, we did not want that.

THE CHAIRMAN: But what do you lose if this provision stands because we are trying to amend Section 3 as it is in the Bill and because an explanation has been given that is already covered somewhere - you want to delete this one? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, thank you so much. If the minister admits that indeed and rightly so practise notes are already covered under the Act, then that means the Commissioner-General, under the same provision, can give guidance on how to change a method of accounting, making this clause redundant. 

THE CHAIRMAN: We should not be annoyed because of this and that. We should see sense when some explanation is given to accept it rather than saying, “Oh”. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to read Section 160 of the Income Tax Act in regard to remission of taxes. It says, “Where the Commissioner-General finds it necessary, the Commissioner-General will give a practice note to the taxpayer on what he is supposed to do in conformity to the parts calculated there, whichever is higher.” So, whatever we are trying to cure here, what the new clause is saying is that the practice which is needed by the Commissioner-General is already put in this Act.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I tried to advise the chair and the minister but I think they have ignored. In clause 3 they are talking about the Commissioner-General but in the amendment they are talking about a commissioner. These are two different people.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I am not a lawyer but commissioner in respect to this Act means Commissioner-General.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, from what has transpired, we understand that the question of practice notes is covered under Section 165. You need not repeat it somewhere because it is covered. However, this provision - not by practice notes but by the law itself - has stated what you have to do. What is the problem?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, it is not a matter of conceding for the sake of conceding. I want to re-state our position as a committee. That clause empowers the commissioner, or the Commissioner-General in the sense of the definition, to have power to say to taxpayer X, Y, Z that, “I reject your application to change the method of accounting” or “I grant it”. Our concern is those grounds must be defined. They cannot be defined in the law and so we are trying to reduce those discretionary powers. A practice note, when issued, is referred to as a guiding document. So we are saying if it is already covered, why don’t we delete this law?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the two are not the same.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: But why are we wasting time really? You agreed in the committee but this is a full committee. So, I put the question that clause 3 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 4 of the Bill is amended by inserting immediately after (e) the definition of cost oil and (f) the definition of immovable property as follows: 

“(f) (i) Immovable property shall include property accessory to immovable property, livestock and equipment used in agriculture and forestry, rights to which the provisions of general law respecting landed property apply, usufruct of immovable property and rights to variable or fixed payments as consideration for the working of, or the right to work, mineral deposits, sources and other natural resources or any other benefit to arise out of land. Ships, boats and aircraft shall not be regarded as immovable property.

(ii) The provisions of paragraphs (i) shall apply to income derived from the direct use, letting or use in any other form or immovable property.

(iii) The exploration and exploitation rights of natural resources shall be regarded as immovable property with regard to the water bed and sub-soil of which they are related to, including rights to interest in, or the benefits of, assets to be produced by such exploration or exploitation.”

Our justification is to ensure clarity as to what immovable property as used in the Act means.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where did you get that definition of immovable property from?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the Parliament of Uganda, under your wise leadership, has a department of lawyers. In consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the office of the Solicitor-General, this definition was harmonised and agreed upon. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What is immovable property? When you say an aeroplane is an immovable property, what do you mean? I think this is a new jurisprudence. (Laughter)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a legal counsel attached to it. He was instructed to consult the department, to liaise with the ministry that is sponsoring the Bill and this definition was brought. Our intention is not about the technical definition – it can be amended – but it is to define it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would think it will not be advisable to accept this definition because you should have told us that the source is probably something like Black’s Law Dictionary. You cannot say Ministry of Finance or legal counsel. Those legal counsels should have told us where they got this definition from because we are not going to re-invent the wheel or create new jurisprudence in this House. You will get a technical problem the moment you get out of this House. So in the absence of an authority that says that this definition is according to Black’s Law Dictionary for example, it will not be advisable. You are not going to change the Commonwealth legal systems just by defining it in a different way. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Apparently, the definition was not given and they were not happy about it. I see you talking about tractors being immovable property; I really do not know -(Laughter). These are terms we studied in our legal courses and movable property is different from immovable. A tractor is not immovable property. Why don’t we leave it so that the courts will interpret, instead of doing something ridiculous? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I oblige to your guidance. The spirit of the committee was to have a suitable definition, but the need to define it is there.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we leave it to the courts? When it becomes an issue, the courts will do so, instead of changing meanings that we have been moving with for centuries.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, in clause 4(f), there is a definition for petroleum revenues. This definition means tax charged on income derived by a person from petroleum products, government share of production, signature bonus, surface rentals, royalties, government participation share of production and any other duties or fees payable to Government from a contract.

Mr Chairman, we wish to amend that sub-section by deleting the words, “… government participation share of production” and just before those words add the following words: “proceeds from sale of Government share of production.” I beg to move.

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on how that will take care of sale of interests. I am asking this because the previous definition whose source we all failed to understand was basically aimed at addressing a situation where a company sells its interests to another company like what happened between Heritage Oil and Tallow Oil companies. So, Mr Minister, how is this going to take care of the interest of a company that has been sold to another company?

MR KAJARA: The sale of interests is not covered in this section. This amendment is intended to only define petroleum revenues. That is why we say that among them are the proceeds from the sale of Government share of production. The issue of transfer of interests is covered in another clause; we shall come to it in the course of these proceedings.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard the Minister’s amendment. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.


Clause 12

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I want to move that clause 9 -

THE CHAIRMAN: We are already done with clause 9 and now we are on clause 12.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that we recommit clauses 9 and 10.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have to wait. Note that we are now handling clause 12.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, under clause 12 I would like to propose an amendment on the allocation of costs and expenses by inserting the words “and/or license” immediately after the words, “neighbouring country and Uganda.”

In other words, clause 12 should read: “Any exploration, development or production expenditure associated with the unit development involving discovery areas, which extends into the neighbouring country and/or license ….” 

The justification here is that the need for allocation of costs should cater for both transactions over borders and licensed areas within Uganda. In other words, it will not touch those that are out of Uganda but if there are costs between one licensed area and the other, the allocation for those costs and expenses should apply. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KAJARA: I wish to propose an amendment to clause 14. My proposal is to the effect that we insert the words “and measurement” immediately after the word, “valuation.” In other words, we talk of valuation and measurement of petroleum. 

In (b), we should insert the words, “the value of petroleum”; so the sentence should read: “… for the purposes of determining the value of petroleum…” not for the purpose of determining the contractor’s gross income. The justification here is that gross income is not defined in the Bill. The other justification for this provision is to provide for the valuation of petroleum in the contract areas, which shall include both the Government and the contractor’s shares. That is why we talk of the value of petroleum. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, on the same clause, the committee proposes an amendment which will see the substitution of the words, “the provisions of the petroleum agreement subject to any further procedures that may be agreed in writing between the government and the contractor”, with the words “regulations prescribed by the minister, which shall be laid before Parliament”. The justification is to empower the minister to issue regulations for the evaluation of petroleum.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 19 is amended by: 

(a) deleting paragraph (a). The justification is that the provision is already covered in 890 (2). 

(b) Amending (d) as follows: substitute for the words “any person” the words “a duly appointed agent or trustee of the contractor.” The justification is to ensure that only persons duly authorised by the contractor as the contractor’s agent may be required by the commissioner to furnish returns on the contractor’s behalf.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 21 is amended by: 

(a)	In (d) substituting the provision with: “All petroleum revenues shall be payable to the Uganda Revenue Authority”. 

(b) 	In (f) by substituting the words “London Interbank offered rate for six months as quoted at 11.00 a.m. on the first business day of that month by the London Office of Citibank N.A.” We substitute all that with the words “rates published by the Bank of Uganda”. 

Our justification is to provide for computation based on the rates published by the Bank of Uganda and not another bank being out of our law.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This amendment which is being proposed now may put us in a problem because we have not had the privilege of looking at the Production Sharing Agreement (PSA). We do not know what the agreement says so we may be making amendments which are contrary to what is in the agreement. I just want to address your mind to that.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, first of all, the purpose of these amendments is to re-align the terms of the PSA within the law, and they have been studied and there is no conflict.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The PSA is subject to Ugandan laws and what we are making here is an income tax law, the law that will govern the PSA. When this law comes in force, the PSA will have to comply. The rules in the PSA will comply with this. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, is it too difficult for the ministry to avail the agreement to us so that at least we would be discussing these things from an informed position? Is it too difficult for this agreement to be availed to Parliament?

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I want to give to the House is that while considering this Bill, we raised concern that even at the committee level we should be availed with a copy of the Production Sharing Agreement but we were not given. It is very unfortunate that we are deliberating on issues that in a way -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the members to continue demanding for the PSA yet hon. Hilary Onek brought the PSA to this House? Is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: The thing is that if you were here yesterday, the Committee on Natural Resources has a mandate but we were informed yesterday by a member of that committee that they have not been able to convene to do the business but the thing is available. However, the minister who is in charge is saying as far as he knows, the provisions of the agreement will have to adhere to the provisions of the law so there is no worry. So I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 23 is amended by substituting the words “to undertake an audit” with the words “to execute his or her mandate”. This consequentially amends the head note to read, “Right of the commissioner to execute mandate”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRMAN: You have to recommit and that comes after. Let the motion be moved.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, and wish to recommit some sections with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, before we pass the Bill, I beg that we recommit clauses 9 and 10, reason being that we were going very fast and were not able to consider them at the Committee Stage. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 9 (89) (g), which provides for transfer of interests in petroleum agreement by deleting sub-clauses (f) and (g). The justification is that those provisions are redundant; they are already covered in clause 89 (g). I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, in clause 10(3), we delete the word, “non-resident.” The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that non-resident sub-contractors who are not registered branches pay a Withholding Tax of 15 percent as final tax. The current draft compels all non-resident sub-contractors whether registered or not to pay 15 percent Withholding Tax as final tax. 

In clause 10(5), I move an amendment by substituting for the words “a resident” and “any” and insert immediately after the word “sub-contractor”, the words “in Uganda.” The justification is that the purpose of the amendment is to allow non-resident sub-contractors who have registered branches in Uganda to pay Withholding Tax at a resident rate of 6 percent and later on, on submission of returns, be subjected to the 30 percent applicable to all residents. I beg to move. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like to seek a simple clarification from the Minister. Why would we discriminate between residents and non-residents in relation to percentage of taxes? If a non-resident would pay 6 percent, then I would rather not register as a resident. Why can’t we make it uniform so that people do not opt out? I am not an economist, I want an explanation. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I can come in to give information. We discussed that issue in the committee but the spirit is intended to encourage foreign companies to be based here and bring all their proceeds here in order to employ our people rather than coming in to sub-contract or contract to make their kill and run away. So, it is more of boosting.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, and passed it with amendments.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

“A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2010.”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed. (Applause)

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make clarifications regarding the Production Sharing Agreement. I want to put the record right. It is true that the Production Sharing Agreement was tabled in this Parliament, but the practice now is that the Clerk is under strict instructions not to give out these Production Sharing Agreements to Members of Parliament. I believe that as Members of Parliament we have a right to access information which is relevant to making of laws. Unless this practice is checked, we may make laws that are not in the interest of this country.

THE SPEAKER: You are likely not to have been here yesterday because I directed on how it should be handled. Please, check for what was done yesterday and you will be answered.
 
MR OKUPA: Today, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is here. There were preliminary objections that were made here regarding the main law. Now that that the minister is here, could he assure the House when the main law on petroleum is coming to this House?

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Members. The law has already been drafted and it is in place. It is before Cabinet and as soon as they go through it, we shall bring it here. I believe this can be within a month.

I would like to thank Members for passing this Income Tax (Amendment) Bill. We have transfer of shares in the oil sector and they attract tax. This has now put us in a stronger position to tax such transactions.

MR ONDONGA OTTO: I am glad you said that this can be within a month. Does your license allow you to stop them from extracting oil, since we do not have the main law in place? We may have an ugly scenario as we go on extraction.

MR ONEK: We have a law in place and that is the Petroleum Act. We are bringing a more comprehensive amendment of that law to make it cover the current process. We have moved a long way and we require better laws to help us manage where we have reached.

MR OKUPA: We had a workshop that was coordinated by ACODE and hon. Onek was there at the opening in Entebbe and he gave a statement. The minister talked about a comprehensive law that was coming.

MR ONEK: The law exists already and thank you for that supporting statement.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: The Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008 was read for the second time but we did not go to the committee, but I realised that it was a dry Bill or maybe too technical for the Members. They did not show any interest in debating the report. I think I should give you more time to go through it overnight.

OKUPA: I think you should give us tonight such that possibly tomorrow, we are able to handle.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is very technical.

MR NABETA: I want to remind Members that there is another Bill called the Electronic Signatures Bill. I think we should combine them tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: We should read the other one also such that we can combine the two. Hon. Members, please, join me in welcoming our children to Parliament. However, their particulars have not been given to me.

This is also to inform you that this year’s National Prayer Breakfast will be held on 8th October 2010 at Imperial Royale Hotel, Primrose Hall at 7.30 a.m. The guest speaker will be Prof. Piyet Naude, the Chief Guest is His Excellency, President Pierre Nkurunziza and Chief Host will be His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Please pick your card from any of the parliamentary receptions.

With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 October 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 
