Friday, 16 October 2009 

Parliament met at 11.52 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. As we had indicated, we want to finish a number of committee reports, which have been pending for some time. So I hope we shall work quickly. Thank you. 

STATEMENT ON UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON FOOD SECURITY, POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT ON MARKING THE WORLD FOOD DAY

11.54 
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today the world is celebrating the International World Food Day. On behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, I request to make a presentation in commemoration of 16 October, the International World Food Day. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, Uganda is joining the rest of the world in marking the World Food Day of 16 October 2009. Celebrations in Uganda are being held in Kotido District under the theme: “Achieving Food Security in Times of Crisis.” 

This event has come at a time when the whole world has been undergoing the economic credit crunch. Uganda has been facing a long drought with scanty rain patterns and also a sharp increase in the prices of agricultural products across the world. The crisis is stalking the small scale farms of the world where 70 percent of the world’s hungry live and work. It is evident that acquiring food in Uganda has been very difficult to so many people to the extent that it is affecting their feeding patterns. 

The Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development recognises that over 105 million hungry people have been reported in the world, which implies that one sixth of all humanity is suffering from food scarcity related complications. This has manifested in the increasing malnutrition levels, low productivity levels, including that of children in schools - so many schools have reported that many children are continuously absent because of lack of food - and increasing cases of domestic violence among others. 

It is further reported that 6.75 million of the rural population where food production is expected to be more pronounced is vulnerable and food insecure. As a result of food shortage, one third of the children in the country are stunted, and it is especially acute in rural areas including districts of Kabale, Kisoro, Kitgum, Gulu and Pader. 

In recognition of the above, the forum is urging all stakeholders to ensure that:

1. 	There is increased commitment to addressing food security issues mostly in the budget allocation to the agricultural sector. It is absurd that Uganda has not reached the 10 percent budgetary allocation which was agreed on by the Maputo Declaration to which Uganda is a signatory. 

2. 	Mobilisation of farmers on timely planting and harvesting to take advantage of the weather changes and also adopt mechanisms to reduce post harvest losses. 

3. 	Encourage communities to emphasise food security crops, mainly fast-growing cereals and vegetable crops, given the unpredictable rain patterns. This will not only provide market value but also food in case families fail to raise incomes.

4. 	Appeal to government to consider food storage as one of the mechanisms to respond to food shortages that are becoming continuously common. 

5. 	We call upon Parliament to be more vigilant to this noble cause. A lot has to be done together to ensure that every human being in this country gets adequate food rations.

Appreciation

We appreciate all those individuals, civil society organisations, UN/donor agencies and government departments that have worked tirelessly to contain the food security situation in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. I beg to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development for making this important statement. Let us have some brief comments. 

12.00 
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Chairman of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development for the statement that he has made. Now that we are here with the Minister of Agriculture, I think there are some things we need to know as a country. We need to know what government is trying to do about them because the situation in the country is very bad. It is not only affecting one district – the traditional districts which have had food shortages like Karamoja – but it is even going to areas, which have been the food baskets of the country. 

My own district, Bukwo, and Kapchorwa have been producing and supplying food both to Kenya and Uganda all this time. This time, however, we do not even have food for ourselves. So the situation is very bad. I want to get information from the Minister of Agriculture, who is here, about what government is doing, in practical terms, to ensure that come next year there is going to be food. The food shortage we are experiencing now has been because of the poor harvest this year. Those who have harvested may be having some little food but next year is going to be a very bad year. 

The NAADS programme may not help us because it is a programme for the future. We are already dealing with six farmers in every parish but this is affecting the whole country. I want to know from the minister what plans or programmes are being undertaken so that there is some food that parents or families of the farmers are given to grow, which will help people next year. Otherwise, the situation is going to be bad. Our schools are not likely to feed their children and therefore, all boarding schools may not be able to survive. 

I want the minister, following this statement, to really come out and inform the country on what is being done. Supplying food I know is a very difficult thing, but supplying food from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is not going to help us at all. I want to see what plans there are to enable farmers produce their own food, given the rains that are coming now. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to join me in welcoming Ms Grace Cherotich Ruto, the Vice-President of Makerere University Guild and also of the East African Community Students Union. She is up there. She has come to observe our proceedings. You are welcome.

12.03
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Mathias Kasamba for his personal efforts in taking the lead to present to Parliament the importance of this day, which we celebrate every year. 

In the past, the Ministry of Agriculture used to communicate through the Chair to demand for a special arrangement for a delegation from Parliament to go and participate in a function like this. This happened regularly in the Seventh Parliament but we have not heard from the ministry or from the Minister of Agriculture concerning an arrangement, if any, that the ministry has to offer for Parliament to go and participate in this function in Kotido. 

Above all, I would want to say to the minister that today would be the most appropriate day for him to lay on the Table the Food and Nutrition Policy which was passed in the Seventh Parliament. Most of us are very new in the House and have been demanding for a food and nutrition policy if there is any. I know we had it but most of the current members of the Eighth Parliament never had the opportunity to get a copy. We want to get this so that we are updated with the document and the policy.

Secondly, since this date is known, I would also have been happy if the appropriate ministry, either Ministry of Agriculture or Ministry of Health, would have been able to lay on the Table a Bill on food and nutrition. There is no time at all. Time is running out and if there is one, we want to get an assurance because we are experiencing very difficult circumstances now concerning matters of food security.

The government programme we have in form of NAADS places more emphasis on cash crops. Whatever agricultural product we undertake, the target is basically to earn more income for the farmers at the expense of food security. So I would like the minister to also assure the House that in the zoned areas in the country, these are the specific crops that are emphasised for food security in region a, b, c and d. The responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture is immense.

Parliament has always been demanding from government the appropriate allocation of the budget to the tune of 10 percent for agriculture but the ministry or the minister has not taken trouble to defend or set priorities, which would be able to expend the 10 percent if given to the ministry. In what area would the ministry be able to invest this 10 percent budgetary allocation? How much of this would go to food security? How much of this would go to water for production or irrigation? How much of this would go to research? As we celebrate today, it would help for the ministry to support Parliament’s effort and demand this 10 percent concerning the Maputo Protocol.

There are two key things: one, the ministry has more or less abandoned seed production to the private sector and as such we do not have any quality seeds or planting materials in this country. I think it is the mandate of the ministry to make sure that while it plays its regulatory role in the seed industry, it must take keen interest and ensure that the planting materials that the farmers are receiving are of good quality. 

As Christians, I and two other colleagues from this Parliament have just come from our tour of Israel. We were told that the country experienced drought for the last seven years but they are feeding most countries in the Middle East. They rely on the Sea of Galilee to provide irrigation water for industry and for consumption. So surely, Mr Minister, you have a big responsibility. 

As Parliament, hon. Mathias Kasamba has already given us the position of the parliamentary forum and we would now want you to back him and us by giving the appropriate plans and policies that we can be able to support to feed this country. This would also ensure that farmers can get something over and above food for income to support their families. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.08
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, National Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Kasamba for the statement. I am not hungry and I believe I welcome the World Food Day, but I can imagine someone out there in Katakwi or Kotido who has slept on an empty stomach for over five days or even more; how will he welcome the World Food Day celebrations? 

I think that perhaps we could rephrase it to say, “World hunger day”. It is not only here in Uganda. Most of the African countries have been hit by drought and floods that have caused our countries and our citizens to suffer. Sometimes the meaning of the World Food Day kind of disappears in our minds. I even wonder if our children, and maybe the generation to come, will survive.

Two weeks ago I was in Washington where we celebrated the World Habitat Day. The major issues were climate change, food insecurity, poverty and rural migration. Uganda, as per the report from the Global Humanitarian Forum read by Kofi Annan, has been labelled the most vulnerable country in the world to climate change. Today we are facing variations in climate change and there is a lot of food insecurity. 

I do not know whether government has comprehensive strategies and interventions for the people. When you look at the NAADS programme, what they have been doing for the last 10 or 15 years has not been really strategic to empower people to have food in their homes. There are no food baskets in our homes. People produce and sell and even when they sell, they still buy that food later at a higher price yet they should be able to reserve food for their own consumption. I think that government should come in through the local governments to ensure that each home has a food reserve. Before they sell anything, they must have something to take them at least some three months or so, so that we do not have this hunger all over the country.

Our people are hit; they have no money to buy basics and they cannot even produce. People are so hungry that even if it rains, they have no energy to go and dig because they are worn out. They have been starving and when the rains come, they are hungry and they have nothing to plant. I do not see the efforts of government yet to invest in this.

I was thinking that perhaps we could create a special fund for agriculture like we have created a land fund. If agriculture is so important to us, and indeed it is, why don’t we address it strategically with maximum contribution in terms of the budget? Why don’t we give agriculture priority in this country because it is not only a backbone but I believe it is the one that drives the nation? When people are hungry, there will be no services in the country. 

I think that as Parliament we could think about having a special fund and this special fund could address two important areas. One area is water for irrigation. There are places, even in Buganda, where there are no rains up to now and yet people want to plant. It is the planting season but they are scared they cannot plant because the plants will dry out. There is no water for irrigation. 

This scheme would also help people and the districts to purchase tractors. Some people have plenty of land but they cannot use hoes to till the land; they need some equipment. So, I would urge Parliament and the Ministry of Agriculture to invest in this so that we can save this country. If we go on like this, the World Food Day will turn into a “world hunger day” and I do not believe that is a good precedent that we will be setting for the generations to come. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We also talked about this issue of food security the other day and I am glad I can see the former minister in charge of planning here. Sometime back he told us that there was going to be a community mobilisation Bill. I hope that during the course of this debate he will tell us where it is because we have been lamenting about how to organise the communities.

12.14
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kasamba for the statement but I am not very comfortable with the theme, “Achieving Food Security in Times of Crisis”. I think we should have food security all the time and not only in times of crisis. Do we have food crises around all the time? I think the theme should be adjusted. We need food security all the time. So, whoever came up with this -

Two, this is Parliament making a statement to itself. Where is the statement of government from the relevant ministry? It should be here and at all the district headquarters. The problem we have these days is that on a day like this - (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the theme is for the whole world because there is a world crisis in food security. The theme is not a localised Ugandan theme.

Secondly, the government is making a statement at the function as we speak now. We are ably represented in Kotido. There was also a press conference the other day. Two weeks ago we had a press conference and there was a press release about this World Food Day. I think the statement that is issued by government today at the function will be available tomorrow in the press. But at the moment a statement is being made at the celebration site in Kotido. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the honourable minister for the information. Madam Speaker, the point I was trying to emphasise is that the statement that is going to be read in Kotido today should have been read at all the district headquarters. It should have been one uniform statement. In 1999, the President and the First Lady celebrated this day in Mucwini in my constituency but elsewhere, what we read from the papers subsequently were various statements being made by RDCs and others and there was no uniformity. So, the central message does not sink into the population.

Otherwise, I would like to repeat what the previous speakers have said that we have celebrated these days for many years but the action plan of government to make sure that we have food security in this country is not seen on the ground. I think the government should come out with some effort, however little it may be, and say that, “This is what we are doing to do to make sure that we have food security in this country”. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Victor Nursery and Primary School Makindye East in Kampala, represented by hon. Mabikke and hon. Nagayi. You are welcome. 

12.19
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I want to use this opportunity to congratulate the committee and the chairman in particular for presenting this statement. To me it goes a long way to raise the awareness of Ugandans about food insecurity that the whole world is facing particularly the less developed parts of the world. 

I want to thank the government for the interventions that have been taken. I know NAADS at least is doing something in our villages and we cannot ignore that. I know that there are efforts that are being put in to increase agricultural production and to make Ugandans less hungry. I am aware that Uganda does not rank lowest in food security. If we compare ourselves with the rest of Africa, I think we are relatively better than many countries. That does not mean that we are not hungry. We are hungry and there is a lot that still needs to be done in order to eradicate hunger, and that would be in line with the millennium development goals to which we have committed ourselves.

Also, as hon. Odit has said, in line with the Maputo Protocol which particularly demands that African countries commit at least 10 percent of our national budgets to food security, I think Uganda is way far from that. So, we call on the government - although we are aware that there are interventions that are taking place, we also know that we fall short of so many actions that we should take, including allocating enough funds to agriculture. 

Also knowing that agriculture is where the majority of our people are and knowing that the world is becoming hungrier, I want to call upon the minister in charge of planning - most of these things are falling on us as if we are not aware of what is happening. So many alarms have been raised and indeed climate change is here with us, but in terms of planning for climate and its impact, we do not see much. 

I think we need to intensify that, particularly when you go to the rural areas. The dialogue on climate change and food insecurity seems to be amongst us the elite but when we go to our constituencies, when we go to people who are less educated, they are not aware. Therefore, I call on government to facilitate more awareness on issues and particularly now that climate change is resulting in food insecurity that Uganda had never seen. 

I also want to talk about Uganda’s policy on population growth. We are suffering from a population growth rate that we are not able to cater for in terms of the resources available, and we continue to be comfortable with our families producing more and more children. Unfortunately, it is the very poor who are producing more children and those are the ones who are getting hungrier and that have fewer resources. So I would like to know from government what they are doing in realisation that the population growth rate is very high. In fact, Uganda is ranked among the highest. Our resources are becoming more strained, unemployment is increasing, food insecurity is increasing, and the poor are getting poorer because they are producing more children.

I am sure you know of women who are producing seven, eight children and they do not even have a full acre of land to cultivate for these children. I call on government to have a policy on population growth that is clear but also get the population to know of the dangers.

12.24
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): I thank the chairperson, hon. Kasamba, for the report. I have a few comments to make regarding food security in the country. 

As most members have said, government is not doing enough as far as promoting food security in this country is concerned. It is a reality that there is a lot of change in our climate all over the globe. So if we relax and fail to handle this matter seriously, we are likely to get a disaster in this country regarding nutrition. 

The programme that the Ministry of Agriculture is now promoting all over the country, the NAADS programme, is a good one but I am afraid it is not addressing food security with a lot of urgency. It is concentrating a lot on cash crops, which is a good thing, but without food even if you get money from cash crops, you will end up spending on food for your family and at the end of the day you may not benefit much from those cash crops.

Before we give support to farmers in parishes to grow cash crops, I think it should be a condition that whichever family benefits from this fund or materials from NAADS, they should have food crops within their garden. Otherwise, they will end up rearing chicken, cultivating cash crops and at the end of the day they have nothing at all to eat. The little money they will make from there will end up buying food. 

Another thing I would like to ask government to do is to subsidise planting materials and seeds. Currently, what the ministry is doing is to tell the farmers where they can access seeds and planting materials, but that is not enough. You will find that many families cannot afford these materials. I think it should be in the plan of government to subsidise planting materials so that the farmers can plant and have food in their homes and also surplus to sell.

There is also lack of information among many farmers especially in my district, more so on planting crops that are drought resistant. A person plants a crop, which requires plenty of rain and yet there is drought and that crop dies within one month. And when he tries the next season, the same thing happens and in a whole year you find that nothing has been harvested in that home or area. So we need agricultural extension workers to advise our farmers on which crops to plant and during which season of the year.

Lastly, this can be promoted by providing materials like cassava, which has been found to be resistant to drought in many parts of this country but many families are currently ignoring it because it fetches little money. This crop is, however, very important because it is the only food that is available to most families in times of drought and I think that it needs to be promoted. 

The Ministry of Agriculture is still thin on the ground. Although a lot is being done at the national level, the staff are very few at the district level. The so called extension workers are not seen not only in animal production but also in crop production. We still lack qualified staff, technical staff to assist and guide our farmers to do the right thing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually to add to what hon. Asiimwe has said, I found out that Namwendwa sub-county, which has ten parishes, was sharing a veterinary officer with Bulopa sub-county; it is very big but also sharing and I am sure that that is happening elsewhere. 

MRS MUGYENYI: It is not only your two sub-counties that are sharing veterinary officers; it is across the country. There are very many sub-counties that are sharing an agricultural officer and in my case a veterinary officer. Thank you. 

12.29
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman, hon. Kasamba for this very important briefing to Parliament. God loves Uganda, which is currently the food basket for the Great Lakes region and yet we are doing very little to actually maintain that performance. I would like to encourage Parliament and government to put more input and Uganda could not only double but triple its current agricultural production.

When you drive towards Juba and you see the number of Fuso lorries carrying agricultural products and other products to Juba - the same is happening to our neighbours in Congo - you can imagine if we had invested in railway transport, we would have a cheaper cost meaning that our traders would get much more at farm gate prices if they went with cheaper means of transport. 

Think of value addition; we still have to a tune of 30 cows going to Juba aboard one lorry. What if we had added value and taken some tonnes of meat because they are actually not taking them for domestic use; they are taking them to butcheries for consumption. So there is a lot we can do. 

I would like to emphasise and re-echo what the Rt Hon. Speaker has raised. We are now having a funny debate about the role of cultural institutions in this country and yet we have not used them where they have an advantage in the area of food security, soil conservation, main streaming climate change and tree planting. 

The other problem we have had this year is that the seasons have failed in some of our places. You plant and the rains disappear; you plant again and you are only lucky to yield something. So, this means that we have to bring on environmental issues and step up irrigation.

I would like to add that despite the current land stand off between those who speculate in land in square miles for sleeping on and not for production and the squatters; we can still produce what we are producing. I would like to encourage government that we should move towards radical land reforms as it were under Amin’s Decree of 1975. If you do not use it, you leave it to government. We need land used more for production than this sentimentalism of owning land just for the sake of it when our population is increasing. 

Uganda has one of the highest population growth rates and yet -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just been touched by the honourable member’s statement referring us to Amin’s Decree of 1975 as far as usage of land is concerned where if land is not being meaningfully used it should just be grabbed and given away. A few days back, the same honourable member was on the Floor complaining about some mafia who are threatening to grab land in his area. I just want to understand as to whether the mafia, which is scrambling for land in Bunyoro is scrambling because the land is not being utilised? Is it in that perspective or what is it? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Opposition Chief Whip. First of all, I am talking about the substance and the content in the Amin Decree and not because it was Amin. 

Secondly, if you listened to my statement, I should go further and even say that the land in Buliisa should be comprehensively planned by government on top of the systematic demarcation protecting the indigenous rights. So, I am aware of the development needs where government has a problem in even acquiring land for giveaways. I think we cannot accept that as the Eighth Parliament; we should be planning for the next generation.

I wanted to add that if we have the courage to go for serious land reforms, we could actually produce more. We have a lot of absentee landlords who have not used this land since 1900 and will never use it. Why should we be having this in a country where the population is fast growing? We do not have to wait for the Malthusian Trap; that elementary economics when the population grows so much that we can no longer produce enough on that very land. We therefore need more research in agriculture. We need to have fast yielding crops given the uncertain weather and we need to have more yielding crops if we are going to feed our population. I thank you.

12.35
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Mathias Kasamba for the statement he has given us that has given us an opportunity to make our remarks on this day. I note with concern in issue No. 1, page 2, where he notes that it is absurd that Uganda has not reached the 10 percent budgetary allocation and had we done this, if we had invested in agriculture, I think the issue of food shortages in Uganda would not be the case because there would be enough investment within this area.

Yesterday I was hosted on a radio talk show and there was one caller who said all we talk about as Parliament is lamentations and that is true. Maybe we are the people to blame because we are the people responsible for the Budget, we are the ones who pass the Budget and we are the same people who come back here to say that we have not passed 10 percent of the Budget to agriculture. 

I have made research and I will talk with figures here on just two areas where I made research: expenditure on vehicles, rent and consultancies. It constitutes the 10 percent of the national budget we are talking about. The way we set priorities in our country, we do not set them right. 

I do not think that there is anybody here who would stand to justify that we need to spend Shs 200 billion on renting of government premises. This is a percentage that has moved to more that 400 percent in a space of ten years. Why don’t we go on prudent spending? We should be innovative and set our priorities right and unless we do this, we are not going to achieve anything. People will remain hungry, poor and infrastructure will not be developed because we are not investing in areas which are appropriate like in infrastructure, health, schools et cetera.

The chairman is concerned that - and I am very much concerned that one third of the children in the country especially in rural areas including districts of Kabale, Kisoro, Kitgum, Gulu and Pader are stunted. It is very good I am talking when the children have come to visit this Parliament today. When we were passing the education related Act, I argued that we should feed the children with at least break tea so that the children do not go hungry. These are the yields of not feeding our children. We should get something.

I think some policies should be reviewed and the minister in charge of children is here - when we go to our national budget, there is a component for teas and refreshments. Last financial year, there was a figure which was close to Shs 6 billion budgeted for refreshments and teas and that is for offices, people who are rich, people who have jobs, people who have something to eat. 

Why can’t we get a portion of that? Why can’t we sacrifice that to the children of Uganda? Why are we bringing up children who are stunted? What yield do we expect in future? Anybody who is concerned, we know it very well, getting a first grade in rural areas now, just one first grade in a constituency, they celebrate. What do you expect from those children who are not feeding? Do you expect them to pass when they are doing their exams on empty stomachs and studying everyday on empty stomachs? I think this policy of children in schools should be reviewed. When it is break time, teachers go into the staff rooms for break tea, for children it is “to whom it may concern”. This is very unfair.

On issue No. 4, they appeal to government to consider food shortage as one of the mechanisms to respond to food shortages. When I was still young, there were these government storage facilities for grains. Where did they go? If the previous governments could really plan for such issues like food security and we are saying we are a more sophisticated generation and scientific, can we not plan? I think that is what one of our contributors said. Where is the planning function in this country? Why are we not planning for this population? If we are boasting that Uganda is ranking highest in food production, why are we having more that 20 percent of our population going hungry? 

We are having celebrations in Kotido today. I think this to me is a mockery to take such celebrations to Kotido where people are dying of hunger. The question I would ask is; how many tonnes of grain were taken to the people of Karamoja so that they get out of this hunger? The other day even my son who is just six years old was arguing; he said the children in Karamoja need food and shelter. He said, “Can you give me some money to buy some clothes to send to the children in Karamoja?” They were told at school to mobilise toys, clothes –(Interjections)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Banyenzaki. I have been listening to colleagues and some of them are advising government to increase on the awareness of food insecurity. And that probably, instead of talking about food security here in Kampala, we should move around and make sure that people get to know that the whole world decided to apportion a day for food security. Not because we want to celebrate food insecurity but to say that this is a menace that has befallen the whole world. But hon. Banyenzaki is saying that this is mockery – I am at a loss. Keeping quiet and celebrating it in Kampala where the markets are full of food might not help. I think it is better to go deep down in the villages. Sometimes we sit at Kololo and the information does not sink down to the local governments and the grassroots leaders who are supposed to mobilise the people. So, I seek clarification from him so that I can follow properly.

MR BANYENZAKI: What I am saying is this. The celebration is taking place in Kotido where people are hungry and you are asking the hungry people to celebrate Uganda as a food basket. And I hope that Hope Mwesigye, a good heifer from Kabale – you know for us in Kampala, women who look very well like you hon. Nankabirwa, we call them heifers; “Enyana”, (Laughter) so now, we have a heifer in Kotido celebrating with the hungry and malnourished and they have not taken any food to even for those children who are starving –(Interjections)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: First of all, I would like to inform my dear brother, hon. Banyenzaki that heifers are not human beings. 

Secondly, the people in the south west are more malnourished than those in the North –(Interjections)– yes, these are documented facts. When it comes to responding, I will give the details. But I want him to know that there are more malnourished children where he comes from than where the celebrations are taking place. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother for accepting the information. Today, world food day is being celebrated in Kotido. And we know that Karamoja as a region is a very hostile environment in terms of the climate; it so bad to the extent that Karamoja as a region is not agriculturally productive. 

So it is my hope that through this celebration, government will tell the Karimojong how they have improved their environment for production. But if they just go there with their 4,500cc vehicles and escorts and they do not account to the Karimojong how they have transformed their area and given them the right tools and technology for production, then it will vain merry-making. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it is just a pity that we have not had advance information about the contents of the speech, which is going to be made today. But some of you who come from up country know that getting a national occasion is something that people hatched from the centre. People stay there for a week, they spend money there and it improves things there for the better. So let the people of Kotido also receive big people. 

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Banyenzaki because he is talking much about Karamoja. I want to state that this is a principle that is being celebrated in Kotido. And on behalf of the people of Karamoja, I would like to appreciate the efforts of government to improve Karamoja. 

I know that they have always tried to distribute the seeds although they come at the wrong time. Currently, they are still giving people food and looking after them. But my colleague hon. Wadri said that our soil is not productive. I would like to inform him that some of the most productive soils in this country are in Karamoja. And for many years, Karamoja used to have two seasons of rain. The first one is from February, March, April, May and mid-June. Then the rest of June is dry. Then the second rains come in July, August, and September – that is when the crops are ready for harvest. 

I think the principle issue is what he mentioned; the climate change. The place has been de-forested, even the animals – in fact somebody asked me whether Kaabong and Moroto have the greatest number of cows in the country. So because of the security that has come there, now the cows graze a lot and destroy the environment. The people have been asking, “Can we be assisted with irrigation?” There are two researches, which have been conducted and one of them can be implemented. 

So while appreciating that, we also appreciate what government has been doing for Karamoja and actually the Karimojong are agro-pastoralists; they grow food and look after animals. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the pupils and teachers of Bugahya Central Primary School in Bugahya County, Hoima, represented by hon. Rwebembera and hon. Nyakaisiki. You are welcome. Please, conclude.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, maybe all has been said. I mentioned this wasteful expenditure by government. Perhaps at an appropriate time I will be given a slot to give my findings and we debate this issue thoroughly so that we can set our priorities right as a country and Parliament in particular. As I speak now, the way we are spending money, we are on the wrong path. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we should discuss the Medium term Expenditure Framework; isn’t that really what constrains our expenditure? Isn’t that what ties our hands?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, when you talk of the Medium term Expenditure Framework, these are set – we are now in October, the Budget has already gone. Things come well prepared. In fact yesterday you said it right, our recommendations are just mere proposals. 

The people you see here in front of us do not have a say –(Interjections)– I am being honest. The Ministry of Finance makes the ceiling; they have their hands tied. But in this coming Budget, let us direct our resources to irrigation or water. But these people have things packaged; they have their wishful list, but when they go to Finance, they are told that the resource envelop is very small. They start apportioning and these people have to accept.  

It is a pity that these ministers here are very few; we have talked about food and famine; this is no longer a one ministry case. All of us must get involved and give our input. It is very dangerous; we are getting a problem all over the country. Today, we still have some food but by January and February when you are looking for votes, you will find it very hard.

12.53
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity, and I thank my chairman, hon. Kasamba for this report. When I joined politics in 2006, I told my people that priority No. 1 is food and priority No. 2 is education. I told them that they can do nothing without food. You cannot be healthy; you must produce food to eat, and sell some. 

The second one was education because without education you are finished. If you have the education, nobody can neglect you; you will be recognised. You see, people were saying that everything is being given to those people from the West. I told them, “I was the city engineer for many years, but am I from Ankole?” So I told them to get the necessary education and they would not be neglected. 

So I was very happy when hon. Kasamba brought out this issue of food. If we want food security, we have to follow a chain; we need to talk about seeds, the soils, the farms – what happens after planting? How is the harvesting, the storage and so on? 

I do not think we have the right seeds at the moment. We need improved seeds, or should we go for genetically improved seeds? Government has not yet come up with a policy on genetically modified seeds. There are countries in Europe and America where they have bumper harvests due to genetically modified seeds. What is government doing about it? 

Our soils; some of them look black but the nutrients are no longer there. We need to inject in nutrients for them to be fertile again for food productions. So the ministry has to look into the issue of our soils; let us get soil scientists to find out what exactly is missing. 

Then, how long are we going to continue with the hoes on our shambas? We must come out with a plan. We need tractors to be able to produce on a large scale. And during harvest, what happens; do they store the produce properly? You may harvest a lot, but if the storage is poor, you may lose most of it. So we need to look into all these issues in order to ensure food security. 

Madam Speaker, the marketing also is an issue. We talked about it this week. People produce food and sell everything. You cannot have food security when we sell all the food. Government should come out strongly on this; probably with a policy on marketing so that we do not dispose of all our food to other countries. 

We are very lucky here in Uganda because we have comparative advantage in food production over all our neighbours. This is where we should concentrate. Do not bring in cotton production of clothes. We have comparative advantage in food production in the region. If we concentrate on that and sell food to Sudan, DRC, Tanzania and the rest, we would make more money than trying to produce things which we can get more cheaply by importing them into this country. I see people trying to produce radios and TVs yet we can get cheaper and better ones from abroad. But we cannot get cheaper food from the rest of the region. 

As I conclude, let me thank government for whatever they have done to bring into agriculture. They have tried their best, there have been policy changes. I hope they have realised that some of them are not working. They removed extension workers; they removed diploma fellows from villages and put university graduates who cannot work under those conditions. But these diploma boys from Bukalasa could fit among the rural population. You take a graduate? That is why they are here in Kampala. They want to be with us here, but the diploma people, the certificate people, they were fitting there. I think government has to look into this and have a change of policy.

Did we have to privatise veterinary services? Do we have to privatise everything? I think these are areas where government - although they have done a lot – need to look into.

The issue of NAADS, I do not need to talk about it now. People have talked and talked. It is a failure. People in NAADS are stealing. Money is going, so let the ministry, let the government, handle NAADS. I am sure it can do a lot if handled well. This is because nearly every district is sent Shs 1 billion, but you go on the ground and show me what the Shs 1 billion has done. We need to look at these policies and ensure things are moving. 

Finally, I do not have to say this, but let me just remind you: it is very easy to rule people who are full. People can make noise, but when you put food in their mouths, they will keep quiet. But when they are hungry, you have a problem. Let us concentrate on food production and this country will be at peace. I thank you.

1.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members for those good words and advice and in some cases, issues that need attention. 

Uganda is a member of the UN and we contribute money. That is how we have FAO here and Uganda voted for retention of tele-food programmes, which we thought and we still think are very good for our people. FAO has really contributed immensely to the transformation of our people in the agriculture sector and in fighting hunger.

Before I go to specific issues, I would like to give a broad picture of what the government and particularly the Ministry of Agriculture is doing to increase production and productivity to match the demand for food and also save our people from starvation and ensure they have food to sell and surplus to feed their families. 

On production, recently in our budget this Parliament passed Shs 30 billion, which is supposed to be given to the public through the banks at low interest rates for agro-business. 

For a long time, this has been a bottleneck and I think about early this week when the Ministry of Finance signed with the banks who will be administering these agri-business loans to make sure we mechanise agriculture and also have value added to our products to reduce post-harvest losses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe hon. Minister, in which part of the country are those banks you are talking about, the ones who are going to administer those loans?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I did not carry the list but these banks are covering the entire country. We have Centenary, Dfcu, PostBank, they are about 15. It is an initiative and I think government is trying to raise more resources to make sure we give agro-credit that does not attract a lot of interest. The maximum we think should be ten percent.

We are also trying to make sure that planting and stocking materials are availed to the farmers so that they can have the right seeds for production and also stocking materials for livestock.

It is true this Parliament passed the divestiture of the seed company, the only one we had and the assumption was that the private sector would actually provide seeds to match the demand. Unfortunately, this has not come true. But the government through the Ministry of Agriculture has had NARO sign a Memorandum of Understanding with NAADS to make sure we also supplement the market to avail seeds. Agriculture has been capitalised.

MR WADRI: I am at great pain to try and understand from the Minister whether or not NARO can produce seeds. What is the mandate of NAADS? NARO’s work is to carry out research, develop technology and avail it for those who can be able to multiply it for the people. If you press NARO to go further and generate seeds, when they do not have the capacity, they do not have the land and do not have that network. That is another way government is going to try and pass the blame to NARO, which has no mandate to do the job, just like NAADS is mandated to provide extension services. Now government is using NAADS to provide cows, to provide seeds, to provide - which are not extension services. So really, what will be the function of seed certification services and the seed companies in this country?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you hon. Wadri. Madam Speaker, one bird in the hand is better than two in the bush. We sold the seed company as a stop measure. NARO has big chunks of land where we can produce these seeds from. I am telling you the truth because you demanded that we must find a short-term measure to deliver seeds and planting materials. 

While in livestock we have NAGRIC, which can actually do it, in the crop sector we do not have it. So we are looking around to find the means of both supporting the seed companies and ensuring that the seed is available. But in the meantime, for the next season, we have taken that route so that we do not get into another mess just like we did.

I agree with you, hon. Odit. These are different mandates but at the moment we do not have that agency to do it and we have NAADS in all the sub-counties. In NAADS there is a component of food security. 

I would like to request Parliament to appreciate the conditions under which we are operating. Because we are the –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for yielding the Floor. The minister is treading on very slippery ground. I am a member of the agriculture committee and I do not think the issues that we discussed as a sector rhymes with what the honourable member is saying. That is why my colleague, who once was a chair of the agriculture committee, stood up to seek clarification, and even on the other side, I could see hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi, also a member who served on the agriculture committee at the level of chair, standing up to seek clarification. 

NARO as the organisation that is specifically charged with the responsibility of carrying out research does not have the mandate, let alone the capacity. I know right now you are – it is like a person who is drowning; he will hang onto even a floating leaf thinking that it will save him.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are yearning for seeds and there are private companies which will best deliver them. Government as an institution is a poor business person. It can never deliver that, but it can develop the technology and pass it on to others. So I appeal to you Mr Minister that let us not involve NARO in this slippery and messy ground. I thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for giving way. I am a former seed officer; before I came here, I was a seed officer. I was a seed production manager. The way I understand seed production as a business, it is not as simple as we are talking about. I am looking at a fully fledged business where you need a fully fledged arrangement with seed production, seed processing and seed marketing mechanisms in place, and with the ability to purchase chemicals and be able to deliver. 

When the minister tells us that NARO is partnering with NAADS to produce seeds for the country, I am looking at that arrangement. So, who is going to fill that gap? Unless he is telling us that NARO is partnering with NAADS to produce what we call foundation seed, which seed can be given to companies to multiply; I am not convinced that this arrangement will work. I want to state that much as we talk about the agriculture sector to develop agriculture, if it is not backed by a sustainable seed industry, we are writing on water. I want the minister to clarify on that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed allow me to welcome pupils and teachers of Flight School, Buruli County, Masindi. They are represented by hon. Kaahwa and hon. Jalia Bintu. Thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I want to allay the fears of Members; they were only impatient, but they should have left me to conclude. Madam Speaker, this is temporary and we are looking at a possibility – actually the Ministry of Finance is sourcing for money to capitalise the seed company so that the seed industry is vibrant and can match demand.

We have also intensified technical skills and extension services to all the sub-counties in the whole country. We are encouraging farmers to do soil fertility management using composite manure and fertilisers, for those who can access them, because some of our soils are exhausted. Government is zero-rating fertilisers, but even then, the use of fertilisers is still low and we are looking at the possibility of a subsidy maybe in future. 

We are also promoting value addition, particularly primary processing, to make sure that we reduce post-harvest losses and also prolong the shelf life of our produce to reach the desired market. 

In fisheries, we are trying to encourage fish farming and there is a deliberate effort to shift people from wild catch to fish farming. One of the enterprises that we have earmarked, especially in the East, where there is potential for fish farming, is encouraging farmers and farmer groups to go into aquaculture to increase fish on the market. 

Hon. Odit raised a very serious concern that we need to provide a food and nutrition policy to the new members who were not privy to this policy when it was passed. Sometime back I brought a few copies here. I have taken note of this; I will ask our secretariat to bring more copies and avail them to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, there was a bit of misinformation that NAADS is only promoting cash crops without stables. That is not true. Hon. Members, one of us happens to have represented me somewhere and I would like to say that the speech that the Member made was very good. I recall, among other things, that the Member told people to observe food security. (Laughter) Yes, that is very serious and he communicated to the whole world that NAADS is promoting food alongside cash crops to make sure people have enough to feed their families on and surplus to sell -(Mr Odit rose_)– hon. Odit, please don’t –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the minister only wants me to feel happy. What I would like to say is that emphasis on NAADS is enterprise selection on the basis of which crops can give more income and cash than food. In this case, our appeal to government is to be very clear on whether NAADS is emphasising more of the non-traditional crops for cash or food security. Do not mess up the whole thing and end up misinforming the farmers, hon. Minister.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there is misinformation to our farmers. When we talk about enterprise mix, we are only changing the minds of the farmers to look at agriculture not as a way of life. And in the enterprise selection there are words “enterprise mix” that are used to take care of the food security.

Madam Speaker, hon. Odit raised another serious issue relating to budget allocations being still low. He also said that we have not matched the ten percent from the Maputo Declaration. I have talked about this many times. What is true is that we still have a constraint on our resource envelop. However, you will notice that this year we have moved forward. I hope in the years to come we are going to match.

I would like to inform Parliament that we are in the final stages of signing CADIP campac, but this has been delayed because Ministry of Agriculture designed the Development Strategy Investment Plan for the agriculture sector for five years. The amount of activities and programmes we want to run on priorities actually far exceed the MTEF ceiling. 

I would also like to inform my brother, hon. Byanyima, that yes, we have a wishful list, only that we still have problems with revenue although we are very hopeful that we are making gains and that we shall one day get there.

Hon. Nalubega said that some people are very hungry and suggested that there should be a special fund for the agriculture sector so that we can do it the way the energy and road sectors are doing. Well, I think Parliament has the mandate to make such a recommendation. I would like to say that it is also our wish, as government, to ensure we transform our community, and as you know, the roads are supplementary to the agricultural sector. If you look at places where roads have been constructed, you realise that there are many Lorries full of food coming from there.

Let me say something about what hon. Okello-Okello said about the theme. This is not our baby, but what I can say is that as Uganda, we participated in the World Food Crisis meeting. Kotido, where we have had a presence of FAO for quite some time, is very relevant. We should be talking about supporting these initiatives because we need more and more.

There was something about population growth, raised by hon. Mary Mugyenyi. I would like to say that this is a prick. I think all of us need to think about this. I hope that at an appropriate time, the responsible ministry will give a statement. If you have a population growth that does not match the growth of the wealth, particularly the production of goods and services, then there is a problem at hand. It is like digging a hole to seal another; at the end of the day you will have an equivalent hole. My view is that we need to take corrective measures to address this problem.

Madam Speaker, I notice that there were so many crosscutting issues that were advanced by honourable members. For example, hon. Dr Asiimwe raised the issue of people concentrating on cash crops and abandoning the growing of staple food. I would like to inform the House that I spent two days in Bundibugyo with hon. Dr Asiimwe telling people not to cut down their plantations in favour of cocoa and rice. We need the support of Members of Parliament in this respect to supplement government’s efforts to encourage people grow staple foodstuffs as well. 

This is important because we have noticed that in some places, people are just cutting down their plantations to replace them with staple food growing. What the ministry is doing is to ensure that in every sub-county, any enterprise mix made, must have an element of food security. We cannot fund 100 percent cash crop production.

Madam Speaker, hon. Stephen Birahwa said that Uganda is a food basket and that we are now exporting to the entire Great Lakes region. That is true. However, the challenge is that as we export, our families are starving. 

The report indicates that in the south west, where I come from, 40 percent of the children are malnourished. The report interestingly says that in the North, where people have been going through a war, only 12 percent of the children are malnourished. I think we need to talk to our people. As members of parliament, we should be examples. Are we ourselves food secure? Are we showing examples to our people? I would like to say this needs collective effort.

The other one was about land reform and requested for radical reforms and I think this is good news from you, because many times, you have been talking about communal land and you know that with communal land, what belongs to everybody is nobody’s. Land should be put to productive use and I support you –(Interjections)– let me conclude, hon. Birahwa – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Let me conclude, hon. Birahwa –(Interjections)– you know radical land reforms. The issue raised by hon. Banyenzaki about the children. Honourable colleagues, we all have children and I appreciate hon. Banyenzaki’s concern about the children. 

Remember Article 17(c) of our Constitution that talks about the responsibility of every citizen, including taking care of the welfare of the children. Why should a father fail to look after his child and he wants them to tax other people to look after his children. Because when you say you want food in the school – face it, it is tax from you people that goes to feed those children. 

You know there is free primary education; there is now Universal Secondary Education and the quota system in university. What are we doing ourselves as parents? If it is a recommendation from Parliament that we go and feed those children and, therefore, go and tax people more, I think we shall take it. 

Finally, hon. Loote raised the issue of agriculture presence in the Karamoja region. The region is being transformed into both crop and livestock farming communities and we have done a lot of affirmative action; Government has provided tractors to open up some of those lands for people who are willing, and we have also revived our regional agricultural research station at Nabwin where I was recently –(Interjections)– please, it is functioning because I was there recently. It is not that I have not been there; I was there with your chairman to retrieve a tractor. We sent there a tractor to demonstrate on research and these people grabbed it! Now they are saying it is not functioning. Madam Speaker, I was there and I am not being told. I was with the chairman, the RDC, the agricultural officer and the Director General of NARO in Nabwin – he was not there and we demonstrated. 

We are trying to make demonstrations of short and high yielding crops. There is a type of sorghum which is doing very well in Karamoja, and I visited so many sub-counties where it has been grown and it is working. We hope this time around, Karamoja will improve its food security position. 

In Abim, the picture is even better, because we have a group of youths who are planting up to 200 hectares of rice. So, I think the situation is improving and we need the support of Parliament as always in the agricultural sector, to transform the lives of our people to ensure food security and surplus income for our people. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you minister and the forum on food security. Let us move to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE BUDGET PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/09

1.29
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I wish to present to you the state of the national economy – that is, the performance of the fiscal year 2008/2009. 

We did bring before Parliament the two earlier reports as required by our delegated function – the medium and third quarter. Unfortunately, because of the other pressures, we did not have time to present them. 

I am happy and I would like to thank the Speaker for giving us this time to be able to present this report and refer Members to check with the other reports which you got copies. We think they are very important because there are salient issues we raised about the global crisis and the other challenges which could have actually helped us in the budget debate and the Sate of the Nation Address by the President. 

Macroeconomic overview and summary of major findings

This report presents an analysis of the performance of the economy for the Financial Year 2008/09, in view of the macroeconomic objectives of the government. The government’s main macroeconomic objective as highlighted in the Budget Speech includes the following:
    1. Maintaining low levels of inflation at utmost 5.5 percent per annum,
    2. To ensure an annual GDP growth rate of at least 8 per cent in real terms,
    3. Ensuring a competitive exchange rate that is supportive of the export sector and finally,  
    4. Maintaining adequate foreign reserves.

The committee noted that since 2007, most economies of the world have experienced the effects of the global financial crisis that started in the Unites States of America. Our earlier reports showed indeed that Uganda’s economy was equally not spared from these effects. 

After several years of impressive growth, an average of about 9 per cent, over the past three years, the pace of the economic activity plummeted with GDP declining to about 6 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09 although this was still high by regional and world standards. 

The analysis in this report shows that although the number of sectors in our economy are still experiencing this effect, a few variables such as private remittances and exports have picked up while our foreign exchange reserves remain comfortable at about five months on imports. 

In brief, the following are the main highlights of our analysis. 

    i. That core inflation was registered at 12 percent and continued to over-shoot the government target of 5 percent, while headline inflation stood at 14.1 percent compared to 7.3 percent the previous fiscal year. 
    ii. That also GDP growth declined to about 6 percent in the period under review compared to 9 percent in the Financial Year 2007/2008.
    iii. That the external trade slightly improved mainly on account of a slight increment in exports. However, the trade balance remained negative and actually slightly deteriorated, mainly due to continued lower global demand, which reduced both the volume and the price of Ugandan exports. 

In foreign direct investments, remittances to NGOs and other portfolio inflows weakened, especially during the last quarter of the Financial Year 2008/2009. However, private remittances from abroad commonly known as the kyeyo money slightly increased - this is very interesting - indicating some positive signs of the recovery from the global crisis. This means that our human resource out there has not been hit as hard as we anticipated. 

Domestic credit increased and in particular, credit to the private sector improved, despite the high domestic interest rates, indicating some reduced tightening in the bank liquidity. However, commercial banks’ lending rates continue to be high. Both Bank of Uganda policy and bank rates increased, further pushing domestic interest rates. The committee has always emphasised the need to review and look into the ever increasing domestic rates.

Reflecting the impact of the sudden and anticipated reversal in portfolio increase, the exchange rate continued to depreciate during the financial year. Subsequently, delays in the government spending and rise in demand for domestic currency had a constraining impact on liquidity, resulting in sharp increases in interest rates, but the shilling later slightly gained value towards the end of the financial year. 

Domestic tax revenue collections underperformed in the financial year, mainly company taxes, petroleum duties and VAT duties to weaker than expected economic activity in the period under review. 

Domestic Price Development

During this Financial Year 2008/2009, prices surged above the programmed limits compared to the same period a year ago. A general price level in the domestic economy; that is the annual headline inflation, increased by 14.1 percent compared to the increase of 7.3 percent over the same period a year ago. 

The surge in the general domestic price was mainly on account of an increase in the prices of the food crops, which increased by 27.1 percent compared to a slight increment of 0.4 percent over the same period a year ago. 

Food inflation has continued to surge mainly originating from the strong demand from the neighbouring countries against low supplies due to prolonged dry spells, high transport costs as well as other supplies, and high constraints such as poor yields, crop and animal diseases notably the Foot and Mouth disease, which has hit most of the cattle corridor areas. 

The annual core inflation, which is the targeted form of inflation, excluding food crop items, fuel, electricity and metered water from the basket of goods and services, increased by 12.5 percent compared to an increase of 8 percent over the same period, a year ago. It should be noted that the government’s targeted or programmed level of core inflation is actually at 5 percent. This target has, however, been continuously over hit, which questions the efficacy of this target on the price stability. 

We continue to recommend that government reconsiders her stance on the 5 percent inflation target, but also address the fundamental factors that have consistently driven the inflation numbers, especially the food upwards, because food affects most of our people. For instance, government needs to address the structural rigidities and constraints in the agricultural sector, among others.

On the other hand, energy, fuel and utilities inflation has been decelerating albeit slowly, and registered an increase of about 4 percent in the reporting fiscal year compared to an increase of 11.6 percent over the same period a year ago. The table below shows you the inflation movements for the period of 2006/2007 and 2008; the source being the Uganda Bureau of Statistics.  

I seek your indulgence. This is a report full of data and I want to skip some things where possible, but I do not know if that will not cause us problems. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can summarise, but I will ask the Hansard to print it.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much for the guidance, Madam Speaker. The outlook for the coming financial year will largely depend on the normalisation in the regional demand and supply of foods, and the extent to which the food season will impact on the overall inflation numbers. 

The meteorological department has warned the government of an impending El Nino season which is likely to affect food production adversely. On the other hand, non food prices are likely to be affected by the global oil prices along with the expected exchange movements. If these shocks come in stronger than expected, the non food inflation pass could push the overall headline inflation upwards. 

However, experience last financial year showed that considerable declines in global oil prices were not necessarily translated into the lower fuel pump prices. In this regard, Government needs to put in place a regulatory framework to ensure that consumers are not exploited by the fuel dealers as has always happened. Christmas time is about to come.

Monetary Developments

I will start with the monetary aggregates. 

By the end of the review period, net foreign assets of the banking sector expanded by 12.2 percent equivalent to Shs 621.88 billion compared to the same period a year ago. This was mainly on account of Bank of Uganda foreign reserves growth of 15.9 percent equivalent to Shs 693.34 billion. 

However, the net foreign assets of commercial banks plunged by about 19.9 percent, equivalent to Shs 146.75 billion compared to the same period a year ago, reflecting the adverse effects of the global downturn of the country external accounts, especially as investors’ confidence remained slightly subdued.

However, domestic credit registered an expansion of about 67.7 percent compared to the same period a year ago. This was mainly on account of increases in Government net borrowing from the banking sector, to the tune of Shs 297.79 billion, equivalent to 31.1 percent, reflecting some resurgence in private sector demand. The gross rate of private sector credit from the banking sector grew by about 33.6 percent, equivalent to Shs 918.52 billion in absolute terms.

I am trying to skip and will go for the bullets because we have made some recommendations. Just above the table, if I can guide you, in the face of the continued slowdown in private external financing, government is urged to keep maintaining a soft monetary policy stance until the economy fully stabilises from these shocks. 

Table two on page 6 below, illustrates the monetary aggregates in billion terms as stock at the end of the period, and it shows the net foreign assets, the domestic credit, the money supply for the period running from financial years 2006/2007, 2007/2008, 2008/2009, and it also gives the gross of the two years in absolute	and percentage terms.

On page 7, we hope that these developments will facilitate banking, improve efficiency and reduce interest rates in the banking sector.

Interest Rates Developments

Commercial Banks’ shilling denominated interest rates: over the review period, the reversal in foreign inflows coupled with heightened financial uncertainties led to unexpected shifts in liquidity and money demand, subsequently leading to a hike in interest rates. 

As shown in table three below, the weighted average lending rates increased from an average of 19.56 percent in the Financial Year 2007/2008 to an average of 20.84 percent in the Financial Year 2008/2009. The time deposit rates also slightly increased from an average of 9.9 percent in Financial Year 2007/2008 to an average of 10.17 percent in the Financial Year 2008/2009. 

However, the savings deposit rates declined from 2.44 percent in the Financial Year 2007/2008 to 2.2 percent in the Financial Year 2008/2009. Table three illustrates the commercial banks’ average interest rates. The source again is Bank of Uganda.

On page 8, I will go straight to the recommendation that government should gradually reduce her dominant role as a player in the financial market, through its use of monetary instruments to “mop up” excessive liquidity. It is possible that the Central Bank can develop monetary policy instruments that do not crowd out private sector credit. 

What we are trying to say here is that our private sector is currently competing with these very banks because a commercial bank will not find it prudent to give money to an investor, to farmers or to business people in the rural areas, where there is a risk, if Bank of Uganda can give them Treasury Bills at a very certain risk free rate. So, we find that, that is the biggest determinant right now of the interest rate. Every wise bank naturally puts their money where there is no risk - that is in Bank of Uganda; and we are encouraging government to look at this.

I will move straight to the bottom; No. 8. Previously, Parliament had recommended that government considers offering incentives to banks that want to open up branches in rural areas. You can see a lot of banks in most of the towns, but when you go deep down in our rural periphery, the banks are still missing. Again it is because of that problem. I am sorry if I missed some very important points but the report is big and I am trying to summarise.

Movements in Bank of Uganda Policy Rates

On page 9, you can see the Treasury Bills we have been talking about in table four; weighted annual discount rates and Bank of Uganda rates as they are. You can look at the 91 days, the 182 days, the 364 days, and if you compare with the bank rate of 16.7, for example in the Financial Year 2006/2007, you will see that in the Financial Year 2007/2008, the bank rate is 15 percent, and if you compare it with the instruments of 91 days, 182 days and 364 days, it really shows you how much the bank rate is going to be affected by these monetary instruments of the Bank of Uganda. Until the effect of the global financial crisis wanes; government should consider relaxing, at least moderately, its monetary policy stance.

Developments in the Foreign Exchange Market 

The table on page 10 gives us - in figure one – the exchange rate movements; and you can see it is showing the months from the period of July 2007 to June 2009, showing how the graph was stable earlier until September 2008 when there was a slight upward shift up to May 2009 and then a bit of reduction. The source is Bank of Uganda.

Domestic Capital Markets

Uganda Securities Exchange:
I will just take you through the table on page 11. Table 5 shows us the trends in market activities at the Uganda Securities Exchange as per the Financial Year 2006/07 and 2008/09. It clearly shows the volumes of shares traded; the turnover in million Uganda shillings, the market capitalisation and the all share index. The source of this is the Uganda Securities Exchange. 

Parliament continues to recommend that government fast tracks the implementation of the recently passed Securities Central Depositories Act, but also urgently work on finalising the Pensions Bill in order to improve the efficiencies in the securities market, shorten transaction costs and help shore up liquidity for attainment of the long term viability of the scheme. It is also necessary that comprehensive actuarial review of the pension sector is done.

In light of that, I will also inform honourable colleagues that our Parliamentary Pension Scheme has an annual report ready and it will be put in your pigeon holes for your own perusal and internalising. I must add that it is not only to Members of Parliament but also to parliamentary staff because they are equally important stakeholders. 

External Trade
During the Financial Year 2008/09, lower global demands continued to affect the performance of Uganda’s exports and constrain remittances and foreign investment, three important supports of private demand in the recent period. However, activity in the economy began to soften towards the end of the fiscal year consequently stabilising the trade balance. The trade balance, which measures the net contribution of exports, posted a deficit of US $936.31 million compared to a deficit of US $913.49 million realised the previous financial year 2007/08, which is a slight deterioration of the trade balance of 2.49 percent.

As shown in table 6, exports performed fairly well, posting a growth of 18.85 percent compared to the previous period, by increasing from US $2,596.01 million in the Financial Year 2007/2008 to US $3,085.28 million during the Financial Year 2008/09. Much of this growth in exports is attributed to the regional cross border trade especially with Southern Sudan, Egypt, Kenya and the Eastern DRC. The performance in exports of US $3,085.428 is almost twice the export made in the Financial Year 2006/07 of US $1,499.89 million. This increase is largely attributed to the penetration of the coffee exports into the Arab world through Egypt with the help of UGEMCO, a subsidiary of Uganda Coffee Development Authority. Congratulations UCDA!

The imports, on the other hand, registered marginal increases amounting to US $4,021.59 million compared to US $3509.50 million in the same period last financial year. This represents a growth in imports of 14.59 percent compared to the same period the previous financial year.

The slight increment in imports is attributed to the strength of the shilling which started appreciating towards the end of the financial year. In spite of the increases in the imports on a year to year basis there was a deceleration in import growth in the last quarter of the financial year 2008/09 of US $899.58 million compared to US $119.06 million in the same period last year, representing a decline in imports of 11.78 percent.

We had earlier mentioned that and I have basically been elaborating what is graphically shown in table 6.

Portfolio Influence

During the period under review, remittances from abroad decelerated after experiencing moderately high growth rates in the financial year 2007/08 estimated at US $1.3 billion, about Shs 2.8 trillion. Remittances from Ugandans on kyeyo suffered a major slowdown particularly in the third quarter of the 2008/09. There was, however, a rebound in remittances to about US $748.58 million at the end of the Financial Year 2008/09. I am trying to justify the growth total stability because in the third quarter there was some volatile situation and I think that is when there was more psychological global economic crisis than the actual one.

However, the private transfers through non-governmental organisations plummeted, diminishing from US $543.64 million in the Financial Year 2007/08 to US $453.64 million in the Financial Year 2008/09 representing a 17.1 percent decline as per the table below.

These developments, among other indicators of external sector performance, indicate a less buoyant position since our partners in development, the NGOs, cannot adequately participate in the development activities they have been carrying out.

In our third quarter report we had actually tried to inform Parliament that the situation may not be as buoyant as it had earlier been indicated but we did not present this report. You have copies and you can always look at them. 

I will try to move faster, thanks to the Hansard which will be able to cover the whole report. On page 15, we now show the foreign direct investments. I think I should read the part on page 14 below which talks about the illustration on page 8. The global financial crisis did not seemingly affect foreign direct investments. Minimal decreases of about 5.39 percent were registered with foreign direct investment declining from US $778.43 million - you should have a heading here, “foreign direct investment” after the “remittances inflow.” That means that below table 7 there is a heading missing and that is why I had skipped it but it is quite important. 

However, a steeper and more protracted global downturn as well as delays in the resolution of the global financial crisis could prolong the slowdown and begin to imperil the foreign direct investment, further worsening the external sector performance. Were international trade and financial flows to remain sluggish, the slight signs of recovery in the advanced economies might come to Uganda with a longer lag than is currently projected. Such a trend is likely to affect the performance of our economy by depressing employment, tax revenue and consequently the scope for budget spending especially on the mega infrastructure and energy projects. 

Real Sector Development

Sectoral Share of GDP 
During the last financial year, Uganda’s economy registered a robust GDP growth rate of six percent amidst the financial turbulence experienced globally as a result of the recession. Though this was a decrease from the Financial Year 2007/08 GDP growth rate of nine percent, it was a remarkable growth given the financial crisis globally and even compared with our neighbours in the region. The growth was largely driven by the buoyant growth in the service sector, especially transport and communication, which grew by 20 percent and financial services at 21.1 percent. This could also explain some of the investments related with the CHOGM budget the other year.

Table 9 clearly shows the agriculture and fishing industry services and the total GDP. 

Agriculture Sector

There was a slight improvement in the agriculture sector with GDP growth rate of 2.6 percent as compared to 1.3 percent the previous financial year. The growth attained in the agriculture sector was mainly attributed to increased growth in food crops from 2.4 percent in the Financial Year 2007/08 to 2.9 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09. However, cash crops performed poorly declining from nine percent in Financial Year 2007/08 to 1.7 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09. This was mainly caused by the poor performance of the coffee sub-sector which contributes over 60 percent of the total cash crop output. Its dwindling performance mainly resulted from reduced global demand especially from the European countries.

Industry Sector

There was a remarkable slowdown in the industrial sector which grew at 3.8 percent in Financial Year 2008/09 compared to 9.1 percent in 2007/08. The slump in growth was mainly registered in the construction sub-sector which declined substantively from 10.8 percent in the Financial Year 2007/08 to 2.2 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09. Both mining and quarrying grew by 9.2 percent while manufacturing posted a modest growth of 7.2 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09. But there was a slight growth in the manufacturing sector of about 7.2 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09. The fall in the construction sector is generally attributed to a reduction in remittances from abroad, the major component of private demand in the sub-sector.

The Services Industry
The services sector accounted for 51.2 percent of the total GDP in the Financial Year 2008/09 and registered a strong growth rate of 9.4 percent during the year under review. This growth was largely attributed to the transport and communication sub-sectors which grew at 20 percent and posts and telecommunications at 32.3 percent. This is attributed to the increased coverage of the telecommunications and internet services countrywide. We must thank this sector for that. 

Financial services had a strong growth as well, of 21.1 percent, especially because of the new banks. The banks are really increasing but our concern is that most of them are in the same urban towns which had banks. We would want them to penetrate in line with the sub-county rural development initiative to have them at that level.

Investment

The annual Uganda Investment Authority survey continues to indicate that investors attracted and licensed by the authority are among the top tax payers in the country. This underscores the important contribution made by investors to the country’s revenue. Uganda Revenue Authority is mandated to promote and facilitate private sector investment in Uganda as set up by the Act of Parliament, the Investment Code, 1991. 

Table 10 illustrates the planned investment and employment levels for the period of the Financial Year 2008/09. You can see all the sectors as I have gone through them. The source is the Investment Authority. We avoid plagiarism as much as possible that’s why we have to quote the sources in case of any future reference.

Page 17, I will try to skip and go straight to the second paragraph. According to the UIA estimates the translation of ratio of the planned investment remains at 60 percent. This means that of all investments licensed by UIA in a given period 60 percent are translated to real projects where as 40 percent do not actually materialise. This has however not been scientifically proved as there are no available statistics to show the number of actual investments each given year. Since government has committed a considerable amount of resources towards investment promotion, it is important that it ascertains in quantitative terms the actual number and value of investment being made. In addition, UIA should be facilitated and given an additional mandate to set up a monitoring and evaluation section for purposes of trucking the projects it licenses. It should not end at licensing; it should be interested in actualisation of these projects. Alternatively UBOS should commission periodic studies and surveys to asses the impact of the projects licensed by UIA.

Key Sectoral Performance

You are aware government has been fast tracking the energy sector. The country continues to suffer from the high tariffs in the region yet the supply is insufficient, unreliable rendering Ugandan goods uncompetitive. The continued small increases in the power tariffs have become frequent; the cumulative effect will affect the competitiveness of local investors.

Table 11 on page 19 illustrates the energy generated in 2008/09. You can see in the quarter of 2008 what Nalubale gives us and Kiira. There was 7 percent decline in power generated both from Nalubale and Kiira power stations in the third quarter of calendar year 2008 by 13 GWH. Further more, a 5 percent decline in the first quarter of 2009 was realised hence a reduction by 33GWH. The source is again the Electricity Regulation Authority.

Purchase sales made by Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd as at the end of March 2009 are made from embedded generators, the Kasese Cobalt Company, the Kilembe Mines, the Kakira Sugar Works, the thermo generators like Aggreko, the Jacobson, imports from Kenya and Rwanda when they are not very active. That is why Parliament recently, through the request from Ministry of Finance, we brought the Great Lakes interconnectivity loan requests so that we do not only have to rely on the local national capacity. If you have the highway in terms of the interconnectivity transmission lines, you can actually be able to get power from those who have cheaper sources. You are aware of the bigger Inga project expected in Congo and what Addis Ababa is doing. 

What that means is that as a country we must improve and make sure we enjoy the economies of scale to reduce our tariffs, short of that, in a very short period our neighbours will out compete us because if they have cheap power and we are increasingly producing ours at a high rate as we integrate, our people will find it cheaper to find power from outside. This is because the generating companies will be selling to transmission highways depending on who has the most affordable power.

On page 20 we have the Umeme power purchases and sales to different categories of consumers. You can see the peak hours, the shoulder, the off peak, commercial sales, domestic sales, medium sales, industries and the large funds. This is how they categorise their consumers.

On page 20, Parliament has in the past recommended that government considers undertaking reforms in the power management sector with the view of having one efficient institution to manage the power supply. We think the bulkanisation of UEB into so many companies has not helped the country it is time it should be reviewed and I think that is the language the minister is now talking.

Petroleum Exploration and Production Sub-sector

Petroleum exploration has been going on for sometime now and the results so far indicate positive prospects for viable mineral production. A number of oil wells were drilled during the financial year 2008/09 and these include: Taitai-1, Ngege-1, Karuka-1, Kasemene-1, Kingfisher-2, Kigogole-1, Ngiri-1, Jobi-1 and Rii-1.

The investment in this sector is expected to be in excess of US $500,000,000 as at the end of the Financial Year 2008/09. This has greatly boosted efforts to find more petroleum. 

However, to assess the potential contribution of oil production to the national economy, government should urgently design and make the public production sharing agreements public.

We also advise that whereas we have a good policy, the law making process has been slow and so we would like to request, through Parliament, that government fast tracks bringing this law to us so that we can put in place the necessary institutions and regulations if we are to make good use of this oil. 

The down stream petroleum supply and distribution on page 21: The petroleum sector went through turbulent times in the last quarter of the Financial Year 2007/08 and the first half of Financial Year 2008/09 mainly as a result of increases in the international oil prices – I am actually trying to go through Table 13 – however, prices have been easing as the shilling started appreciating against most of the major currencies especially towards the Financial Year 2008/09. Premium was at its lowest in the month of May 2009 as well as kerosene as shown in Table 13. The last six months of this year have not had big challenges in the volatility of the petroleum products rates. 

Page 22; as earlier recommended, refurbishment of the Jinja oil storage tanks, realisation of  the Kenya -Uganda pipeline and  the construction of the regional refineries will greatly help incur big supply constraints which in turn affect all sectors of the economy negatively. 

Transport

The state of Uganda’s feeder and main roads continues to deter local investors and access to markets and final distribution points. This has greatly affected agro-based industries and domestic market-based industries which is the key component in the country’s poverty eradication efforts. To end this, we hope that the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) which has been mandated to develop and maintain an efficient national road infrastructure in the country by linking rural and urban areas, islands to main lands and ensuring safety of road users will stabilise the infrastructure problem, which means that we note that the current status is not stable. 

We have a table there with approved estimates on page 23; outturns and proposed allocations for the Financial Year 2009/10 in billion terms clearly excluding arrears and taxes, wage, non wage, Government of Uganda development, donor support and the total sum of Government of Uganda. The source is the Ministry of Works’ policy statement.
 
Parliament appreciates government’s efforts in up scaling infrastructure financing without relying so much on aid support. In other words, we are comfortable with the arrangement of UNRA and the Road Fund. However, efficiency in resource utilisation by UNRA is of essence while completion of some of the pending roads projects should be rationalised in order to avoid unnecessary costs to the economy. Some projects like the Northern Bypass have taken unnecessarily too long. 

Parliament has previously recommended that government considers redeveloping the railway network. Railway transport is by far the most affordable means of transport especially for manufacturers who import enormous volumes of cargo into the country. I must add that even our competitiveness for exports globally is largely affected because we are paying three times more than what we would be paying to dock our consignments in Mombasa if they went by railway and not by road as we are doing currently. Even axle load debate we are having is because goods supposed to be going and coming by railway are coming by road, which unnecessarily stresses the road and hence the high depreciation of our roads.

Therefore, an efficient and effective railway network would facilitate trade operations and relieve the business community from high transport costs they currently face. After the controversy facing the Rift Valley Railway Consortium, the railway infrastructure remains in limbo. And government is again reminded that the failure of the railway system to reach the desired standards continues to lead to high port costs, demurrage and storage charges by both producers and manufacturers and if I can add on exporters in addition to the duration of transporting cargo from Mombasa to Kampala is quite long which leads to high working capital requirements reflecting high costs of doing business in Uganda. The need for alternative routes to northern routes is also long over due. 

Can I also remind the Ministry of Works that the current concession which RVR is holding is under a very big threat because the Kenyan side seems to already be throwing in the towel and even the guarantee we gave them expired in August. So, we need the ministry and Parliament to also find out from the ministry what the legal implication of RVR operating in Uganda when Kenya which has a bigger side of the network is already questioning the concession and when the guarantee has expired. Are we safe as a country?
 
Telecommunications

I will just go to the last paragraph. Currently, the national population cellular network coverage is close to 100 percent while the national telephone switching capacity stands at 11.5 million lines. This we all know has been a very successful story which can actually be qualified as a fundamental change. However, slow progress has been noted in the Internet infrastructure with a total international bandwidth currently at 507.99 megabytes of which 138.5 is uplink and 369.42 is downlink. With the launch of the Broadband Cable System connecting East Africa to a digital super highway, this is expected to change.  

I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, as I would like to refer Members to another report of the Standing Committee on National Economy on indebtedness, performance and debt sustainability. It is supposed to be the next item on the Order Paper. We thought it wise to marry the two because we have been discussing this for some time. 

We did, with your permission, arrange a presentation by the Ministry of Finance in the Conference Hall, where they gave us enough copies of the debt strategy issues’ report. They gave us the external aid utilisation by creditor and by sector, and a brief. We had actually demanded, in line with the Budget Act, for them to give us the report on loan guarantees and grants for the Financial Year 2008/2009, as it is our duty to check the performance of these loans. The ministry complied by giving us copies of this book. I did lay one on the Table because we have been looking at both the new and old loan requests.

The committee is interesting the sessional committees in looking at the performance of the already existing loans and this workshop in the Conference Hall was in that spirit. We have given our own further findings on the debt sustainability. Of course, as at June 2008, the total stock of the outstanding arrears amounted to Shs 397.2 billion. Of these, pensions and gratuity arrears amounted to Shs 1.5 - this is domestic debt. I am sorry I have mixed it up. Let me first dispose of the domestic debt before I go to the external debt. 

This is the biggest component of the arrears comprising of the 39.7 percent of the total stock of the arrears. Other significant arrears include court awards amounting to Shs 73.8 billion, and obligations to international organisations amounting to Shs 50.7 billion. Accumulation of arrears continues to propagate inefficiency and undermine sound budget management. The continued build up in new government domestic arrears in spite of government efforts to reduce the stock of existing arrears, provides evidence of how compression of recurrent expenditure has almost become close to impossible. 

Government is urged to rationalise clearing the domestic arrears as per its earlier commitment. Similarly, a more careful balancing of recurrent capital spending could help in mitigating any future increasing trends in the expenditure of arrears.

The table clearly shows the stock of the domestic arrears as at June 2008. You can see the pensions, the court awards, the salaries, international organisations, utilities, rent and others.

On page 26, the table illustrates distribution of the government instruments by category, the trust company; the biggest component is the commercial bank at 55 percent; trust company at 25 percent; insurance at one percent; pension fund at six percent; Bank of Uganda at five percent; and the least being others. The source is again Bank of Uganda.

I am avoiding skipping recommendations. I am sorry but you will be able to go through.

We go to the external debt, which I was referring to earlier. We have tried so much as a committee. Before we brought in the first loan, we did request for this report and we requested for these presentations because as a committee, we thought it was very important that we do internalise and appreciate the challenges in the external debt sustainability. The other workshop we had in the Conference Hall unfortunately was not well attended but we made sure 300 copies were brought on our table and I remember they lasted for almost four days there. 

We encourage Members to internalise and appreciate these findings. Of course we do appreciate that Uganda did benefit from debt cancellations.

Let me read the report and then I will add on a few things. Uganda was the first country to qualify for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative in 1998 and 2000. This outcome enabled Uganda to be eligible for the debt write-offs. In 2006, the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) enabled Uganda to write off 100 per cent of the eligible debt owed to the World Bank, the IMF and the African Development Bank. The MDRIs substantially lowered Uganda’s stock of public debt from US $7 billion at the end of 2005/2006 to US $5 billion at the end of 2006/2007. 

However, the total external stock of debt (both outstanding and disbursed) surged again and as at the end of financial year 2007/2008 stood at about US $1.8 billion rising to about US $1.9 billion as shown in the table.

Table 16 gives us the evolution of the Uganda external debt from the period 2002/2003 up to 2008/2009. We actually have the total debt outstanding and arrears.

Depending on Madam Speaker’s guidance, I was of the view that we marry this debt because debt sustainability is part of the performance of the economy and that is why we have given you this document. On the order paper, it was supposed to be another report, but given that we are going through it, I thought I should seek the Speaker’s guidance on that note.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you present it.

MR MUKITALE: The external debt sustainability for Uganda. 

The Debt Sustainability Analysis for Uganda for the period from 2008/2028 shows that the country’s external debt is within sustainable levels. The country has managed to achieve debt sustainability by implementing sound macroeconomic policies, but also largely by receiving debt relief. Particularly, the HIPC and MDRI debt relief helped improve Uganda’s debt sustainability outlook substantially, which led to drastic improvements in the country’s debt burden indicators.

However, as Parliament has continued to recommend, if government does not operate a cautious borrowing strategy, then the external debt situation might in the near medium term start drawing backwards. Actually, if you check what we got from the ministry itself, by 2012, if we do not increase on our other indexes, like the GDP, borrowing will become a big enemy. As per now, if the money is spent in important sectors, we can still say we are safe.

In addition, while the external debt level is currently sustainable, strict adherence to the debt strategy is still very necessary. Government and development partners should adhere to guidelines and procedures when contracting new loans and issuing guarantees. 

Last year, Members were informed that the debt strategy of 2007, which is actually a product of Ministry of Finance, should have a ceiling. Every time we get the Budget, they are supposed to indicate to us how much they intend to borrow that year. So we propose that for all loans being negotiated, it should be mentioned for Parliament to understand the ceiling. This financial year, it was mentioned, but last financial year, the ceiling was not mentioned, yet it is there according to the ministry’s own debt strategy. 

Some of these guidelines and procedures are already spelt out in the debt strategy and the Aid Management Manual. However, breaking these procedures continues to pose serious challenges in terms of managing and tracking external assistance. I must add that we found through scrutinising these loans that the ministries have been leaving out the sessional committees when implementing the loans. We have made it a policy of our committee not to scrutinise any loan if the sessional committee is not brought on board. And I want to encourage the sessional committees to interest themselves in the performance of existing loans. Our role as a committee is largely scrutiny rather than the performance of the other loans. The performance of the other loans should have been under the daily routine work of the sessional committees, and they should be responsible for advising us whether that sector needs to borrow or not. 

Debt Burden Indicators

The analysis under this category largely centres on key solvency indicators such as the net present value of the debt, the gross domestic product, the export performance, and the domestic budget revenue.

We have, in addition, looked at some liquidity indicators such as debt services, exports and domestic revenue collections. These indicators were assessed against the International Development Association (IDA) resource allocation index scores. The thresholds are based on the country policy and institutional assessment, on the premise that better performing countries with stronger policy and institutional performance have the ability to withstand the debt burden. 

Madam Speaker, on top of the Conference Hall presentation by the Ministry of Finance which I chaired, Ministry of Finance also invited the committee on finance, the Budget Committee, the PAC, National Economy Committee and two other committees; we further discussed debt sustainability. 

I will lay on the Table more copies of these records because it is important for us to understand how we work out sustainability; looking at the GDP, the export capacity of the country, the net present value and the domestic budget revenue. We went through this and it will help bring Members on board. 

We now move to page 29; I am about to finish. The table on page 29 indicates debt sustainability - I mentioned that the debt over GDP, the exports, the budget revenue – we also look at other rations like debt servicing because before the banks lend you, you must be solvent and must have the capacity to pay. 

When we benefited from HIPC and MDRI, they raised our appetite for borrowing because we had benefited from that debt cancellation. It is important for us as Parliament, now that our country is financing its budget to the tune of 67 per cent, to look for the other 33 per cent. However, even when we must borrow the 33 per cent, what is most important is when you borrow, where does the money go? Do you put it in infrastructure, human resource development or agriculture, which employs most of our people? 

Parliament continues to recommend that any future sustainability of the country’s debt will largely depend on the prudent procurement and deployment of borrowed resources. Any new financing should not only be in concessional terms, it should also be prioritised to strategic areas that will help to build the country. 

There is an increasing debate about the charges of the commitment fees - the penalties we pay – and we think that the ministries implementing loans should make sure that every time the country is committed, the plans of implementation should be prepared well in advance so that the country does not pay money because somebody sleeping somewhere in a ministry is not doing their work.  

However, it is not only concessionality that guarantees external debt sustainability, but also the volumes being borrowed. We should make sure that the current appetite of borrowing does not exceed the means to pay. Of course, we do realise that we have one consolation; that with the oil discovery, it is possible, if we plan well, that we could in future reduce the issue of borrowing and it will be a matter of the past. But Parliament must interest itself in making sure that this oil industry is well and comprehensively planned. We have a good policy, but we think the pace at which the planning is moving is lacking.

Therefore, while the country’s debt situation is not worrying at the moment, caution on any future borrowing is warranted although reliance on concessional financing also remains essential for the country. It is upon this basis that we suggest the following specific new financing policy and strategy recommendations for the government to consider.

By the way, we must thank the Ugandan Parliament, especially those who were here before us, who gave us a very good law. Most of our neighbours do not require parliamentary approval to borrow. So I want to thank those who were here before we came to Parliament for having been futurists.

In order to guarantee that Uganda’s debt remains sustainable, the government needs to put in place comprehensive new financing policies besides the current debt strategy, in order to ensure that it receives the best quality external aid to finance poverty-eradication, national development and investment plans.

The policy would also outline the institutional arrangements for aid management and aid contraction processes. 

Secondly, Uganda should assess the quality of future external resources’ inflow, taking into account the financial terms on offer, as well as the policies and procedures of the various donors and creditors.

It is high time the government started rejecting support from donors and creditors who impose cumbersome conditionalities. 

Some countries like Rwanda reject some loans if they find any condition which is not palatable with the local interests. So, we need our negotiation team to step up that. Unfortunately, Parliament is left out of that process because it is an executive function. But we think in future, Parliament’s sessional committee should appreciate why the sector is borrowing in the first place.

Effective Monitoring of Disbursement Triggers

Disbursement and utilisation of borrowed funds is required. I have already mentioned this. In this regard, the government should put in place a system for monitoring key aid variables in order to avoid the problem of absorption capacity.

Whereas the Ministry of Finance and OPM is actually supposed to be monitoring these loans, when you go on the ground, a lot of latitude and leverage seems to be left to the end-user line ministries with very little checking and supervision from the OPM and the finance ministry. 

We have talked to the Office of the Prime Minister, which houses the function of NIMES. Actually, NIMES is a structure within the OPM supposed to do this monitoring. So, we have talked to the Office of the Prime Minister and they are telling us they are trying to revive the function.

We have also talked to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to try and reactivate that very important structure, which has been actually napping.

Finally, of course this will also work if the sessional committees themselves get interested in how these loans are running.

Projects need to be properly designed with clear implementation plans. All projects should be subjected to a comprehensive review by the development committees prior to approval.

In conclusion, we hope that government will borrow some lessons from this analysis to guide it both in re-designing its macro-economic management and budget execution, especially for the Financial Year 2009/2010. During subsequent years, government should particularly continue to limit its financial spending to levels that can be credibly financed and sustained without necessarily constraining the proposed infrastructural investments.

While Uganda is still relatively sheltered from the global financial crisis, largely due to her large agricultural potential - but I should also add the large subsistence sector, which is actually cushioned from some of these global crises.

Lack of proper resource utilisation characterised by poor programme project implementation and continued budget leakages, could endanger the gains made over the past years.

Honourable colleagues, as I mentioned, we can actually summarise part of the indebtedness sustainability in the National Economy End-of-Year Report, and if that is allowed, I would request we marry the two and discuss it as one item. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I want to thank the Committee on National Economy for this very comprehensive report on the performance of the economy, coupled with an item that you have been demanding regularly about the external debt. But the impression I get is that both the Opposition and the government may need time to study this. They also need time to get the documents, which the chair says he distributed, so that we can have a meaningful debate.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join you in congratulating the committee for the informative report. 

But while debating this very critical report, I urge the Government Chief Whip to make sure that the ministers who are concerned with this kind of report are available. We would like to have the Ministry of Works in the House; the Minister of Ethics and Integrity because of corruption issues; even the economic monitoring minister should be here. I think the Government Chief Whip knows who the Minister of Economic Monitoring is, for him to whip, so that they would be on the spot to respond to issues during the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are pre-empting what I was going to say. That is why I was saying both sides need to study it, and because it covers all the sectors, we need more than the ministers who are present here today. We need each sector to be represented because they touch the entire economy. 

2.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government takes very seriously the reports of this nature and it has been our normal approach - I am sure my brother here, the Shadow Finance Minister, will agree with me that when it comes to dealing with critical matters of the economy, we get our team together. But we have also had this arrangement of discussing with ndugu Oduman on a number of issues. It is possible hon. Epetait is not very familiar with our methods of work, but I am sure he will soon get to know how we operate, especially when we get to the Floor. I thank you. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament since 2001 and I am extremely familiar and conversant with parliamentary procedures and the hon. Government Chief Whip is aware that sometimes in this House, we are faced with critical issues that require adequate responses from the government side, but you find that the Front Bench on the government side is wanting. Is he, therefore, in order to impute that Epetait, a seasoned legislator in Parliament, has not been familiar with parliamentary procedures and methods of work for all the time he has been here? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was referring to his special relations between himself and hon. Oduman. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, internal workings of government and internal workings of individuals in government may at times take time for certain individuals to appreciate. This is what I really had in mind; otherwise, the track record of hon. Epetait in this Parliament is beyond reproach. That is not questionable and I am sure we shall continue interacting. I thank you.

2.49
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you. I just want to clarify the impression that might have been created by the Government Chief Whip that we normally relate and discuss -(Laughter)- to mean that there might be no response from our side. I just want to say that we will be, in this case if we are postponing debate, making a substantive reply to this through my shadow ministry. Of course yes, we continue talking in spite of these counter responses and responses, but that should not mean that we will not be responding substantially from our side. I wish that, Madam Speaker, you will grant me that opportunity as we commence debate on this next time. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I said I want you people to get time to study the report. How much time do you think you require honourable members? One week? Tuesday next week; no! I think the Chief Whip needs to mobilise his team to read all these things because they are not here. 

MR ODIT: I think hon. Epetait was only busy mobilising the other side; the government side; because he is facing that side. We are also wanting on this side. It is our responsibility that all key stakeholders, including sessional committee chairpersons and even back benchers, appraise themselves with this information. This is a very important report for all of us and for the country. I appeal to the Chief Whip on this side and the rest of us to be on their toes to mobilise the appropriate people who should be here. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, debate on this should be adjourned for one week to give you time to mobilise; maybe the whole of next week, and we do it the other week. So, the Clerk will put it on the Order Paper for the Tuesday of the other week. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, last week you did commit to us a loan for municipality markets and the committee has already scheduled the joint trip with the Committee of Local Government and a few members from Trade and Industry, to go and check the status of these markets and the earlier performance of Local Government. So, we shall not be here from Wednesday to Friday. The other week would be okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said that I am leaving this coming week free for other work. However, hon. Minister of Finance, there are two areas I want you to take an interest in. There was a report on Uganda Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company (UGEMCO) - they have done a good job, but you are not giving them enough support. I want you to talk to UCDA and find out their needs. They have broken into the market in Egypt, which has big competitors. So, I want you to give them the necessary support. Talk to UCDA and find out their needs. 

The second one concerns the banks and I complained on the Floor of this House some time back that I wrote to the Minister of Finance in April complaining about the absence of banking services in upcountry towns. The minister has not answered my letter. It was copied to the Governor, who has also not answered it. I said that here on the Floor of this House and the Prime Minister said something would happen. But our committee has also reported that the city of Kampala is deluged by banks, while the other places are hungry. We really want a solution. We cannot go on like this. This is our economy and we want you to do something about it. We want more banks upcountry –(Ms Nankabirwa rose_)- you are not moving fast enough; I do not see you. If you know Kamuli, there is only Stanbic Bank. This is very serious by the way.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I just want to assure you that we are taking these issues very seriously. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can you answer my letters as a ministry because I wrote to you as ministers and the Governor Bank of Uganda, and no one has replied me? It is five months now.

MS NANKABIRWA: I will take responsibility for my minister not answering you by reminding her of that letter. The report about the plan for spreading the banks is there, starting with the government-owned banks: PostBank, and micro-finance institutions. I am sure we shall –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! I am talking about serious banks like DFCU, Stanbic Bank, Barclays and not these micro-finance banks. We are not talking about SACCO banks; we are talking about real banks.

MR OKUPA: I thank you for giving me the opportunity, Madam Speaker, and for re-emphasizing that issue to the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance should stop taking us lightly. There are a number of issues that we have always asked them to make statements about in this House. I will mention one against which the minister has persistently dodged to make a statement. That is the issue in regard to Shimoni. Do you still remember that hon. Kajara was supposed to bring here a statement in two weeks? But when the two weeks ended, he communicated that he would not be around to present that statement. That was even before Budget time. However, up to now, we have never seen him present that statement to the House with all the relevant documents we asked for. 

After that debate we saw construction cranes raised on Shimoni land with an iron-sheet fence constructed to deceive us that work had started. But as luck would have it, the wind came and blew everything away. We were able to see that nothing was going on at that site -(Laughter)– to the embarrassment of government. 

The other one is, while we were discussing the Budget, I laid documents about money that had been apportioned for the purchase of two aircrafts for the Victoria Airways in which Uganda Government had injected money to the tune of US $250 million. After that, hon. Omach promised to get back to us with a statement after one week. But we have never seen those planes ever since. In the newspapers, there were reports that they had purchased two planes. When are we getting this statement? I think the Government Chief Whip should take this very seriously. 

We can give them another one week or so to have all this brought to us. It is so disturbing and these are very serious matters.

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I am sure you will agree with me that there are a number of statements that we have lined up for submission to the House. However, it is also true that the House has been having quite a huge backlog of critical business to clear –(Interjections)– it is true!

Anyway, I would like to assure the House that once space is created on the Order Paper, the Minister of Finance – for insistence yesterday, the explanations that came up here actually took up the whole afternoon. That practically happens with every statement that is brought here. Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you allow us time to prepare so that at the time debate on the report of the Committee of National Economy starts, we provide this House with statements on Shimoni, the airlines and all the others that have not been mentioned. We shall make sure all these are brought so that we can be in a position to clear the air and to assure the House and the nation that we operate in a very transparent manner. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock in the afternoon. Have a good weekend.


(The House rose at 2.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 October 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

