Wednesday, 14 October 2009

Parliament met at 11.06 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We started a bit late because we were still monitoring the situation, but I think we should begin. I also want to inform Members that copies of the report in respect of item No. 5 were distributed some time back. So when we finish item No. 4, we will move directly to item No. 5, which is about the National Drug Authority. I am aware that the copies of the report are in your offices. Come with them so that we do not have to distribute new copies; they were distributed long ago. Yes, hon. Mukitale.

11.08
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa)): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance; a matter of national security, and a matter of a likely future disaster in this country, if government and Parliament do not act in time. 

I would like to report that whereas the Government of Uganda has done a lot to discover the oil in the Albertine region where I hail from, and a lot of oil of wells happen to be in my district, it is saddening to note that as we speak, there is already an infiltration by foreign interests and mafias with collaborators and agents around Uganda. It is surprising to note that out of the 11 oil wells discovered in Buliisa, six months before the government comes to talk to the community, before the oil companies and the ministry come into the picture, there are people claiming six of the sites and locations of these oil wells. 

The right thing to do should have been for government to take the lead by talking to the communities. What I am saying is that in the last three to four years there has been an attempt to have a repeat of the 1900 Agreement where people have tried to claim land in square miles. 

When the prospect came about and it was discovered that not every place had oil – and these includes pastoralists who came four years ago and are now claiming interests in some of the oil wells. Even after knowing that this is customary land, they are now coming with geological surveys to prove that they already own these locations. Our concern, as leaders, is who gives these people information? Who are these people? The good thing is that between the Ministry of Energy, Petroleum Department and some companies, there are some claims, invoices and cheques that show that payments by new landlords have already been executed in regard to these oil wells.

It is even interesting, Madam Speaker, to note that the aerial survey done by a South African company six months ago is likely to be the work done by these very mafias. That we can have an aerial survey turned into an infiltration by the same people who are now claiming ownership of all oil wells; we find this very scary because what this means is that all compensations at prospecting stage will just go to these very special new citizens. But I would like to report that my native community is watching the situation. It also means that when it comes to the production stage, my people will be just spectators; the proceeds will actually go to the new landlords who are emerging – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you very much, my brother, hon. Mukitale. I would like to say that much as I have tried to attentively listen to you, I have failed to understand who the mafias you are making reference to, are. Who are they? You seem to know them. So, can you please be open so that we can be part and parcel of the system that can help you? Be frank and open; do not fear. I know that my colleague, the hon. Government Chief Whip, is in front of you, but please talk your mind.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Chief Whip of the Opposition to insinuate that I, Daudi Migereko, inhibits free debate in this House, particularly when he is very familiar with my democratic credentials? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, the Government Chief Whip was seated and just quietly watching the situation; he has not intimidated anybody. Please, make your point quickly.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, I am bringing this matter to the attention of Parliament and government. There are people in this country who are paid to be responsible of the sector and I cannot access the cheques of whom they are paying. So it is a matter for Parliament and government to find out who these people who are claiming are, because by now it should be public information. We have a committee in charge of land; we have a committee in charge of energy. They should be interested in this because I am making a prayer at the close of this. My prayer and pleas hon. Speaker and colleagues are:

1.	That immediately, an investigation is made of the fraudulent attempt to acquire the whole rift valley and where found, they should be revoked.

2.	That government interests itself in immediate systematic demarcation of land and land use planning in the Albertine region so that we can protect the indigenous communities while at the same time planning for the transhumance and the influx because what is happening right  now is that there is too much unregulated transhumance and influx.

3.	That government should ensure that land ownership as at 2000 is upheld so that those customary owners could be able to have a benefit in the oil industry, if any.

4.	That the law for regulation and institutional making of the Oil and Gas Policy, which was passed last year should be brought to Parliament so that Parliament can play a role if this problem of speculators and those mafias is to be dealt with.

5.	When you go down on the ground, there is almost no presence of government. It is only oil companies. Even government officials can fail to access any information on the oil wells because the department of petroleum is very thin on the ground. Can we see increased government presence in this industry? 

6.	Finally, it is my prayer that with comprehensive planning, other government departments like the Ministry of Lands should take an upper hand in land use planning and systematic demarcation. The Ministry of Works also needs to do a lot to reduce the distance they are now covering using long distance prospecting roads at production stage. 

7.	We would be very happy if the herdsmen case is solved because they lost the case in court but nobody is moving to enforce the eviction. 

I thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe I can ask the government to say something.

11.18
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the prayers that my colleague has made. I think this House and country will be helped if very specific issues are dealt with and if in responding to the submission, the Government Chief Whip clarifies who is currently paying off in terms of compensation because what he has said is that people already have cheques – they are being paid. Who is paying the wrong people? 

He is also saying that there has emerged a new group of landlords who seem to be tallying their interests to settle with the geological surveys that were done. Who currently owns this information? And who is giving out the tenancy to the new landlords because we do not want to engage into a crisis before we even taste any dollar from the oil? So, I would like the specific questions answered. Is the ministry the one responsible and therefore the ministry is the one creating these new landlords? Who is really doing this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister.

11.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can see hon. Mukitale is raising critical issues that can have serious ramifications on the petroleum industry in the country. I just want to say that when I was still the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, there was a directive issued by His Excellency, the President, clearly indicating that there should be no new land acquisition in that part of the country because we were witnessing a rush by people from Kampala or people with money trying to acquire land in the Albertine Graben and His Excellency, the President, wrote to the concerned ministries clearly indicating that there should be no new land acquisition, there should be no titles issued on land in that area so that this could help contain the rush for land in that part of the country.

All I can say is that I will be raising this matter with the concerned ministries: the Ministry of Lands and the Ministry of Energy. I will ask them to come and brief the House on what is exactly happening. It is also true that there was a select committee on patriotism –(Laughter)    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pastoralism – 

MR MIGEREKO: I have heard –(Laughter)- the committee is on pastoralism but I have always had this problem because whenever hon. Kassiano Wadri and I face each other, we are most of the time discussing issues of patriotism –(Laughter)- and I was looking at him.

There was a select committee on pastoralism and one of the issues that the committee was supposed to take up was the problem of herdsmen, the problem for the rush for land in Buliisa area and I thought that by now we would have had a report from this committee. Perhaps we shall try and find out how far the committee has gone with its work because it would help clear people’s minds, particularly here in the House in regard to who are exactly causing problems in the Buliisa area and other areas and the solutions to some of the problems that they are creating. 

But I also want to say one thing; that there are areas within the Albertine Graben where way leaves are supposed to be acquired for construction of power lines and so on. I know that these are fairly small numbers of people affected but I believe that when the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development comes here to present a report, he will be in position to state clearly which people are in the way leave areas, the process of identifying them, compensating them and so on and so forth. Otherwise, I agree that this is potentially a serious problem and I am going to request the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come here and provide information on what could exactly be happening.

I can promise that next week on Thursday –(Interjections)- I wouldn’t want to say because we have got the Presidential Round Table tomorrow and there are also other activities on Friday. We always want to set realistic targets and timeframes for ourselves. It is the normal NRM way of doing things. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday the Members of the committee on pastoralists said they were winding up. So, I hope they can conclude their report and bring it so that we can debate them together. 

11.24
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of public interest and this matter engulfs the area, which I represent together with my colleague, hon. Mabikke. It is in Makindye Division. 

Three months ago we heard a rumour concerning these two constituencies that zones were being re-demarcated and when we investigated together with my colleague we were told that the initiative was coming from the Electoral Commission and that the Electoral Commission had allowed the re-demarcation and that they had actually printed the new zones on record; that they drew a map and listed the new zones according to Makindye Division. We went and consulted the office of the RDC but we were not assisted properly. So we decided to write a letter, on 4th September, to the Electoral Commission. 

The Chairman of the Electoral Commission replied disassociating himself from the purported map and order and actually properly guided on the procedure of re-demarcation of zones, if need be. After that we received a guest in the name of Perez Ahabwe, the Minister of Local Government. He came to Makindye Division and met with the stakeholders and this matter was raised. He guided, as he maybe able to expound, but the bottom line was that there was no such order from the Electoral Commission and in any case, it was not the Electoral Commission to do that job. Furthermore, he emphasised that for everything to be done appropriately, it should follow the laid procedures and from that day we thought that the matter had been settled, but it was not. 

Madam Speaker, the office of the RDC went ahead and appointed alternative leaders in these purported new zones. I received a letter from one zone called Kategula on Entebbe road near Ebony Villas inviting me for a village meeting concerning this very particular matter. Midday on that particular day, I was informed that the Police had stopped the meeting. So I felt that the Police were exercising their powers of discovering whether there was going to be commotion but I was more interested in the reasons why the meeting was stopped. When I contacted the Police, they told me that they had not stopped any meeting. They said, “But you know we have got a problem, there are new chairmen in different areas and when the existing LC chairpersons organise meetings, these new purported chairman of new zones sabotage these meetings by issuing counter orders purported to come from the Police.” So the police officer assisted me; he was there in the meeting and I informed the people on what to do. That was then. 

Two weeks ago I had a meeting in Nkere Zone. When I got there I was lucky that the assistant RDC of Makindye Division came to that meeting because it had been my earlier prayer that we have meetings together with them. So when this assistant RDC came, he stated that the matter was coming from their office and that they thought the zones were having too many people and therefore it was necessary to split them and that they wanted to extend services closer to the people more quickly. That explanation was not objectionable by anyone, in my opinion, but the procedure had not been followed and the questions were: is this a nationwide programme? How does it happen that in Makindye West and East the population has increased and therefore it necessitates a split in zones and that strangely in Nakawa Division, there has not been any increase in the population? So, from that, we insisted that we wanted evidence.

When they feared that we were getting tougher on them, they forged a letter from the Chairman of the Electoral Commission dated 11th purporting to say that the Electoral Commission Chairman was writing to hon. Kyanjo and hon. Mabikke informing them that the first letter he wrote was actually in error because he had not consulted the relevant offices and that the zones were in order. 

When I read the letter I was shocked but from the conclusion I suspected that the English used was not from the Chairman of the Electoral Commission. Because the office of the Electoral Commission Chairman is open, I decided to consult my colleague, hon. Mabikke so that we could go there. We failed yesterday but this morning I went there and as expected, all doors were open for me. 

When I reached there, I presented this letter to him and complained that a letter had been circulated in the constituencies, and hon. Mabikke and I, the primary recipients of the letter, had not received our copies. The chairman consulted his people who went through their computers and did not find a letter senior to this, coming from them.

The matter is like this. We are obedient servants of this nation, serving in two different capacities according to our parties left and right. We want to follow the orders and laws as laid down. We would fear to enter into a situation of war or commotion in Makindye Division and the most dangerous thing is that the people over there are using the RDC’s office - actually the RDC is using the name of the minister and the chairperson of the Electoral Commission. You know, the problems we have with the Electoral Commission right now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, you are going into so much detail arguing a case. I think you should just ask the government to lay those things on the Table because now you are accusing the minister - I don’t know which one because there are two ministers there. There is also Prof. Kiggundu, whom you are talking about.

MR KYANJO: I am talking about the Minister of Local Government and the Chairman of the Electoral Commission and they are the two people at the centre of this forgery. My appeal is that the minister clarifies on this matter and restrains the RDC from conducting himself in a manner that is inconsistent with his schedule of work otherwise we shall have trouble for no good reason. I beg to lay the fake letter on the Table for an investigation and I am demanding that government takes very serious action over it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, tell us what you are going to do. We don’t need to debate this because we don’t know. You are alleging.

11.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my brother, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, for giving us this information. It is true that I visited Makindye Division on the 11th August and hon. Kyanjo happened to be part of the meeting I had but it is not true that I visited in response to this problem. It was one of the normal visits that I am conducting throughout the country.

Before I respond, maybe I can put a few things correctly. First of all, when you mention zones, these do not exist in the language of local government. We talk about villages. 

Secondly, it is also not correct that I actually responded by saying the Electoral Commission did not give a directive because I had no powers and I had not talked to them. 

Certainly this issue was raised as he said. There were two groups: one presented a petition seeking my guidance on whether one council can overrule the decisions taken by a precious council. The other group was contesting the re-demarcation of villages to create new ones. My response at that time was: do you all agree that these villages were big and therefore needed re-demarcation? 

Both groups agreed that it was necessary for the villages to be divided. Then I asked them, “Do you disagree with the process”? They said, “Yes, that is our centre of contention”. I said, “If you agree that demarcation of these villages is acceptable to all of you, that is the principle. If you think the process was irregular, that is secondary and we are going to handle it.” My brother hon. Kyanjo was there, both groups were satisfied and we are trying to handle the issue.

The jurisdiction of the RDC is under the Office of the President and I don’t think I have powers to restrict what he does. I can only tell my colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the government should come here with a policy statement on that issue so that we know what exactly is happening and who is in charge of what so that the country knows.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I was coming to that. I am going to consult my colleague, the hon. Minister for the Presidency, to investigate the activities of the RDC in Makindye and then we shall come here to give you a brief -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I have not even read the letters you are talking about. Please, don’t engage me in the debate. You bring a statement here and we discuss it. You are engaging us in a debate but we don’t know the things you are talking about.

11.38
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the report presented by hon. Hussein Kyanjo, there are now two structures of government there. There are those who were appointed by the RDC and then there are those who were elected. According to him, the two structures give counter orders. When the elected government of Makindye wants to hold a meeting, the leaders appointed by the RDC give a counter order. In the meantime, what is the Minister of Local Government going to do? Which local government are you going to rely on? Is it the appointed ones by the RDC or the elected ones by the people?

11.39
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Local Government mentioned very correctly that the ground is not opposed to the re-demarcation of the villages, but the procedure. In the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 176(2) (b) and (c) provide for the principles which apply to the local government system. 

Article 176(2) (b) particularly says, “… decentralisation shall be a principle applying to all levels of local government and, in particular, from higher to lower local government units to ensure peoples’ participation and democratic control in decision making.”

Article 176 (2) (c) further goes on to say, “The system shall be such as to ensure the full realisation of democratic governance at all local government levels.”

Article 176(3) goes on to say -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, what you are saying is true. Can we get the policy position from the government so that we can –

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, the point is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And it is not only for Makindye. Hon. Kyanjo asked whether it was only Makindye or the whole country. Honourable members are interested -

MR MABIKKE: The point is that the information the honourable minister is giving is a cover up. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I have directed him to come with a statement.

MR MABIKKE: We need Parliament -(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, yours is a dignified office of this House. You have made a ruling and given advice, and the honourable member insists beyond your guidance! Is he in order to continue undermining your dignity?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is completely out of order. Minister you bring a statement on those issues for debate by this House.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I agree and I still want to inform this House that since the office of the Electoral Commission was mentioned, I have to consult the ministry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All those will be included in your statement. 

MR AHABWE: I have to consult the Presidency and I will give a statement. It is very clear. Madam Speaker, can I promise that I will come here with a statement in two weeks? (Interjections) There is no way I can take a position on Makindye, which I am not very clear about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, bring a statement in two weeks.

11.43
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a very serious issue of concern to this House and to the nation. We are all aware that the Leader of the Opposition was involved in a motor accident and he is still in hospital. Today The Red Pepper came up with a front page story whose headline is, “Parents want Latigo to marry the dead girl.” I want to quote what The Red Pepper wrote in the first paragraph, “We have it on good authority that a delegation of four people including, Gulu LC V Chairman, Norbert Mao, MP Reagan Okumu and some left Gulu yesterday morning and held a meeting in Lira Town that came up with eyebrow raising resolutions which may add salt to Latigo’s deep wound.” 

Everybody in this House knows that yesterday I was here in the House. I have not been to Gulu. The last time I was in Gulu was on the 2nd of this month. Everybody knows that AMANI is meeting at Munyonyo; they started their meeting yesterday and the Chairman of Gulu is attending. I am raising this serious concern because sometimes when I see government take action on some of the media houses I wonder why they should not act against such reckless and misleading articles that are not true.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you complained to the government?

MR OKUMU: I just got this newspaper as I was coming in. I will take the necessary procedure. But for purposes of information, since the matter had already come out and since hon. Latigo is a Member of this House, I wanted to raise it on the Floor of this House that the matter which has been raised in The Red Pepper is a total lie. It is not true because everybody knows, including you, Madam Speaker, that I was in Parliament yesterday. I never travelled anywhere and hon. Norbert Mao is attending a conference at Munyonyo. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday the Minister for National Guidance advised all those who had complaints against the media to report to her. So please, do the needful. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

11.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do request that the Bill be read for the first time -(Interjections)- he is supposed to read it. The Certificate of Financial Implications - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First read the Bill and ask that it be read the first time and then indicate whether you have a certificate.

MS NAKADAMA: The Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008" be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded. Hon. Members, the Bill stands committed to the relevant committee. This is an area about which Members have been complaining for a long time. So I hope it will be dealt with expeditiously. Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications on the Table. It was issued by the Ministry of Finance on 13 October 2009 and it was signed by the Minister of Finance, Hon. Syda Bbumba.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill has complied with the Budget Act requirements; it is committed to the relevant committee.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

11.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Lukia Nakadama): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications? 

MS NAKADAMA: The Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance was issued on 13 October 2009, signed by the Minister of Finance, hon. Fred Omach. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill complies with the Budget Act and it is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and a report should be brought back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY BILL, 2009

11.49
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale) I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MR BAHATI: In fulfilment of rule 102, I would like to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and issued on 10 September 2009.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, but owing to its multifaceted nature, other committees can team up to facilitate the progress of the Bill. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE FAMINE SITUATION IN TESO SUB-REGION

11.51
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Lastus Serunjogi): I beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the famine situation in the Teso sub-region. 

On Wednesday, 8 July 2009, members of the Teso Parliamentary Group through their chairperson, Hon. Patrick Amuriat, made a statement in the august House on the looming famine situation in Teso sub-region. The statement indicated that a number of deaths had occurred due to starvation and malnutrition. The statement further revealed that over 40 households in Amuria District had nothing to eat.

Death cases included the following inter-alia:

The late Atwanya of Achanya in Acowa sub-county; Ms Ariokot Kevina of Atida village in Matheniko in Kabelebyong sub-county; and Apidi, a child aged below 10 years from Achowa who died after eating poisonous wild fruits as she had nothing else to eat.

While the delivery mechanisms and distribution systems for the relief were weak, no prior needs assessment for the types and amounts of relief required was done. The statement also expressed concern over the inadequate quantities delivered as relief.

The statement revealed that the Teso Parliamentary Group requested for urgent provision of planting materials. They recommended that all relevant stakeholders including the intended beneficiaries should be involved in the planning and management of the relief distribution process.

Following the submission, Madam Speaker, you directed the Committee on Agriculture to urgently travel to Teso sub-region to assess the famine situation and this was done during the dates of 13th -19th July and here is the report to the House.

The objectives of the assessment were:

To verify the concerns presented by the Teso Parliamentary Group;

Assess the extent and severity of the famine in the Teso sub-region and identify the root causes of the famine in the sub-region;

To assess the amounts and impact of Government interventions so far made through provision of relief and planting materials; and

To assess the extent of the effects of famine on health and education in the sub-region and recommend to Parliament the appropriate interventions to address the famine situation in the sub-region.

The methodology

The committee held discussions with the following groups: Prime Minister’s Office, mainly the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness and Minister of State for Agriculture; the district leaders, including members of disaster preparedness committees from Bukedea, Kumi, Katakwi, Kaberamaido and Amuria districts, which were held in Soroti Lukiiko Hall.

This is where the committee received views and data and reports on the famine situation in different districts. The committees also met local communities both at household level and in community meetings organised by the leaders. The committee accompanied by members of Teso Parliamentary Group carried out on-spot assessment of the fields and homesteads and the random selection of the sites visited took into consideration the following:

The categorisation of the food security situation across the regions as used by the Office of the Prime Minister, with periodic maps depicting severe food insecurity areas which are indicated in red and those with moderate food insecurity indicated in yellow, and adequately food secure areas indicated as green. These are periodic maps given out by the Office the Prime Minister in regard to food security, periodically.

The selection was also made on the extent of drought and crop losses which translate into famine and food insecurity situations in the sub-region as described in the meetings with district leaders. And in this meeting, the sampled areas were categorised after getting that information as: those which were very severe; severe; and moderate situations. Later in the report, we shall see which areas fell under what categories.

The visited sampled areas are given in sections 3.2.1 for Amuria District and then section 3.2.2 Katakwi District; 3.2.3 for Kaberamaido District; 3.2.4 for Soroti District; 3.2.5 for Kumi District; and 3.2.6 for Bukedea District.

The committee held meetings with Bukedea District and Malera sub-county leaders on 17 and 19 of July respectively, and later witnessed the severity of famine in the areas which had been earlier visited by His Excellency the President.

General Observations 

The committee observed that the famine situation as described in the submission of the TPG to the House existed in all the six districts although in varying severity. The committee categorised the severity of food shortages in the region as follows:

Category 1: Very severe (widely and uniformly/homogeneously spread). The discretion of this severity is also given in Annex I, which is attached on this report from the Office of the Prime Minister in the office of the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness.

i)	Bukedea District: The sub-counties of Malera and Kolir;
ii)	Kumi District: Kapir, Mukura, Kumi and Ongino sub-counties;
iii)	Amuria District: Wera, Acowa, Abarilera and Orungo sub-counties and;
iv)	Katakwi District: Usuk, Ngariam, Toroma and Magoro sub-counties.

Category 2: Severe (widespread but not uniform)

i)	Soroti District: Tagur, Kateeta and Gweri sub-counties;
ii)	Kaberamaido District: Anyara and Ochero sub-counties;
iii)	The rest of the sub-counties which are not in category 1 in Bukedea, Kumi, Amuria and Katakwi districts fall under this category.

Category 3: Moderate (sparsely dotted and potential food basket for categories one and two if supported on production: 

i)	Soroti District: The rest of the sub-counties except those in category two;

ii)	Kaberamaido District: The rest of the sub-counties except those in category two.

Findings

The committee upon fulfilling the assessments now presents its finding:

In general, the committee submits that the efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (MAAIF) are in collaboration with the committee’s findings.

The ministry held a consultative meeting on 03 July 2009 with the leadership of the Teso sub-region whose main objective was to establish the status of the food situation in the region. In that meeting, it was agreed that the famine problem should be addressed through provision of emergency food relief and planting materials.

The sub-region had inadequate rains, especially in the first seasons, which led to failure of the crops. MAAIF attributes this situation to a global phenomenon not only limited to Uganda and, therefore, must be handled at all levels; that is, locally, regionally and internationally.

During the President’s visit to Bukedea District, he directed the Office of the Prime Minister to:
i)	Increase the amount of relief to the famine-stricken areas;

ii)	Take into account special consideration for schools and people living with HIV/AIDS and;

iii)	To supply hoes to the affected areas for quick preparation of the fields/gardens. 

The Teso sub-region had for long been largely relying on the following crops as the major source of food and income: Sorghum, groundnuts, maize, cassava, potatoes, cowpeas, millet, green vegetables and beans, which were adversely affected by the drought because they are mainly annual crops by nature.

There were also high instances of the “witch weed” observed to be adversely affecting cereal crops like maize, millet and sorghum through the weeds’ parasitic feeding method. The high weed population could stem from among others declining soil fertility, over dependency on cereals for long without rotation with non-cereal crops, and from having no land resting during the LRA war when people used to cultivate fields adjacent to camps.

There were also reported problems of increase in disease and pests in some crops like cassava and maize where maize streak and cassava brown streak viruses attacked them and caused the drought.

The main cassava varieties in production were “Nigeria” also known as “Migera,” Akena and the Tropical Manioca Series (TMS) Line 2961 brought in when local cassava varieties like Bwanataraka and Chole had succumbed to the African Cassava Mosaic Disease (ACMD) in the 1980s. 

The committee also noted that in all the six districts, most of the homesteads had on average two to three acres devoted to food crops. In addition, there were well prepared fields ready for second season planting if rains and planting materials were received.  

A permanent concrete silo in the formerly Kaberamaido County which used to be for collecting and storage of cereal grains for the community is no longer in use.

The committee also notes that since Teso has been the major source of groundnuts and sweet potatoes for many urban centres and Kampala City in particular, famine could soon affect the availability of such supplies to those areas.

The committee also noted that demonstration farmers, for example, Mr Amodoi James of Orukirukio village in Achang Parish in Ngariam Sub-county, Katakwi District, who had seven acres of groundnuts, and received agricultural inputs from the Prosperity-for-All programme under the NAADS framework, will find it difficult to fulfil his credit obligations, like all farmers in that category, let alone fending for the family food requirements since they have got to pay back 70 per cent of the inputs given on credit.

There is also scarcity of good quality planting materials leading to procurement of poor quality planting materials like seeds, cassava cuttings, vines, et cetera under the NAADS programme’s efforts. 

Root causes of famine in the Teso sub-region

Following the discussions with the various stakeholders, the committee identified the following as factors that contributed to the famine/food shortage situation in Teso sub-region: 

Climatic changes which led to floods, droughts and the various forms of insecurity in the sub-region.

Reduction in the food production attributed to the recent LRA war and loss of livestock through war and rustling, which made many households move to camps. 

Loss of alternative sources of food and cash from livestock products like milk, ghee, meat and hides due to cattle rustling.

The floods, which destroyed crops, followed by droughts in the year 2007. 

The 2008 and 2009 weather vagaries affected the rain patterns, hence leading to drought. The 2009 drought happened when farmers had planted extensively in an effort to increase production. The drought reduced seed germination and subsequent crop performance on yield and quality. Granaries in homes were emptied to provide emergency food sources to households. 

The destroyed eco-systems of wetlands, forests and silted water streams left lakes Kyoga, Bisinia and Opeta as the only sources of water for humans and livestock in the sub-region.

The type of food crops in farming systems being mainly annual (seasonal) crops which make them have a short-term solution under famine conditions. Additionally, the short root system of the cereal crops makes them more vulnerable to drought in comparison to deep-rooted perennials like the bananas which can withstand droughts and rejuvenate when rains come. 

The highly weathered sandy soils in many parts of the sub-region due to prolonged cultivation of the same kind of crops with no or limited use of options on land resting, crop rotation, nitrogen fixing cover crops or livestock pastures and organic or inorganic fertilizers. 

Availability of funds as at 06 July 2009

The committee learnt from MAAIF that:
In June 2009, Teso sub-region received Shs 910 million under NAADS, out of which each sub-county received Shs 13 million for food security. Currently, Shs 523 million was available within the NAADS programme at the sub-county level for procurement of seed and planting materials.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was set to release approximately Shs 600 million to sub-counties in Teso sub-region. By 17 July 2009, a total of about Shs 1.5 billion had been released excluding the Shs 600 million mentioned above. 

The sub-counties that had funds available would immediately begin procurement of the food security planting materials and all those that did not have adequate funds would start procurement with the first quarter funds.

Relief distribution by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM)

The committee was informed by the Office of the Prime Minister that Shs 10,374,212 billion was availed to it as a supplementary allocation in June 2009 for relief food emergency response to acute food shortages in 52 districts. The use of those funds is given in Annex 1 with details on amount supplied to schools and communities in Tables 1 and 2 and the distribution of hoes as promised by the President in Table 3.

Other concerns on relief distribution

The committee established that:
Action Aid, one of the NGOs in the region and the Prime Minister’s Office had been giving out food rations.

The effectiveness of the food supplies within the villages was very low as most households testified that the food could not last more than a day – a maximum of 1 mug, approximately 1 kg of maize flour, and 1 cup, which is half a kilogram of beans. 

All districts lacked sufficient relief supplies from Government and donors to overcome the effects of famine.

There were alternative sources of food supplies on sale from neighbouring districts of Karamoja, Mbale and others, but at high prices. 

There were also reports of selective distribution of food rations in all districts implying that not everybody benefits from the food supplies. This partly stemmed from lack of special considerations of vulnerable groups like families headed by the elderly, children and women, who would not struggle for the supplies.

Health Problems related to famine

The committee was informed that:
Twelve people were reported dead in Amuria District due to effects attributed to famine; 14 people in Morumenta village in Akum Parish, and 13 in Kobuin Parish both found in Acowa Sub-county, were reported to have vomited due to eating immature cassava.

At Acowa Health Centre III, there were many patients admitted, especially children and the elderly with symptoms attributed to effects associated with food deficiencies like malnutrition and dehydration. 

People living with HIV/AIDS informed the committee that they could not continue taking ARVs on empty stomachs. The mortality rates were likely to increase substantially if people living with HIV/AIDS were not given urgent attention.

The elderly people who were unable to move in search of food were seen to be near starvation. The committee encountered many such cases in Orungo Corner, formally an IDP camp in Katakwi District.  

People in the affected districts had resorted to eating immature cassava varieties which were planted before the famine. For example, one cassava variety called “Nigeria” which the committee learnt had high cyanide content at immature stages and therefore harmful to human beings if consumed in its raw form. The committee witnessed cases of vomiting and diarrhoea at Acowa Health Centre III. The details of these are in Annex II, which are abstracts from the various districts. 

Allow me to lay on the Table samples of the cassava that were being eaten by people, which if they had been the “Nigeria” type, would have been very dangerous. 

Effects of Famine on the Education Sector

In all the districts affected by the famine, many children had dropped out of school due to lack of adequate food both in homes and at school, which was likely to have an effect on candidate classes. All this information is given in Annex II attached.

Operations of the District Disaster Preparedness Committees

The committee noted that the Office of the Prime Minister was deliberately implementing direct delivery to sub-counties as opposed to district headquarters because this approach saves districts from logistical challenges of delivering the relief to the intended beneficiaries.

Since the LC III chairpersons and sub-county chiefs were the chairpersons and secretaries respectively to these sub-county SDPCs, they should be feeding the District Disaster Preparedness Committees and CAOs with reports on receipts and distributions. That is the information we got from the Minister who was with us in some of the meetings.

The recommendations from the committee are categorised into three sectors; immediate requirements, medium term and long-term and 6.1 is on immediate requirements where the committee recommends expeditious provision of relief supplies in greater amounts commensurate to the severity of the famine in Teso sub-region and in due consideration of the household sizes.

Provide appropriate planting materials and agricultural inputs for early maturing crop varieties including cow peas, which are quick sources of green vegetables in vegetative stages, and seeds for sauce when mature, and for use for planting during the next season.

Provide medical care services and supplies for the sick, children and the elderly.

The actions to meet these requirements are proposed as identification of sources of fortified foods and food rations.

Procurement of Planting Materials

Compilation of household statistics by district officials and budgeting for cost of relief food and distribution by the officers of the Office of the Prime Minister.

Identification of the needs and costs for health centres for re-hydration, malaria treatment, HIV/AIDS care services by the district directors of health services in conjunction with Office of the Prime Minister.

The medium term requirements are that it is expected that communities would plough as they expect rains. Therefore, agricultural inputs will be required in the medium term and there is need for provision of suitable quality planting seeds, animal breeds and poultry stocks.

The actions required to meet the above requirements are:

The districts should select appropriate crops and varieties for the next two seasons and procure the planting materials;

Enactment of laws, policies, ordinances and by-laws on food security and nutrition at national, district and sub-county level.

Government should expedite the enactment of laws for agricultural research on appropriate production technologies; for example, bio-technology for quick methods, and tools on utilising living organisms in development of crop varieties, livestock breeds, poultry and fish stocks and vaccines.

Also required is the Plant Variety Protection Bill for sustainable support and protection of plant breeders and seed companies, and providing high quality crop varieties and certified seeds respectively for use in the farming community.

The long-term interventions are requirements of modalities for de-silting water reservoirs in the sub-regions, a problem seen as a cause of floods.

Development of community production wells; these are simple wells which can be developed in areas before the major irrigation schemes can be put in place and MAAIF together with the districts should make a needs assessments for animal traction implements and restocking of oxen.

There is need for government to enact a law on a contingency fund for acquisition of quick mitigations on emergencies.

There is need for farmer education on climate change and land preparation.

Provision of improved crop varieties; short term maturing types and moisture-stress-tolerant varieties; and sensitisation on good husbandry practices.

Initiation of programmes on simple methods of harvesting water.

Establishing community tree nurseries; this is mitigating environmental degradation and then the need to promote ox-ploughing in sub-regions. It is actually reviving this because this region is known for the excellence in ox-ploughing.

Strengthening the extension system and formulation of by-laws on food storage like promotion of granaries and then the enactment of the Food Nutrition law since the policy on the subject matter is already in place.

The actions required under long-term are:

Government in conjunction with the private sector should work out modalities for availing heavy agricultural equipment, for example, bush clearing units; excavators for de-silting and laying pipes for irrigation; and de-silting the water reservoirs, which as I said earlier, are also leading to floods as the rains come in from the Karamoja regions and Mbale hills.

Enhancing agricultural research for safe and appropriate technologies on varieties tolerant to drought, livestock breeds, poultry and fish stocks, and on production packages.

In conclusion, the above findings clearly show that the adverse effects of climate change and other related factors on food security are real in Uganda. Therefore, the government should increase its support to the entire agricultural sector in the country, but more specifically to the districts like Mbale, Serere in Soroti District and parts of Kaberamaido, which are still productive, and hence serving as sources of food supply to the famine-stricken areas. Otherwise, those categories would also fall to the famine-stricken areas due to excess supply under the famine-stricken surrounding regions if they are not supported.

I would like to end by thanking you for having facilitated both the committee on agriculture and the Teso Parliamentary Group to undertake this assessment.

I thank the Teso Parliamentary Group for the cordial working relationship we had with them during this assignment. I thank the local governments in the six Teso sub-region districts and the community as a whole.

I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chair and your committee. I also want to thank you for the speed with which you acted and also the fact that although it was about Teso, the recommendations are really applicable for the whole country. We thank you for your foresight.

12.22
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I also want to thank the committee for this report. Teso being part of my constituency, I know it was so much affected by the famine and most of the people who were affected are persons with disabilities. But what surprises me is that when directives are given, they talk about the elderly and people affected with HIV/AIDS, leaving out persons with disabilities. I am not happy with that arrangement. 

Whereas it is true that these vagaries were natural, some areas are facing food shortages because they do not have cash crops. The food they grow is what they sell to get money to run their day-to-day activities. For example, previously in Busoga, we used to have cotton, but where is it now? Teso used to have cattle - Soroti Meat Packers; where is it? These are issues, which we need to revisit and see where we have competitive advantages as zones. I think that if we still had our cash crops as before, we would not be having many problems of food shortage. 

The report talks about the NAADS programme; I sometimes sympathise with my brother, the Minister of Agriculture, hon. Bagire. NAADS has been a very big problem in this country. We allocate money here, but it ends up in people’s pockets. In fact, unless we review the NAADS Act, we shall continue lamenting that NAADS has not helped this country. 

The money we give to NAADS has done very little to help solve the problem of food shortage in this country. There used to be a department in the Ministry of Water and Environment to do with water for production. In countries where there is shortage of water, they use irrigation. And these dry countries are now giving us food relief. We claim to be naturally gifted yet we continue to languish. Why don’t we revamp this directorate if at all it exists, so that we can have water for production and stop depending on the natural rains? I beg that the government does something about water for production.

Last but not least, I do believe that this country has the capacity to engage in water harvesting. At the end of the day, that water can be used for production when the drought comes. If you look at the countryside, most of the houses are roofed with iron sheets. These are potential ventures for water harvesting and we can use that water for food production. 

I propose that government engages in some of these ventures. When shall we stop crying about food insecurity? We have a fully-fledged Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which should give us a roadmap. What is their 20-year plan for this country? We should stop gambling. 

When it comes to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, how prepared are we for these challenges? The floods swept all the gardens in Teso sub-region, but the ministry was just looking on. And when relief was given, they gave only one kilogram and for planting materials, they gave rotten seeds! What is it that we are looking for? We need to be honest as a country. Do to others as you would want them to do to you. Why should people continue to die as we look on? I think we should come up with a policy as the legislators, to help this country stop lamenting. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member talked of rotten seeds and rotten food. I want him to give some evidence because the committee does not say so.

12.28
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora Country, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee on Agriculture for their dedication and resilience during this field tour. It was quite challenging, but I thank you for your resilience. 

The committee produced a very informative report and on page 5, they categorised the districts and sub-counties according to the severity of the famine. Category one is very severe, and then the severe ones are in category two; my concern is on the response that government made towards mitigating the situation there. 

Whereas the President, according to the report gave a directive that there should be increased amount of relief to food-stricken areas, I beg to report that in Kumi District, for example, under category one, Kapiri and Mukula sub-counties got supplies only once and moreover at the rate that the committee has attested to; about one mug of posho and half a mug of beans per household. 

An average household there is six people. A mother testified before the committee how her children humiliated her after she prepared porridge and they asked her whether she had prepared milk because it was so dilute that it did not look like porridge. 

Onyino sub-country only got supplies twice and in fact the last supplies were delivered mid last month, I think. These supplies were just a gesture of sharing the problem but really fell short of helping the families out of the situation. 

On a sad note, we have come through different cycles; for a long time in the past, we had very severe floods in the Teso sub-region which were immediately followed by drought. Both problems affected the crop yields. As we speak now, floods have again started in Teso. It is a cycle, which is causing a lot of suffering.

This morning I brought it to the attention of the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that one of the sub-counties in my constituency, Ngora sub-county and Nyamongo parish in particular, had a number of acres mowed down by a heavy hailstorm on the 10th of this month. Now they are compiling the data and getting more information on the matter, which I hope to submit to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. 

When you come to the issue of relief supplies to the schools - the primary and secondary schools - we appreciate that this could be one way of reducing the number of school drop outs and improving school attendance. However, a number of communities are wondering why the government has decided to completely forget about the local communities and taken some little supplies to the schools for preparation of porridge. Unfortunately again, a number of schools are also unable to cope with the demand for porridge. 

I would like to urge the government to come up with a very clear position on school feeding. This is because tomorrow after the food supplies from the centre to the various schools run out, we shall get back to the same position because the food situation in the families has not changed. We shall continue to grapple with food shortages and immediately there is no more food in the schools, our children are likely to drop out. Moreover – (Member timed out_) 

12.34
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I also want to thank the committee. 

Today let me prefix my remarks by telling this House that in the Bible days, according to the book of Genesis, there was a famine in Egypt and Egypt knew how to manage a famine better than Uganda. Egypt had silos. That was thousands of years ago. In Uganda, we do not store anything and we oscillate in a cycle. We have floods this week, we move to droughts next week and then famine the other week. 

The government is not going to consider strategic interventions. I am telling you in the face of global climatic changes, we will keep coming to this House over and over again. Until government helps the farmers to harvest water when there are floods and store it for production, until government helps us or shows us how to store the excess food, until we find interventions that allow us to get fast-maturing food, we will come back to this House.

I want to tell the committee that since you left Teso, the moderate areas have gone to severe. I also want to thank the committee because their report provides comfort to the people of Teso. The report observed acres and acres of weathered crops. I hope now the government knows that the Iteso are neither lazy nor drunkards. I also hope the government will call its ministers to order and they apologise to the people of Teso for these reckless statements. The committee saw acres and acres of weathered food. You cannot be a drunkard and lazy and afford to have ten acres of maize like the ones the committee saw. We demand an apology from the government because of the reckless statements made by the ministers.

Let me go to the specifics. Regarding planting materials as recommended by the committee, our major concern right now is the decision by the Ministry of Agriculture to centralise procurement. Even with cassava stems, which are locally available, districts are being told to provide Lorries to go and get these materials from Kisoro. We are concerned. Instead of maximising the little money Parliament has, some people are actually making money out of the famine situation. We are concerned and want the Ministry of Agriculture to re-organise this so that we get more from the little money the famine-stricken areas were allocated.

If you talk about Soroti District, we have not received relief food yet. It is only the schools that received food. The households have not received even the four kilogrammes per month. Instead, when there was food that was supposed to be taken to Gweri sub-county, it was handed over to the Movement chairperson who decided to use it for campaigns -(Interjections)- yes, I am telling you, for 2011. If you could help the Government Chief Whip to keep quiet a little and I say what should be said; the food was diverted. The little food, the only food that was meant for Gweri sub-county, was diverted for launching a Movement campaign called Hakuna Kulala where people are being beaten in Soroti. They are not sleeping. We need food as directed by the President. It should be taken there. 

I want this House to pay attention to the upcoming floods. Already people are reported dead because of floods in Amuria District. If we do not intervene to help people relocate, to help people prepare in terms of health hazards and to provide food before areas are cut off, we will continue with the same problem. I thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I appreciate what you have said about the government not utilising the silos but I have not yet understood why the local governments, which are elected everywhere, are unable to enforce by-laws for storage. Nobody talks about the local governments. The silos are in Jinja, the food is in Malera. I hope someone will tell us what to do because the local governments are elected everywhere.  

12.39
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. I want clarification from the minister because according to the list of supplies in this report, they last got food in July this year and that is about three months ago. How are those people surviving now?

Secondly, I want to know the criteria used to access relief supplies from the ministry. In my constituency, about five days ago we had a heavy storm which destroyed houses and crops in almost three parishes in one of my sub-counties. I have tried to seek for help from these offices but I have not got it. I wanted to find out how we can access such help. It is not the first time this has happened. In the Seventh Parliament I had a similar problem. I tried the Prime Minister’s Office but it was not helpful. The people think that you are not helping them and yet it is because the existing offices cannot help. 

According to this report they say that the stores that existed in which they used to keep cereals were vandalised and they are no longer functioning. I want to find out whether there is a programme by government to keep food in order to prepare for such problems like drought and hunger. I remember when the NRM had just come to power, they built silos in some parts of Uganda; there was one in Kyazanga, for instance. That project took a lot of money. Huge silos were constructed but they have been abandoned. I believe that they are now being hired by private people or they are just empty. That money was wasted. 

I remember when I was studying in Kenya, every after a season, the government would buy maize from farmers and store it in silos in Eldoret, Bungoma, Kisumu to prepare for the hard times. I do not think our government has that kind of arrangement.  

Lastly, in Mpigi we had a similar problem of drought. I have seen in this report they have allocated only 40,000 kilogrammes of maize and 12,000 kilogrammes of beans. This is Gomba County and it has about 250,000 people. You intend to distribute only 40,000 kilogrammes of maize to 250,000 people! I think it would be better to just leave it. You might find that they will use more money to distribute these supplies than what they will have actually used to buy the maize and beans. 

I request the Minister to tell me how much was spent in Kabulasoke and Maddu. These places were affected most. I have a brother there and he told me that he only got half a kilogramme of beans. This is a man who has about ten people in his house but he just got half a kilogramme of beans and one kilogramme of maize flour.  

12.45
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you. We have a very big challenge in this country and since our economy is a free market economy, as government we need to help our people. 

In a free market economy, the forces of supply and demand prevail. We are having a challenge in the rural areas because of the high demand of these products in Sudan, Kenya and DR Congo. People in the villages are selling everything and reserving nothing for themselves. The famine that we are talking about is going to expand to the whole country if we do not do something as government. We need to help our people. 

When I was a young boy, it was mandatory for every family to reserve some produce in the granary. Let the Ministry of Agriculture work closely with local governments to make sure that in every homestead, granaries are stocked before produce is sold. Otherwise, our people are going to continue dying because they are even selling the seeds now. You can go to a home and find that one does not even have seeds to plant in the next season. So, this should become mandatory so that every homestead stocks their granaries and reserves some seeds instead of selling off everything.

As government, we have the role of protecting farmers because they are being manipulated by middlemen. When these people go there, they even buy the crops while still in the garden before they are even ready. They underpay the farmers. When the time for harvesting comes, you find that they paid Shs 300 for a kilogramme of maize when the current market price is Shs 800 or Shs 1,000. So this issue –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I actually support what the honourable member is saying in as far as people selling all the food and leaving nothing in their stores is concerned. Maize leaves Kiboga for Juba as maize grain. The problem that is going to arise now is that under Prosperity-for-All, where we are encouraging people to do poultry farming to get daily income, the chicken feeds for poultry and piglets will not be there. This is because maize is being sold as maize grain and not as maize flour. 

On the second issue of helping farmers to address the issue of middlemen, on the second pillar of Prosperity-for-All, under value addition and marketing, it emphasises group production and marketing. This is where one of the members is given the responsibility of looking for the market to sell to on behalf of the group. Otherwise, if we do not guide our people, the middlemen may become another problem. Thank you.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you, honourable minister, for that information. 

Madam Speaker, the other point is that we were very happy when last financial year’s budget was read with the element of helping our farmers in groups to get maize milling machines, coolers for those in milk production and juice extractors for those in fruit production. However, in my constituency, whenever I go to meet the electorate I do not see anybody who has benefited from this. I do not know whether the people in other constituencies have already benefited from this. 

I would like to find out from the honourable minister what happened to the money that was budgeted to help farmers secure these agricultural in-puts for value addition. I am asking this question because I have never seen anything of the sort in the 29 districts that I represent in this Parliament. This information is very important because many of the youth engaged in agriculture production cannot access these facilities. So, where is the programme being implemented? Is it is western, central or northern Uganda? I have not seen anything of this sort in eastern Uganda, and I am saying this in an honest way. 

I would like to report that people are getting frustrated with only producing things without adding value to them. They think that they are being manipulated by the middlemen. If the farmers access these programmes, they can add value to their products and earn good money. If somebody has a maize mill, for example, instead of selling a kilogramme at Shs 300, they can sell it at about Shs 1,400. That is why we need to ask the ministry to help our people in that line by telling us where in Uganda we have this programme being implemented? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we hear from hon. Byanyima, I just want to inform the House that in Busoga, in the old days, every home was required to have three granaries. The first one would be opened on the authority of the head of the home, the second on the authority of the Gombolola Chief and the third one on the instructions of the Kyabazinga. What I am saying is that they ensured food security and you could not touch them until the chief authorised the opening. If the Kyabazinga did not say “open”, nobody would open such a granary. That brought about food security.

12.51
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for the work that was done and especially when I am reliably informed that during their tour, the members went with colleagues from Teso region.

However, it is unfortunate that we are discussing this report on a Cabinet day. I would have loved to see all the ministers here as we discuss this issue. I am saying this because it is now no longer an issue for hon. Kabwegyere alone. No! It is an issue that touches all of us. We should sit and discuss it because it is becoming dangerous and affecting a very large part of the country. Disasters are happening everywhere in the country.

When we are voting for money, we think of only Shs 10 billion. However, I understand there is no money now for disaster preparedness; it is already used up. The minister cannot pay the suppliers yet this is just the beginning of the disasters. I think we need a whole day to seriously discuss this issue with technical people advising us. There must be a change of heart. It is true we no longer have food but that is because we have left the work to only women. The men in this country spend most of the time drinking and for the young men, on boda boda. I can tell you that this is happening everywhere, even in Mbarara.

The time some of us were born, there were district farm institutes that usually gave guidance on what people were supposed to be doing. This NAADS thing, I really do not know what I can call it, does not touch the lives of our people. All of us need to put in some effort to guide our people. This business of politics should stop in regards to food. 

We used to get the best potatoes from Teso region and the best matooke from our side. These days however, you can drive from Mbarara up to Masaka without seeing a lorry full of matooke, and this means the whole country has been affected by climatic changes. That is why I would have loved the Minister of Water and Environment here so that we can tackle this issue holistically rather than just thinking of the Teso and Karamoja regions.

The Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness should stop diplomacy. Please, demand the money that you need to deliver food aid to the people of Uganda. We do not want to blame you for anything. 

Madam Speaker, you said that people used to own granaries, but when you move out of town you cannot see any granary anywhere these days. This could be due to lack of by-laws. 

This issue also touches the Ministry of Works and Transport because some trucks cannot reach certain places to supply food due to lack of passable roads. That is why I am saying this issue concerns everybody.

Yesterday I said that when we were being sworn in in 1996, the Chief Justice said that Ugandans ought to change their attitudes and be like Americans. He added that an attack on one American is an attack on all Americans. This is not there in Uganda because an attack on one Ugandan is all about shauri yako, which cannot make sense. Let us come out and be vigilant to keep what the colonialists left for us. My sense is that we have now shifted our intentions and programmes to this modern thing called NAADS where a person has to buy even cow dung and cassava stems from Kisoro. Since when has Kisoro ever been good at producing cassava? (Laughter) People are doing this because they are in it only for the money. 

Colleagues, let us be more serious. I know that the report is a good one, but it would be okay for us to discuss it when all the ministers are here. That would enable us look out for the root causes of the hunger. This is so shameful for Uganda, the Pearl of Africa. You can now see the rains falling and plantations have been destroyed by hailstorms. Hon. Kabwegyere, will you be able to feed these Ugandans?

In my area, we normally receive refugees. Even when you go away from your home to look for food, it will never be enough –(Member timed out_)

12.56
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nathan Byanyima for the proposal that he has put to this House. I support this idea because when you look at the presence of the people supposed to sit on the Front Bench, the issue we are discussing goes beyond the offices of the ministers we see here. 

Today is the International Disaster Risk Reduction Day and I expected that probably the Minister of Disaster Preparedness would have made a statement –(Interjections)- but there is nothing. (Laughter) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: My office is made up of two ministers and my minister of state, hon. Eweru, has been leading that effort on the Disaster Risk Reduction Day. He has been walking on the streets and he is there to do that job and I am here to do this job. 

MR OLENY: Well, the reason I brought that to the attention of the House is because this is the organ that informs this country on issues of national importance. If we have not talked about it here, then it makes me worry that indeed we need to appoint a day when this Parliament should spare time and discuss issues pertaining to disasters in this country. We should only now use the Teso case as a wakeup call. 

Listening to comments from honourable colleagues, I also want to agree that it is not only Teso that has been affected by food stress and famine but also other parts of the country. It even goes further to underline one point - it is not enough for us to just stand and say what has government done, what has Parliament said about this. This goes beyond the Government of Uganda alone. This is because there are fundamental issues of climatic change for which developing countries must now all come up and get united in action. 

Very soon, there will be a debate on climatic change issues in Copenhagen in December. You can imagine for us in Uganda we have not even heard what our concerns and offensive interests would be in this whole issue. So, the point by hon. Byanyima is very important and with your guidance, Madam Speaker, you should provide Parliament with an opportunity to deal with these issues in detail. We would expect the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Local Government and so on to give a statement on this issue. 

Having said that, allow me to thank the committee which took time off and really did a great job. This report can engage this House for debate for the rest of today if it were allowed, or possible, but because of time I am sure that very soon we shall be leaving it and just rush on to store it. 

Let me also thank government for whatever little response was availed to the people of Teso. I am saying this because I have been in touch with the people on the ground. However little the assistance was, the people have unreservedly thanked government and that is why I must put it on record. However little the assistance was, the people of Katakwi said, “Thank government for the little that we have received”, and I am willing to put this on record. 

It is, however, also clear that the government response was not adequate to the challenge that was caused by the famine both in terms of the response raised and also in terms of the resources. On this note, allow me to thank His Excellency the President who also personally visited the region at the most difficult time of need for the people of Teso. His intervention indeed guided the actions of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness because after that, we saw some deliveries to the sub–counties not only of Katakwi but also in the other districts of Teso. 

One of the critical issues I should make mention of, is what one of the honourable colleagues did mention. As a House which appropriates money, we must express our concern as to why we have paid very little attention to the contingency fund –(Member timed out_) 

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you. I want to take this opportunity to first of all –(Interruption) 

MR MUWUMA: Is it procedurally right for hon. Mugyenyi, who is a committee member, to debate –(Interjection)- and yet she even signed this report?      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, I am sorry I had not looked at the list. Did you want to rise on a point of information, hon. Mary Mugyenyi? Okay, we shall get information from the Government Chief Whip.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you. As we are all aware, we are extremely lucky that hon. Mary Mugyenyi has been elected to chair meetings of the African Union. As you will all agree with me, this subject of famine is an African problem. Her contribution to this debate will greatly -(Interjections)- enrich us in finding a way forward to overcoming the famine problems in this country. Madam Speaker, I thought that in your guiding this House in regard to her contribution, you would also take this into consideration so that we can benefit from the knowledge she has been able to take on board as she interacts with many other governments on the African continent. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a technical difficulty because she signed the report. You will give information since you signed the report. 

1.05 
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and I want to thank government for the short-term interventions that it offered at that time when our brothers and sisters were having it rough when they were seriously struck by famine. 

Just like colleagues have alluded to the concern of having serious provisions on water for production, there are countries where this has been given priority. Malawi is one of the success stories when it comes to funding or prioritising water for production as the only solution that could increase food production in a country. It is in Malawi that the continent of Africa managed to have surplus food after getting what the whole nation could consume. I think our ministry, especially the Ministry of Water and Environment, should borrow a leaf from the Government of Malawi. 

I feel perturbed in a way because in the last financial year’s budget, the Minister for Water and Environment did promise this House that all the dams that were silted were going to be de-silted and we all got excited. You know that Iganga is a land locked district and we only have one dam in the district called Namadope, which we now call Lake Namadope. They promised that it was one of those that were going to be de-silted because it serves as the last resort when we are struck by water shortages in Iganga town and in the whole region. It is my humble prayer that the Minister of Water and Environment also picks interest in this matter such that we have enough water for our community. 

The issue of mechanisation should be given the necessary attention it deserves. According to the Teso terrain, the landscape is very ideal for mechanised agriculture but last weekend, I was in Bukedea and you can hardly find a tractor. Apart from recommending ox ploughs, I think in order to increase on food production it is better that we also address the issue of deploying tractors to increase on production such that our country gets enough food for our people. 

Madam Speaker, on page 11 they talk of selective distribution of food rations to all districts. Just like hon. Mutuluuza stated, I have complained to this House about the criteria of accessing relief supplies from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and I have never got an answer. Iganga has been hit thrice by serious hailstorms. We wrote to them but I feel that this is a ministry where either by design or deliberate move, certain people are not entitled to relief supplies. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness requires serious –(Laughter)- I thank you very much. 

1.10
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all I also want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a detailed report. I also thank government for the interventions so far provided to the communities that have been affected by this famine. 

Thirdly, I want to thank his Excellency the President for having taken time off his busy schedule and visited the area especially in our time of need. That was during the famine and also at that time when we were hit by the floods. When his Excellency the President visited the region, he made a commitment that immediate food relief should be provided to schools and to households affected. He also made further commitments for the medium-term that ox ploughs be provided and oxen and tractors in the long term. 

I want to comment on the immediate interventions that were recommended by his Excellency the President. One of them was provision of hand hoes so that communities are able to dig or heap potatoes especially when the rains return. The rains returned long ago but today in this report, I can only see a schedule of how they intend to distribute the hoes. I really want to know when we will get the hoes because the rains started about two months ago. The communities need immediate interventions to use these hoes to heap potatoes so that as soon as the next season of drought starts, at least we have something to eat and not this perpetual vicious cycle of hand outs especially in terms of food. So, I really want to know from the minister when we will be getting the hoes.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give you information that the African heads of State and Government committed themselves to allocating 10 percent of their budgets to agriculture. I want to thank government for the assistance that is being given to Teso but I think we need to deal with the problem fundamentally by addressing Agriculture as a sector. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that we need to press and make sure that our government contributes a bigger percentage of the national budget to Agriculture because this is the agreed position. Countries like Malawi have already done it; for example, the former Minister of Agriculture of Malawi is now the President and that country, dry as it is, is not suffering the problems of food shortage even though they have climate change like we do. I will give another piece of information later but thank you. What is happening to that 10 percent of the national budget that is supposed to go to Agriculture? 

MS AKOL: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, medium-term interventions were also recommended by His Excellency and I believe the medium-term is now, because the immediate should have been provided then. But I also do not see the oxen, I do not see the ox ploughs and the rains are there. What are we waiting for? And of course, there are no tractors in the long-term, as hon. Muwuma has stated. Even if it is tractor hire scheme, I believe the communities will be able to adequately fund themselves to use these tractors to open up land. 

I want to say that the core issue here is actually climate change and environmental degradation. When you move to Teso right now, and I want to speak for my district Bukedea, you can see it is – just like they say - the end of the world because you can now see up to the skyline because there are no trees and this is one of the major issues. Trees have been cut. So, this is one of the issues that need to be addressed. 

The challenge is: How do we intend to address these issues as a country in order to mitigate the effects of global warming or climate change and the effects to our communities? This needs to be addressed urgently and as Parliament, I really want to see a statement or a policy document from the relevant ministries on how they intend to address this challenge. Otherwise, the issue of having OPM or the Minister of Disaster Preparedness all the time budgeting for food to address issues that can be addressed permanently by solving the issue of climate change and environmental degradation; and having hand outs to our communities is actually very degrading even to the person receiving that handout and in our communities. We do not believe in hand outs. 

Therefore, much as we are addressing the short-term effects of this hunger and floods, I really want to see the relevant ministries coming up with a long-term solution to this problem so that we do not receive hand outs as the measures to address these issues over the long run –(Member timed out_)

1.17 
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. For the years that I have been here at Parliament, floods hit a certain part of the country every year and it has been worse with Teso but I have been asking myself, what is the country doing to solve these problems? Every year floods come and every year, droughts come in. What is government doing that is of strategic nature to address this problem? We all know that the problem is climate change. What are those long-term initiatives that government has put in place to address the issue of climate change? 

We have a number of times asked about the policy document of disaster preparedness and management. Some time back, the minister assured us that a disaster preparedness and management policy would be coming in five months. I think it is now coming to a year but we have this policy in place. 

We are very quick to announce that problems will be coming. Recently, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness informed the nation that El-Nino would be coming but so what? When you tell my old mother in Ndorwa West that El-Nino is coming, what do you expect her to do? Indeed the landslides came recently in Kabale and we informed the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. Well, let me not sound like I am favouring my region alone but I think we should share even the little that we have as a nation, equally. 

We were hit by landslides in Ndorwa West in March but not even one seedling of beans was distributed. There was not even a word of comfort from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. We were hit by a landslide two weeks ago and there was not even a statement from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. Clearly, I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is becoming a disaster -(Laughter)- we really need to be serious with all regions. 

Madam Speaker, I welcome the committee’s recommendation about the contingency fund. I think there is no country that can prepare sufficiently for emergencies if we do not have a contingency fund. I welcome that recommendation and I hope that the Ministry of Finance will look into this to bring the law into place as soon as possible. Thank you. 

1.21 
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work done. This report is good and I think it has some generalisations. If we look at other parts of the country, they are also equally affected but I would like to thank the Teso Parliamentary Group for raising this issue. You are teaching us the way forward because as my colleagues are complaining, when you go and report as an individual, I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness does not respond. 

I would like to call upon my colleagues in Toro Parliamentary group to also emulate the example of Teso Parliamentary Group. This is because we have also had disasters in our region. We had the ADF insurgency and we have been hit by the Banana Wilt Disease. There was also a time when a whole parish in three villages of Buryanyengye, Nyabushozi and Kyamukerege were swept by a storm. I brought the pictures and wrote to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but nothing was done. 

I would like to thank Teso Parliamentary Group because in the attachment here, they say they got all this in their region. They should congratulate themselves. My colleague, hon. Epetait was saying the porridge in schools is not enough. There are very many children attending school and they are also having the same problem. On a good note, you should really appreciate government’s effort. I would like to differ from my hon. Bahati who called the Minister of Disaster Preparedness a disaster. Really, the minister has tried. If you look at this Shs 10 billion that he managed to secure and send to Teso and you call that minister a disaster, I think that is unfair to Prof. Kabwegyere. In fact, I want to agree with hon. Byanyima that we need to handle this problem holistically. We need an inter-ministerial approach in solving this problem. As Parliament, we are the people who do the appropriation and we must give more money to Prof. Kabwegyere.

I agree that this is a very big problem not only for Teso. I hear hon. Nankabirwa saying it is also in her area. We should have a full session on this and have the Ministry of Environment here to see how we balance the eco-systems; have the Ministry of Health on how we can make interventions in primary health care; the Works Minister in charge of roads reaching the peasant farmers; the Agriculture Minister most important for monitoring our NAADS programmes and how we can modernise and commercialise agriculture.

As hon. Mary Mugyenyi has said, the Minister of Finance should also be on board to increase the ceiling for money going to the Ministry of Agriculture and Parliament for the appropriation. Many times they bring a supplementary budget here and some colleagues do not want to approve but when it is approved you hear that they have benefited. The same people who were refusing to approve are the same people now benefiting from the supplementary budget. So, I would like to call upon everybody that this problem needs collective responsibility and effort. I am sure we shall defeat these disasters. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the teachers and pupils of Kibuuka Memorial Primary School in Mawokota County represented by hon. Mutuluuza and hon. Namirembe Bitamazire. You are welcome.

1.26
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the committee for the good work done. First and foremost, we must know that naturally God had given us this country with free rain and free food because you would just plant one bean seed and it would germinate and produce more seeds. 

The rainfall patterns have changed drastically through our own making because of the degradation of our soils, deforestation and all types of environmental destruction. This calls for government to be more serious this time round and ensure that water harvesting is made into a proper policy and implemented. This is because policies have been made here but most or none of them are effectively implemented. 

This is something that has to do with the right to food, which is a human right. You cannot survive without eating and it is the obligation of the state to ensure that its citizens have something to eat. We are going to have more problems if we do not harvest water. 

It is also high time we implemented irrigation. Irrigation is practised by countries like Egypt. If you go to Egypt, you wonder how rich they are regarding food while using the little water that they get. This is because they use it very sparingly while gaining from it. They even recycle the water that they use but here we are so wasteful with water and we are not bothered about irrigation. Let us get some technocrats from such countries to help us out regarding irrigation. Otherwise, we are going to have a very big problem.

Colleagues have expressed fear regarding the poverty that is biting people to the extent that they end up selling their own food forgetting that they should eat. I think the only alternative that needs to be emphasised here is to ensure the revival of national co-operatives. I think the co-operatives will help us out greatly. 

We are looking at value addition. We know very well that co-operatives used to help us in terms of employing our youth and people would not go hungry. They would get money and sell their produce as a group and that was more gainful. I believe that the policy of value addition is going to be more gainful instead of individuals who may add value but at a poor rate. That is why I want our government to look into this.

I cannot forget to thank the Minister for Disaster Preparedness for the effort that he has put in. I know he is doing it through hardship because of the small envelop that we normally give out when we supply so we should appreciate the little that he has done. I thank you very much.

1.30
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Dr Serunjogi and his committee for a well written report. I also thank them for the recommendations and actions to be taken. It was really very good. I also thank government for whatever they have supplied so far. I think our colleagues from Teso must be very grateful for this because some of us have written several times but have got nothing. Now that you have got, you must be very grateful to government; they tried their level best, with the little money we have, to assist your people. 

In addition, in this report they have talked about NAADS. Let me take this opportunity to inform the Ministry of Agriculture that a lot needs to be done about NAADS. We cannot say that NAADS should handle famine. In fact, we might come to a point where we say, “Money for NAADS should be stopped.” There is just theft in NAADS. They are just stealing money. I was in my constituency recently buying a kilo of beans at Shs 4,000 and giving it to farmers to plant. How can you make money like that? The committee thought that NAADS was a good idea but the Ministry of Agriculture has to do something because NAADS is just a den of thieves. They are doing nothing. (Laughter)

I was disappointed to see on page 11 that there has been selective distribution of this emergency food. My colleagues in Teso region, you leaders, hunger does not know party or religion. Hunger affects everybody. Please, when they bring food, do not look at your party or religion. You give food to those who deserve to get it. This selective distribution should be condemned in the strongest terms possible. 

I have also noted in this report that the Office of the Prime Minister did the distribution, thus short circuiting the district officials. I think this was wrong. The Office of the Prime Minister should involve the district and sub-county officials otherwise these are some of the issues that bring about conflicts. People at the district will start conflicting with those at the sub-county and then start accusing themselves over things which should not happen.  

On water for agriculture, I think we have talked and talked. Why don’t we just borrow a leaf from Egypt? These people are just following the Nile and irrigating from the Nile. Do not think about irrigating in Luwero. Let us follow the Nile where there is water and we start with the Nile.

When you move from Cairo going to Alexandria at the Red Sea, you just see matooke as far as your eye can see. We are in the desert following the Nile. Why can’t our people from Jinja irrigate at least 10 kilometres on either side of the Nile up to where the Nile stops so that we get some food instead of trying to say there is no water in Isingiro when there is water along the Nile? I think let us start where there is water.

Lastly, and I have said this before, these reports should be made simple for people to understand. When I look at the attachments, they say, “We have given so many kilograms.” Somewhere else they say, “We have given tonnes.” Somewhere they say, “We have given so many cartons.” What is a carton? Tell people what they understand, for example, that, “So many litres of cooking oil have been given out”. But when you talk of cartons, my mother does not know a carton. You are talking of a tonne but my mother has never bought tonnes of anything. Use units that these people understand. For example, say, “We distributed so many kilograms or litres.” These are units that the ordinary person uses. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.34
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, you did a very good thing to direct this committee to go and assess the situation on the ground. Because of your directive, the real situation on the ground has been put into perspective. We want to thank our colleagues and government for listening to the voices of the people. 

As usually, when these issues were raised, there were a number of responses from government. One, the President came to Teso ahead of his Minister of Disaster Preparedness. I do not know whether he brought a report to the minister because, to the best of my memory, I did not see the minister in my area. 

I want to appreciate the work of the committee but I think because of mother tongue interference there have been places whose names have been misspelt. With your permission I will provide the accurate spelling of the names of these places. We do not have Tubur, Amoro and Matheniko in Teso. For purposes of our records I will provide the accurate spelling of the names of these places.

We are headed for a very big problem. If rain does not fall throughout the country for just six months, we shall have problems because I think we are just not determined to solve the problem. Look at the report on page 5; Kapir, Mukura, Kumi, Ongino, Malera and Kolir are all sub-counties that are found on the belt of Lake Bisinia. You find the crops dry here and yet there is a big mass of water just by the side of the dry gardens. What are we planning to do? 

When I was in Namibia last month, I was thinking that if Ugandans were transferred there and Namibians brought here we would all die in the shortest time possible. In Namibia, there are areas where it rains for just three days in a year but people are alive. Their children know that rivers are made of sand because they do not see water. They recycle water to use. In the city of Vendu, from 1969 they have been recycling water from the washrooms; that is the water that they use in the city for bathing, drinking and everything. What are we doing in Uganda? When disaster hits the first thing they do is to blame the Opposition. “This is the talk of the Opposition.” 

I want to reiterate the information given by hon. Alaso that Teso is not a place with lazy people and drunkards. We were hit by famine because of problems of climatic change. 

I would also like to raise the issue of the intervention of the Ministry of Agriculture. The Ministry of Agriculture has come up with a tractor hire scheme but we have problems. Ordinarily, you would hire a tractor in Teso at Shs 50,000 to Shs 60,000 to plough a garden. Then the ministry came with a scheme, which is restricted and controlled at Shs 90,000 per acre. Who is behind this scheme? Shs 90,000 just for ploughing one acre? 

And two, when you look at the soil profiles of that region, you do not really need tractors, the best option is ox ploughs and oxen. We would like to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture to review this programme and we are wondering how cassava cuttings can be carried from Kisoro to Kabelebyong when you have Serere Research Station, you have plenty of cassava in Pallisa, in Ngora; what is the problem? We will not be surprised to hear that the next one will be coming from Bunya.

MS BEATRICE LAGADA: I would like to give you information that I have just come back from Amoru where I have a farm. I was informing the district NAADS coordinator that I have a lot of cassava plantation on my farm and if they want to buy cuttings for the people, they can get it. He told me that it is not possible because the ministry is getting cassava cuttings from, of all places, Fort Portal. I was left speechless.

MR MALINGA: You can see the trouble we are in. We would like the Ministry of Agriculture to clearly do what is useful and cost effective for our people. In Amuria for instance, hon. Ecweru has a very big farm of cassava, we can buy from there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members in my district I have directed local procurement because there is a time they brought animals from Bushenyi and they died because there was a quarantine. I have directed the NAADS people that I want local procurement for local resources.

1.41
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative): I will begin by thanking you, Madam Speaker, for having dispatched the Committee on Agriculture to Teso. I thank the committee for the work well done. When I looked at this document and the way it was presented, it reminded me of one time when we had gone to lobby for support at the height of the insurgency in the Northern region. People tried to offer us support, they said, “Maybe you need a disaster management committee at district level”, we said we had one even down to the sub-county level. “Maybe you now need the Ministry of Disaster Management”, we said we had one in the office of the Prime Minister, “Do you have a policy on disaster management?” We said we had. 

Then one person laughed and said Ugandans are very good in producing fantastic documents that are not implemented. They even gave the example of a lower country, which, because of diplomatic reasons, I will not mention. We have the capacity to plan and even come out with workable documents but somehow we do not use them.

I just want to handle the issue of equity in distribution especially in these relief items. Disaster situations are very fluid, and they are also prone to bringing other disasters, or conflicts. I want to give an example on page 10, of Lira. The minister was either misled by putting counties under sub-counties or they were disguising something. Look at Nos. 71 and 72, these are sub-counties and then 73, 74 and 75, which are counties. Page 10 on the annex where they have given us the list of how the distribution was made; how do you for example - I represent all these counties - how do you give two sub-counties quantities, which are equal to those of three counties? 

For example, pick Moroto, it has about 300,000 people and Otuke in total has about 80,000. But now they are saying Moroto, Erute North and Erute South are sub counties. I want this record corrected. These are counties with over 400,000 people.

On planting materials, I am shocked that in Lira, where other districts are getting planting materials from, we are being told we must get ours from Arua. I want to find out from my whip if they have enough cassava cuttings. In Lira we have enough cassava cuttings, planting more gardens for some farmers but they have refused. They have asked the people to get from Arua. I want this investigated.

The minister, when you asked your members, the commissioners, their other staff to take food right to the sub-counties, I want to offer you information that I worked in disaster areas and I know how leakages take place from Kampala to the actual persons, the beneficiaries. You may find that the people you have sent do not want to pass through the districts because they want to sell and use some of these things -(Interjections)- I am just giving you information and I do not want to put you to task and I do not want you to take me to task. It is just information, which is useful. 

Madam Speaker, the value for money audit must be done on this, it is important; it will help the minister; it will help us; it will even help the people who receive these items -(Member timed out_)

1.47
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): We are debating a report on Teso sub-region but I would like to beg the House to use Teso as a representative of other parts of the country, which are equally affected by famine. When the committee was in Teso, some little food was being delivered in Kitgum and elsewhere. So, we should use Teso as a sample representing all parts of the country. But my bigger point is that we have been lamenting about lack of performance on the part of our government year in, year out.  

I think the most serious problem we have in this country is the impotence of the NRM Government; the government is a non-performer –(Laughter)– yes the people of Uganda should discard this government since we are saying anything impotent must be divorced, the government should be divorced. (Laughter) You cannot have a national government distributing –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: I have much respect for our senior legislator, hon. Okello-Okello but is he in order to use un-Parliamentary language – to use words of that magnitude to a government that has performed for the last 24 years; a government that has delivered children through UPE, USE, NAADS and all these programmes –(Interjection)– to use a word that is close to obscene and un-Parliamentary, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member that language is very un-Parliamentary. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have been a Member of Parliament since the Sixth Parliament and I know that Parliament is part of government where hon. Okello-Okello is a member. Is he in order to continue participating in a venture, which is impotent; where he is a member and continues to be part of that impotent association because he is part of government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have already ruled that the word “impotent” should really not relate to the government because we are not dealing with sex. (Laughter) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was talking figuratively. (Laughter) A serious government cannot distribute one kilogramme of posho and a mug of beans to a family for one month; it cannot happen. A sensible government cannot do it. Actually, you are telling these people that they should die, but bit by bit; that is what the government is saying.

The situation we have has not come suddenly. In fact, we shall be talking about the same thing here next year because it is coming again and it is going to be worse. Yet this government will still be looking on. And this is my disappointment; how long are we going to come to this Parliament, say this, that and come again and do it the following year? Can’t we get tired of talking about the same thing? I think as Parliament we should get serious and call the government where hon. Nankabirwa is a minister to order because they are in charge of our resources. 

We are talking about the people who are in charge of our resources; they control the taxpayers’ money. You cannot shift the blame onto government; we know how government works. So, I am saying that we should forget our differences; we should forget our parties and look at the country; look at the people of Uganda and address their issues as nationalists. If we come to debate another budget policy tomorrow and I suggest that because the government is doing this, to show our displeasure, let us reduce the budget of Ministry of Finance for example. I will be talked down -(Member timed out-)

1.54
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, permit me to extend my sincere thanks to you for your wise ruling that made this committee to accompany us to Teso sub-region. And for once, the rulers of this country came to know that at times we just do not say things for fun but we are talking the truth on behalf of our people. I also want to thank the committee for the report and their time; for it was quite trying to be out there in the field with them but they had to bear with us.   

I would like to urge government to come up with long-term solutions to food shortages in this country because today it is Teso sub-region; 20 to 30 years it was Karamoja sub-region and it is permanently Karamoja. I think these relief supplies are never enough.

Hon. Minister, the second rains have been inadequate and so I want to bring it to your attention that we are going to have crop failure. So, can you tell the House how you are prepared this time or it is the usual disastrous issue of being prepared for disasters?

I would like to draw it to your attention that the rations that were supplied were very inadequate; they were a mockery to the suffering of our people. Let us look at the food that was taken to schools. Each student got about two kilogrammes of posho and yet their parents had nothing to give them. So, the rations were long overdue. The students are still suffering and those in primary seven have to do exams just like the rest of the pupils in this country.   

If we look at the annex on pages 6 and 7, all sub-counties of Amuria and Katakwi received food while in Kumi only Ongino received. Where is the equity, hon. Minister? Are the people of Kumi district who are famine hit not suffering like those of Amuria?

My sister hon. Akol talked about planting trees in need of afforestation in this country. I want to draw the attention of this House to our planted forests in the Teso sub-region that were cut during the insurgency. I believe the NRM Government has a duty now to replant those forests for the good of the people of the Teso sub-region; for the collective good of the environment of this country.

When we had this problem of famine in Teso, I had friends of mine from Israel who sent me the blue print on how they are willing to partner with the government to do irrigation; actually they are NETFIM; those are world leaders in irrigation solutions. I forwarded the document to the relevant offices and ministries, but up to now, I am sorry to inform this House that nothing has been done. 

They actually told me - because I rang them; they said, “For us, if the government can come up and act very fast, we do not need rain; we shall come and do irrigation and we can turn Karamoja into a food basket of this country.” I am wondering when the government will learn to act.

Lastly, at times when we have famine, it makes me rethink and I want to urge the ministers maybe to inform their other colleagues who will be in charge of this, that you know, long ago, we used to have famine but we also had our animals to sell. When are they going to compensate people from Teso sub-region who lost their animals to cattle rustlers from Karamoja and those which were eaten in Army barracks? 

At times when you get desperate, you would sell what you have, and you know that for the last 23 years, we are compensating people from Luwero, the war victims. We also have war victims in Teso sub-region who need to be compensated and that did not come out clearly from the committee’s report. But I remember -(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way. I want to say that what you have just said about compensation, this government needs to come up with a policy on animals, because not only Teso, all that greater North area that suffered the war lost all their animals, and to date I have not heard government say this is how we are going to address the question of compensation of animals. It is a way of life of the people and I agree with you that we need a policy; we need our animals back. I thank you.

MS AKIROR: Thank you, my sister, for that information. It is very useful to this House. 

Lastly, you lamented about lack of food security. I also want to draw the attention of this House to the fact that some of the food varieties we have now are very perishable. So, people are forced to sell them off, like the groundnuts we have, the cassava and sweet potatoes. You can no longer keep them for two to three years as was the case those days -(Member timed out_)

1.59
MR YOKASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to thank the illiterate peasants of this country who have been feeding us since creation. The most unfortunate thing is the changes that we have undergone as a country; these peasants can no longer feed us; they no longer have the capacity to do it.

With the wars we have gone through; with climate change; these illiterate peasants can no longer feed this country. Therefore, government should wake up and realise this and, therefore, invest in food production seriously. The peasants have been unguided for a long time, but with climate change, the peasants need to be guided. In other countries, food production is a ministry on its own because people must eat in order to survive; in order to do anything else.

Last year, we budgeted for hand tractors. They were supposed to be distributed at parish level. What happened; because this would have assisted the peasants in production? Where are the hand tractors?

If you look at the Rwenzori Mountains, we have been producing food along these hills for the last 200 years or so, but the problem there is not drought; the problem is not floods; the problem is soil degradation and soil erosion and nobody is bothered about it. It has for a long time been a food granary for this country, but very soon we shall have little or no production in that area.

When it comes to storage in the 21st Century, I no longer conceptualise and understand when honourable members start talking of granaries, because we are living in a cash economy. In my area in fact I first saw a granary when I went for HSC in Kabale - I had never seen a granary and the people of Kasese have never starved. What the people are doing today; they are living in a cash economy. They produce their food, sell, get the cash, invest the cash in other activities, scoop the profits and buy the food. That is value of money; you cannot keep your money in a granary when you can use it to produce more profit and get more money. Why should we encourage people to go for granaries?

What should be taking place today is that government should return to what we had originally, the produce marketing boards. Government should buy this food; give the cash to the people; store the food and in times of need, re-distribute the food or sell it to these people. That is the simplest way. A granary in the 21st Century! There are no granaries in the UK -(Laughter)- to me it does not make much sense. 

Our granary is now the bank in the 21st Century because you can get the money, re-invest it, and get profit instead of keeping that money in a granary for six months. What is it doing there? I do not buy the idea. I buy the idea of government mobilising funds; buying the produce; storing it; and controlling how much we shall export and how much we shall eat. Simple! (Ms Sauda Mugerwa rose_) I still have one point; I do not want that information to interrupt me.

On the issue of rainwater harvesting, I remember when Teso was in drought, I stood here and I said, “Ladies and gentlemen, we are here lamenting but if we harvest this water we will be safe because after the floods, we are going to have drought.” And when I walked out, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister told me, “Mr Bihande that was a good one.” so I thought government was going to take it up. And indeed after the floods, drought came and it will happen next year and the year that follows. So, what is government doing about that? (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bihande, on the issue of the granaries, they were for food security. They had food crops, which they kept in those granaries and cash crops, which they were selling. That is what we are talking about; securing food and something to earn money.

2.05
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and allow me to thank the committee for making this report. I wish also to record our position in Pallisa – when you talk about Teso sub-region, it covers Katakwi, Pallisa and Tororo to Katakwa in Kenya. But during this visit, Pallisa was not covered, yet we are also part of the Teso sub-region. 

I know that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has tried to fight the famine crisis, but in the 1980s there were distribution centres. But it would be unfair to see a whole minister distributing posho; moving from parish to parish distributing posho. We should actually avoid this undue political influence by having our structures on the ground to distribute the provisions. 

When you look at the distribution schedule on page 6 of this report, all the food items for Amuria went to one county, leaving out Kapelebyong sub-county in which so many deaths were registered. 

And again on page 15, Pallisa District appears but they did not receive maize flour; they received 360 bags of maize flour each weighing 100 kilograms; they actually received maize grains not maize flour. So, this should be corrected so that people may know that Pallisa received maize grains and not maize flour.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering, what is the problem with the Ministry of Agriculture? In the second regime of Dr Obote, Dr J.J Otim was the Minister of Agriculture and hon. Babiiha was the Minister of Animal Resources. Things were perfect on the ground in Luwero, but now in this government, the agricultural extension services are not there, veterinary extension services are not there – all the lamenting here would not have happened if all these extension services were in place. So, what is the problem? Why are there no agricultural extension services?

Then, on the issue of NAADS, I happened to read a circular from the Ministry of Agriculture informing the sub-counties that Shs 3 million or 5 million had been set aside for productive materials like cassava cuttings. But when you look at the money put aside for production, and that put aside for overhead costs, overhead costs take up 60 percent of the money. So I request the minister to increase this money so that three quarters of the money goes into production to avoid famine in our areas. 

The issue of political pronouncement is a cause of famine. You may talk about climatic change or whatever, but the politicians in Uganda made a pronouncement encouraging Ugandans to choose other enterprises other than cassava cuttings. They discouraged people from growing cassava and they encouraged them to engage in poultry. But when you give people from Teso sub-region and Pallisa poultry - you may give them 100 and they all die off; yet even the cost of procurement is a problem. 

So I want to ask the Minister of Agriculture, “Where is the problem?” Even the procurement system of NAADS at the sub-counties is not functioning. It is now the role of the veterinary officer in the ministry to buy and deliver the supplies, contrary to the NAADS policy.

Many have talked about water for production; Teso sub-region would not be crying about famine, but the Ministry of Agriculture is dormant; I do not see them on the ground. This is the right time for the Ministry of Agriculture to be on the ground distributing improved seeds; giving out cuttings and so forth. 

I remember when I was in school my professor said, “I would rather teach my people how to fish other than giving them fish, so that when I am not there, they are able to survive”. So, we should look at that as a priority and have our people taught how to fight famine instead of giving them hand outs which are not adequate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming children from Bukasa Primary School, Kyadondo East, Wakiso District, represented by Hon. Sam Njuba and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.10
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometimes I sympathise - because for us in Gulu we have resorted to two things. One is to pray – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister taught you that. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Yes; it was because the Office of the Prime Minister was not delivering. You remember when I tabled on the Floor of this House pangas and hoes which could not actually support agricultural production; we have resorted to prayers and fortunately, God answered us. The rain in Gulu started earlier, towards the end of June and since that time we have been having good rain in Gulu and our people went into production. Now they are harvesting. Unfortunately, the rain is now intensifying beyond what is needed, so we have to pray again so that we can be able to harvest. 

But we can also go further to urge our people to persevere and increase production and to tell them that granaries are useful because the produce marketing boards are no longer there. So, if you do not have granaries, you will perish. 

Unfortunately, during the drought, some of us were urging our people to go and cultivate on the banks of rivers because it was more sustainable to at least produce some food along the banks. But again NEMA went after our people. Unfortunately, NEMA goes after very vulnerable people. In Kampala, NEMA has left everybody to do whatever they want, but when rural people go to the banks of rivers to produce food in difficult times, NEMA goes for them. I think this is very unfortunate. 

We have also gone further to encourage our people to plant trees. This is because in the long-run - I think that with the climate change that is affecting our people we should have more than one approach; we should focus on a wider area. 

It is on this note that I want to appeal to honourable members; there are some honourable members who are advocating for forests to be destroyed, especially in towns. There are some towns like Gulu Municipality, Fort Portal Municipality and Mbale Municipality where people are saying the town must expand and forests must go. I do not know whether towns cannot co-exist with forests. If you destroy forests and put up buildings, the environment will be affected. I think Members of Parliament should also be sanctioned on this. When people encroach on forest land -(Interjection)- honourable member, I know the information you are giving me because you are from Fort Portal. 

Our concern should even be – sometimes we blame Hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere - he was my lecturer and I know he has a very good heart, but he is a professor of theory –(Laughter)- and that is part of the problem. He is a very good theorist and sometimes people do not understand theory when it comes to practical situations. Those are the difficulties he faces sometimes. But he has a good heart for people. However, theories are like that. The way they respond to situations is different from the way other people respond. That is why when you directed that he meets us from the affected areas; we walked away from him because he did not have a heart for us. No, he said, “You go and grow mangoes; go and do all those kinds of things”; and we also took it in good faith. It is in that context that we appreciate the professor has a good heart –(Interjection)- but he is a professor of theory and Members of Parliament should know that.

When you look at the tables given, I was looking at Gulu. In Gulu we have the distribution at the district level. These people were telling us distribution is at the sub-county level. Really, what should we believe in? Even when you look at the distribution, Gulu really suffers. 

On the same day, that is the 15th of July this year, Gulu District headquarters received food. How can one centre receive food twice on the same day? I thought that the consignments should have been registered daily as they arrive. However, I see some contradictions and I need clarification either from the chairman or from the minister. There were two deliveries of the same items on the same day and why couldn’t they be recorded? 

Also, when you look at some of the places, while Gulu District headquarters received 200 bags on the 14th of July this year, there are some places, sub-counties or even constituencies who were receiving 360 bags. That is why I am saying that for us in Gulu, we resorted to prayers. We said we should pray hard and also urge our people to work hard.

2.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Deputy Speaker, as I was driving to this place, I was reading - I think it was put up in Kololo: “47 years of Independence, 23 years of stability.” Twenty-three years of stability and we cannot handle famine affecting just a small portion of the country, leaves a lot to be desired. I do not know what stability the banner was referring to.

When that problem came to Teso, I happened to travel to Bushenyi on the invitation of an NRM friend who was giving away his sister. I saw how the Masaka-Ssembabule area had turned dry and I said: “My God! Help us because from Teso, this will be the next area”, or was it already affected? So, the problem is not limited to Teso; it is all over the country; it is all over East Africa and it is going to be a big problem. We must act now! 

We have just been told about Malawi. We just flew over Malawi the other day and we saw how dry it is. But it has been reported - those who listen to Inside Africa on BBC - that Malawi has had a surplus of food of over 16 million tonnes despite that situation. Yet for us here, we have not suffered to that extent. I think a lot needs to be done in this country, especially by the Ministry of Agriculture. The ministers of agriculture from Kenya went to Malawi to learn; I saw it on television when the president who was a former minister of agriculture was lecturing them about how to improve their farming system - not the type of lectures we receive in Rwakitura. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the honourable Professor owes hon. Akol an apology. When hon. Akol made a statement here, his response was - when Hon. Rose Akol was making - I think this report has exonerated that. You owe hon. Akol and the people of Bukedea an apology. The problem with the Ministry of Disaster, especially the professor, is his public relations; the way he handles things. That is why when some people saw us moving out of that meeting, they were asking us, “Why didn’t you box professor?” I said, “We could not move to that level”. 

Don’t behave like this old woman in my village who would only mourn thieves and bad people. When she came to mourn, she would say, “At least the chicken of this area can now rest, you have gone”. (Laughter) That is the only way this old woman would behave; mourn those bad people and talk what people would not dare say at such a time. So even if there was a problem with the people of Teso, when they are in such a situation, you hold back those ill-feelings you have about them. You need to improve the public relations of that ministry or the theorist that hon. Reagan Okumu talked about.

The issue of corruption - I hope the people of Busoga and Kamuli listened to you when you gave this directive about the procurement. This is the biggest problem; corruption! That is why people even steal offerings from Church. Corruption has entered the minds of the people. Even when people are suffering, people want to make a cut out of it. That is why when Teso was supposed to be re-stocked, they brought cows from Zambia. But the person from Kasilo cannot take care of such cattle; so they all died. 

We are not saying you should not get cassava cuttings if they are in Kisoro, but what is the cost of transport? Why would one go and bring cows all the way from there and they all end up dying? There is corruption. That is why we see all these things here. You must deal with those corrupt officials who want to make a deal out of that.

The Ministry of Agriculture should help the people of Kasilo. Kasilo is not mentioned in this report and I am not complaining. This is because it was not affected by this famine. Why? One, the people of Kasilo have preserved the vegetation in that area; the soil and the vegetation, but they need help. If you add ox-ploughs, if you add oxen, extension services, that would work because the people of Teso were benefiting from Kasilo County and parts of Serere County.

2.22
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. 

On page 8, which has the root causes of famine in Teso sub-region, bullet one talks about climate change. We are clearly told that we have these climatic changes because of deforestation and a few other reasons. However, I beg to differ from my sister who said the government should go to Teso and plant trees. I wish to pose a question to my colleagues. We are the cream of this country. How many of us have planted trees to mitigate this problem? I think we should be able to move it in this House that the minister concerned supplies every MP with 20,000 seedlings of trees so that we are able to plant and distribute some to our voters to mitigate this problem. Lamenting does not help much. We say climatic changes are due to deforestation yet we are not doing anything about it.

Two, they talk of reduction in food production attributed to cattle rustling. True, when we lost the cows, we lost a tool for agriculture because the oxen were part of our agricultural input. We could open up a lot of land; we could open up land timely. But today, you cannot do it because we do not have the oxen. 

The cow itself was also a source of food. I remember when I was growing up, we never used to make bread for lunch; we just had milk for lunch; and we could sell the cow to take our children to school and do a few other things.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I overheard you saying that you had three granaries in your area; one for the Kyabazinga, one for the Gombolola chief and one for home use. Do you still have them? If you don’t, what is the cause of you lacking those granaries? We also had them, but we do not have them anymore. This is due to reasons I have just given you; we lost the ox; we lost the cow; so we lost our other source of food and money. But for you, I believe you never lost a cow; you have everything in place, what could be the cause?

There is no way you can keep food in a granary when your child is dying of Malaria. You have to sell the food to take that child to hospital. There is no way you can keep food in your granary when your child has been admitted privately to the university. You have to sell the food to take the child to school or a tertiary institution. So the issue here is that the social burden on the person is so high. Left, right, you have to sell food and because there are no cash crops, you have to sell the food to get money to facilitate yourself socially; go to hospital or take your child to school. That is one cause of famine. I think country wide the social burden on the person is very high. Government should do something about it.

The committee also noted that the Office of the Prime Minister was distributing food directly to the sub-counties. True, it happened and it might have been good, but unfortunately, it was abused. Like my sister Alice Alaso said, they resorted to using the food for campaigns. I remember three ministers went to one of the sub-counties in my constituency and transformed themselves into campaign agents. They went to the extent of saying, “There is a lot of food in the office but we do not know the MP of this county, so there is nobody we can give the food”; knowing that the MP has nothing to do with supplying food, which was given by government. Whether you knew me or not, you had the obligation to supply food to those sub-counties. Why do you use the food for campaigns? This is another problem. 

I think we should go through the disaster committees in the districts to send food to the people other than people parading with the food and campaigning. We would be using government resources for campaigning.

We noted the effect of famine on education and we looked at the aspect of children not going to school because of lack of food. But one other thing is that people fail to take their children to tertiary institutions because they have nothing else to sell apart from the food and since there is no food to be sold, students stay at home.

There is a clear testimony. About 6,000 privately-sponsored students have not reported to the university because of lack of food stuff to be sold to take them to school. So, it has highly affected education countrywide, not only in Teso. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, concerning the granaries, you know we had a very effective traditional administration through the Kyabazinga as I was saying. It was a by-law that you have all those granaries and they must be full. If you touched your own, it was okay. 

The second one by command of the Gombolola chief was for the whole sub-county. The third one by command of the Kyabazinga was not supposed to be touched. So, it was effectively administered by the traditional chiefs, the Muluka chief, Mutongole, all those -(Interjection)- yes, and they were not elected. They were – 

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, that can only be possible if you have food in surplus, but if you have nothing to store, how do you store nothing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, don’t be defeatist, hon. Omolo. We have to start somewhere. How did those people with rudimentary tools grow that food? They had no tractors in those villages.  

2.28
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): I also want to thank the committee for this report and I thank the members of the Teso Parliamentary Group who actually accompanied this committee to Teso, especially after there were mixed voices in responding to what prompted us to get to Teso. 

But at least overall, the committee has brought out one fact, that there was actually a problem. There was a famine situation in Teso that needed to be addressed; implying that the Members of Teso Parliamentary Group were not just being alarmist, but were actually responding to the voices of the people of Teso.

I also now want to see the other direction and probably in a way, not really to exonerate the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, but allow me to say or call him a victim of circumstances; poor Prof. Kabwegyere -(Laughter)- he is simply suffering the brunt of institutional and government policy failure. He is the man at the end of it all, but there are these other actors: Ministry of Agriculture with a number of ministers; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Disaster Preparedness; he is simply the man at the end of it all and he is the one who gets the last and hardest hitting, which I think is unfortunate. 

My concern in relation to this is that we should dig deeper in looking at what is causing this problem. I am convinced that there is an aspect of role conflict in the manner in which government was responding to this situation; it took time to have a relevant impact on the people. 

According to the committee report, consultations were mainly with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and this gives us that misrepresentation that actually, the Ministry of Agriculture is supposed to be the lead ministry in as far as food security is concerned, and yet when the actual problem occurred, it was the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness that was on the front line. 

So, unless government clearly comes out to bring together these main actors, we are going to continue having that confusion; lack of clarity in policy in as far as handling food security is concerned, because we should be aware that we are not giving food security the seriousness it deserves. As far as I am concerned, food security is as serious as national security because it is all about lives. It concerns people losing lives or failing to have capacity to be productive. So, we should give it that seriousness. 

There is a neighbouring country I have had the opportunity to visit twice, and that granary policy is actually working. With us here, we have local governments, as you said, and they have the powers to enact ordinances and by-laws, but we must accord them that capacity to do that and support them so that we have the granary project in at least every household, so that as we sell, we do not sell off everything. 

I beg to differ from my colleague who was saying that granaries are outdated. We are talking about a peasant population that is illiterate and has no other options; that because of the pressures of demand and supply, they will sell off everything that they have produced so as to respond to other needs. Unless we come out clearly on that and support our local governments, because apparently, in the response to this food and famine situation in Teso, we clearly saw that there were gaps. There were attempts not to involve the local governments and the people and directly try to deal with the grassroots people, which I think was unfortunate. But I am happy that the committee has pointed this out and the minister is going to take heed and make sure that it is implemented accordingly. 

Then there is the Shs 523 million that is supposed to have come through NAADS. Hon. Minister, you must have heard from other colleagues that the impact of that money is not yet seen, but if we have to avert future situations of that nature, this Shs 532 million, for instance, could go to address issues of storing food. I will give you a disappointing example. I got a call from Katakwi where there are tractor hire services that you are trying to push through this programme. A tractor was sent from Kampala to start ploughing without even consulting the farmers and the contractor. The man who was running the tractor hire services was not even from that locality. He went on to identify what to plough and put the NAADS coordinator on a stampede programme trying to put together what should be ploughed. There was no prior planning. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty-four members have contributed to this report and I have also taken note of your desire to have a special session to discuss it. I will create time for it. But for now, I think we need to close so that we can do other work. I now invite the minister to make his brief response because most of these were proposals for improvement.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Henry Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good job that it did because it really captured all the pertinent issues and it covered this subject very well. The input of the ministry was also captured. So, I thank them. 

Like you have put it, Madam Speaker, most of the contributions of the Members have been pieces of advice urging every stakeholder to improve with regard to service delivery. 

I have a few issues that I want to give some responses to. I will begin with the issue that was expressed by hon. Alaso; the issue of centralizing purchase of planting materials, particularly cassava, from Kisoro. I think this is not right. The truth –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, can I be protected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You asked the questions so the minister is responding.    

MR BAGIIRE: I did not rise on a point of order when they were contributing. I kept quiet because I knew I would have an opportunity. So, I think this is my opportunity to contribute. 

It is not true, like it is being said, because we have a problem in the country. The country was struck with a disease called Cassava Mosaic Disease, which devastated all our good cassava varieties in the 1990s. Of course what is sweet to human beings is also sweet to pests and diseases so our palatable varieties like Bwanataraka were totally devastated by these diseases. Our scientists came up with some varieties that could either tolerate the disease or would be resistant to it. However, of recent some of these varieties have started succumbing to this disease. There is a new disease called Cassava Brown Stick, which is so devastating. It affects the cassava roots, stems and leaves. The Cassava Mosaic would only affect the leaves, which meant that in case the cassava plant got affected when the roots were ready, one would harvest. 

However, our scientists have again come up with another variety. Although it is not yet released, it has been tested and is now at foundation level. It has not been given a name, but it is called MH97/2961. This variety is not anywhere else except in Kabarole on a farm of a gentleman called Amooti Kiiza who cultivated it to the tune of 150 acres. 

It is true that we had a few acres of this variety in Serere in a total of only 56 acres in the entire Teso sub-region, which is not enough. When we got this –(Interruption)

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, with due respect –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, you asked your question and he is answering it. We need to finish this and deal with something else.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, like I said, this variety has got attributes. It is very high yielding, early maturing – actually in areas where the climate is warm, for example in the Teso sub-region, it takes only six months to mature and can stand in the field for about two years after maturing. So it can be a good crop for storing food. 

It is also resistant to diseases and has got low snide content. Like the report said, because people had no food they resorted to eating Migera, that is the Nigeria variety, which has got a very high snide content; and people died. It is like the Togolo variety grown in West Nile, which if eaten when not processed also affects you because it is very toxic. The other attribute is that it is easy to cook.

So we are expecting hundreds of thousands of bags from Mr Kiiza’s farm. He has been contacted to supply this variety. We will not give it to the farmers now because we need to first multiply it.

The ministry has contacted local governments to organise people in groups and organisational farms like those of the prisons, to help in multiplying this planting material for the farmers. That is why this variety of cassava is going to be got from Kabarole. Mr Kiiza is the only farmer with it. And I would like to say that in the history of the Ministry of Agriculture, this is the first farmer who has grown cassava to that tune. Until then, the biggest farmer who has ever grown cassava had only 32 acres.

The other issue that was raised by hon. Alaso related to a call to ministers to be impressed upon by government to apologise for a statement, which said that the people of Teso sub-region are drunkards and lazy.

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure do not provide anything that bars us from talking about people who cannot defend themselves here –(Interjections)– can I be protected because I am making a point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you. I am protected, hon. Malinga. So, like it was put in the report, I went to Soroti immediately we got information that Teso sub-region had been struck with food shortage. While there, we met the leaders from that sub-region and they included the district chairpersons, CAOs, the district secretaries for production, the NAADS co-ordinators and the district finance officers.

In our meeting, the chairperson of Kaberamaido local government accused government for allowing the production of waragi packed in tots and said it was killing their people especially the youth. This gentleman was supported by the chairperson of Amuria District who said that true, the youth in that area were drinking a lot because they are frustrated by the fact that government took their animals.

Madam Speaker, what I and hon. Kabwegyere said at the Media Centre were minutes of that meeting. In that regard, allow me lay on the Table a video footage of whatever took place in that meeting. And I would like to request that if there is time, let it be played for the Members to watch - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, it has been laid and it is now our property. We shall decide when to show it to you. Please, wind up.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, on the issue of ox ploughs that was raised by hon. Rose Akol from Bukedea, I would like to say that the President directed that we must provide tractors for that sub-region specifically. He also asked us to start a system of re-popularising and availing the sub-region with the oxen and the ox-ploughs. As I speak, there is a directive that we use some of the NAADS money to provide the youth groups with ox ploughs and oxen. I would like to report that this is going to be handled this financial year.

The other one was about the tractor hire system and I would like to say that that has started as it has been said here. I would like to report that last week I received from the CAO of Katakwi a call complaining about the rate of the person who is giving the service - the rate at which he was giving the service. I then sent a team led by the Director of Crop Resources in the Ministry of Agriculture and NAADS to go and find out. I have been told that the report is coming out and we are trying to address the matter. 

Something has been said about what government is doing - I think this was hon. Bahati – of a strategic nature to address the issue of food shortage. Many people said we are lamenting here and there every other time. As a minister of agriculture and government, we have put in place many strategies. The first is that very soon, a Food and Nutrition Bill is going to be brought to this House. The Bill has already been debated by Cabinet and it is coming here and the provisions in there really guide people on how they should have food. The government also has its obligations and when this law is in place, that issue will also be handled. 

The other issue is that we have brought in experts who are working with our experts and they are coming up with a total strategy on how we should be providing water for irrigation in this country – generally water for production. Like my sister from Kumi said, we have just had experts from Israel and India who have been going around. The first place they went to was Karamoja and very soon we shall have a master plan on how we are going to handle this matter. This financial year, some districts like Kumi, Bugiri, and Kaberamaido will have some small irrigation schemes that are going to be put in place. We have started on a long journey, which is not easy given the financial resources that the Members of Parliament appropriate here. If they increase and give me enough money, I would do the needful -    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do we not appropriate enough or you do not plan for enough?

MR BAGIIRE: It is Parliament that appropriates money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. How much do you request for? Have you asked us for the 10 percent and we have not given it to you? Have you asked for the 10 percent that was agreed in the Maputo Action Plan? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, you know you cannot ask for something that you know is not there –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is not Parliament. It is you and MTEF.

MR BAGIIRE: But last financial year, our percentage was so low and this financial year it has improved to 4.5 percent. Last year it was 3.6 percent and we are improving. I think we shall be moving next financial year. Those were the issues that I felt were so important for me to address.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to relief. You can follow him up. No, please.

2.50
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINSTER, RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank all the members of the committee and those who have participated in the discussion. This committee visitation had value in three ways. 

First, this is the second time that a committee of Parliament has been called upon to check out what government has done particularly in my department. The Committee of Agriculture was sent to Gulu and indeed the Acholi sub-region following the story of the plastic pangas and rotten seeds. The report came and we were exonerated -(Interjections)- there were no plastic pangas and the Hansard is here. If honourable members could be fair –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Former student, please -(Laughter)

MR OKUMU: With all the due respect, I am forced to rise on a point of order. The issue of pangas was not about plastic pangas. These things were laid on the Table here. It was about the quality of those axes and pangas vis-à-vis the amount of money used. It was never the plastic pangas. Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Professor, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and my former lecturer, whom I respect so much, to stand before this House and mislead the people and yet the report of the committee confirmed that what we laid on Table was actually what they found in the districts? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issue of the poor quality pangas and implements is well documented in the Hansard of this House. Let us not go into it. Please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, fortunately there is a Hansard and we can check it and probably again re-table it. I have been advised by hon. Okupa about public relations and I think that everybody in this House should be advised by hon. Okupa on public relations. 

The committee that visited the Teso sub-region has achieved the following as far as I am concerned: 

First, a whole committee of Parliament went and the Members of Parliament from the sub-region went on an on-the-spot investigation of the region and there is a report of the findings. To me that is the most fundamental achievement by this committee. 

Secondly, the committee has been able to establish that our department - the Office of the Prime Minister - had delivered some food because the committee did not go with any food. It is the office that did and, therefore, a combination of all efforts in this House is what is going to advance this country. So, this is a big achievement –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, this House knows very well that we gave money to the Office of the Prime Minister to give food and the members also know very well that it is not our business as Parliament to implement. Is it, therefore, in order for the minister, who was given money by this House to ensure that food is delivered, to insinuate that in one way or the other we did not carry food when actually we were not supposed to have carried food? Does he want to make us employees and staff of his ministry when we are actually the ones who should have overseen the way his ministry delivers on what we mandated them to do? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you talked earlier about public relations but it seems you are not engaging in good public relations. The reason we sent this committee was because the Teso Parliamentary Group were walking out of this House complaining that there is nothing, and we asked our Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to accompany them because this was a national problem. We did not say that the committee should deliver the food. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, that is what I have actually said but in different words. They went there and found that the food had been distributed and in some cases, it was not enough. I have been on the Floor of this House and I have said that food relief is not the same thing as food supply to the population. It is an intervention and I am glad that the committee did not find as many people dead as had been claimed. Thank God that was not the case. 

Another point that has come out in this discussion is whether we can distribute relief equitably. Obviously, relief goes to where it is most needed and in the areas where we have been, at least we have been able to reduce the impact of shortage. I also know that it is quite understandable that more food should be distributed but I would also like honourable members here not to give an impression to the public that food can be distributed to a quantity that can guarantee sufficiency because relief is just a short-term intervention. 

One Member said that we distributed food in July but what about now? If there is no urgency, there is no intervention and this is why I think hon. Bahati was very unfair. If abuse were good enough that it could generate more resources, I wouldn’t mind but to be called a “disaster” when I am trying to address disasters is being unfair –(Laughter)– and in the case of Kabale, hon. Ahabwe has just reported and we have been able to recover the body of the twin after this long time. We intervened; we sent food and we did what we could but there is no way I could have prevented the landslide or even the floods. So, if anybody says I did not intervene and that I am a disaster, he is being unfair. 

I must inform this House that I am very happy with the historical position I have because I have become more humane than I was before because I now appreciate the degree to which our people suffer. But let us not appear to be pleading for disaster to come to our areas so that relief can also come there. 

Hon. Reagan Okumu said that he prayed and prayed, and God responded. I wish everybody had attended the prayer breakfast that was here the other day. We could have other prayer breakfasts to pray that El-Nino does not devastate this country as it seems to appear. I would like to inform this House that Cabinet had a session today at which I presented a paper on El-Nino and we are preparing to address that situation but I do not know whether what we have even contemplated putting aside will be available or even if it is available, whether it will be enough because we are now talking in terms of about Shs 42 billion plus to address the El-Niño. Unfortunately, we are better prepared now than we were in 2007. We can now tell Members of Parliament, we can tell ourselves and we can tell Church leaders that we are better prepared now to handle El-Nino than we were in 2002 and 2007. 

Finally, I would like to appreciate the comments made by hon. Reagan Okumu. I wish you were very fundamentally right that I am a professor of theory because if I were that successful, it would mean that practice would be better informed because you cannot practise if you have not properly addressed theory. One of the problems we have today in this country – even with the issue of drought and with the issue of El-Nino - is because we are not adequately tuned to the concept of the problem and therefore, our address of the problem is usually under valued. 

The last remark is to hon. Alaso and hon. Okello-Okello. Cynicism is extremely dangerous; it is actually a disease –(Laughter)- because if you say that nothing good is happening, that government is impotent, and that everything is stuck and so on and so forth –(Interjection)– I complete my statement.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to come here, after I have raised very fundamental issues concerning the interventions of his ministry in the famine-stricken region of Teso which I expected him to appropriately respond to, and be so cynical and accuse me of cynicism at the same time? Moreover he is insinuating very bad intentions on my part that I said he is impotent. I have never investigated professor to check whether he is impotent or not. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for today’s work and I want to suspend the proceedings to 4.15 p.m. We shall deal with the COSASE report on the National Drug Authority. Thank you very much.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.03 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.22 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This morning we received the report on the famine situation from our Committee on Agriculture, we had a debate and there were responses from the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. Now I want to put the question that this House adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I indicated, we shall get another opportunity to deal at length with this issue.
 
PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL DRUG AUTHORITY

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Reagan Okumu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report should have been debated last year therefore copies were already distributed to Members. I expected that when the clerks put this on the Order Paper, they would have produced limited copies for Members and I think they did. I think there are some copies that Members should be able to access.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The steward is coming to distribute them. As you have heard, the chairperson is saying this report should have been debated last year, let us receive it.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of National Drug Authority and the Auditor-General’s report. For purposes of saving time, I will just read a summary and not go into details because I believe that Members read this report and at least they still have some memory of what was contained in it. They may not have the details but while they prepare to distribute the copies, I can proceed.

This report is made up of four sections. Section one cites the committee’s mandate in Article 90(3) and Article 164 of the Constitution and rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure. The audit queries raised by the Auditor-General form the basis of the report.

A list of stakeholders that appeared before the committee is also recorded. In particular, the committee notes that the National Drug Authority was established by an Act of Parliament in 1993. Its role is to ensure that high quality and cost effective medicine, both human and veterinary, are supplied to the population of Uganda. This section reminds this House that drug selection is also a mandate of Ministry of Health arising from the National Drug Policy Review of 2002.

This relieves the National Drug Authority of having control over essential drug lists and national treatment guidelines. The mandate is now in the armpits of the Quality Assurance Department and the Pharmacy Division in the Ministry of Health.

Observations

National Drug Authority has a board of 20 members and this is too big to be efficient and effective.

The committee noted that there are 52 entry points in the country and National Drug Authority is present in less than 12 of these points. These were also proven when this committee recently visited the entry points where Uganda Revenue Authority is established and there is the clear absence of National Drug Authority. This tends to undermine the activities, work and speedy action of clearing especially drugs from these points.

The committee also observed that there is discontent among the veterinary profession as they are under represented in the National Drug Authority Board.

The committee also noted that following the nomination of hon. Dr Makumbi from UPDF to Parliament, the army no longer has representation in the National Drug Authority Board.

That National Drug Authority invested in the Treasury Bills and fixed accounts without authorisation of the board.

The irregularities in the recruitment of staff were noticed. The successful candidates for the post of internal auditor and the head of finance were not recruited. The current executive secretary was recruited from among the board members although he was number three in the interview.

The law mandates National Drug Authority to recruit district assistant drug inspectors but this responsibility has been relegated to the districts.

No procurement department is in place yet it is provided for in the law.

On property management issues, the committee observed that the National Drug Authority engaged Mr Chris Bakiiza, a partner in a company advocate, as a debt collector. That National Drug Authority had a claim against this firm worth Shs 40,060,000. Mr Bakiiza presented some accountability documents which the committee referred to the Auditor-General for verification. 

Recommendations 
1.	The committee recommends that the board of 20 members is too big and that the number should be reduced to nine. 

2.	To manage the entry points, National Drug Authority needs to work closely with URA and National Bureau of Standards to effectively reach out to the 52 points.

3.	Additional mandate of food regulations requires rationalisation and amendment of the National Drug Authority Act. 

4.	The Minister of Health should cause an appointment of UPDF representatives to the National Drug Authority Board as soon as possible to replace hon. Dr Makumbi who is now in Parliament. 

5.	That irregularity in the recruitment in National Drug Authority staff must be addressed in pursuit of PPDA and National Drug Authority Staff Regulations. Positions which were occupied without going through the normal process should be re-advertised. 

6.	That district assistant drug inspectors must be recruited by National Drug Authority to ensure quality assurance and standardisation of service delivery to the districts.

7.	A procurement department be established and staff recruited.

Part two of this report is on the actions expected on the IGG report. It was reported that the board unfairly fired Mr Kakwemeire the acting Head of National Drug Quality Control Laboratory upon confirming a failed preliminary test of drugs imported from Ningbo 2 Pharmaceuticals Industry in China. 

This revelation did not please the authority. The committee recommends reinstatement of Mr Kakwemeire and upholds the decision taken by government to prosecute Dr J.C Lule, the then acting Executive Secretary and his Board Chairman, Dr Nganwa and Mr Francis Otim. 

Part III of the report is on the audit queries; responses and committee recommendations covering the period 1995 to 2006 Financial Year, and a special audit report by the Auditor-General. 

Fixed Assets Register 

The Auditor-General reported that the National Drug Authority did not maintain a fixed assets register between 1995 and 2006, but instead, it only maintained an inventory list. A fixed assets register provides a more detailed document showing how the assets were acquired and their present condition. An inventory list simply presents a mere list of assets owned by an organisation and there was equally no engravement on these assets.

By the end of November 2007, as contained in the special audit report, this query has been addressed satisfactorily. The committee, therefore, dropped the query. 

Supporting Documents

A sum of Shs 7,736,922 was paid without supporting documents apart from loose minutes. The committee recommends that where such payments are not fully accounted for with payment vouchers, loose minutes, invoices or receipts, the individual affected should be made to refund the money.

Licences, Permits and Certificates

The Auditor-General reported the licence numbers were being allocated manually, but not printed, making it difficult to reconcile the computer registry. 

The committee observed that samples of licences, permits and certificates were of different qualities and designs and could be easily forged. The committee recommends that the issue of serial numbers in a sealed and gazetted format of licences, permits and certificates must be properly addressed.

Control of Revenue

There were no adequate records for controlling receipts and recognition of income and there were, therefore, differences between expected and revenue posted. 

The committee recommends that this irregularity should not be entertained as it is one of the avenues by which National Drug Authority may lose revenue. 

Support through donations from Danish, Red Cross and Uganda Essential Drug Monitoring Programme was not recognised in the financial statement. Income tax, Pay-as-You-Earn, were not reflected in the National Drug Authority accounts. 

The committee recommends that all documents necessary to support accountability must be provided at all times, including donations.

Accounts for the period ended December 1996

Records of deferred applications to open up pharmacies and drug shops were not maintained. Instead, National Drug Authority maintained only approved applications. The Auditor-General could, therefore, not verify the suitability or premises of income worth Shs 32,540,000. There was more money on the account beyond the records of licences issued due to poor book keeping. 

The bank monies were collected on National Drug Authority accounts until the systems were changed and drug shop owners started paying through the bank. The committee recommends that National Drug Authority must have control over its staff by directly recruiting and deploying them to the districts. 

Accounts for the period ended 1997 – 1998

Staff advances amounting to Shs 230,562,738 for official duty, remained outstanding for too long and accountability was not properly made. 

The committee recommends that all outstanding amounts of Shs 230,562,738 must be recovered from the staff who owe this money. 

The 1999 audit queries were dropped upon confirmation of verification results by the Auditor-General. 

Accounts for the period ended December 2000 – bank reconciliation statement and rental income
 
It was noted that the accounting system had serious problems and management together with Dr J.C Lule should take up the matter and present full accountability; the Auditor-General to report progress in the next report. 

National Drug Authority must harmonise its debtors, start recovering them and pay Population Tax for rental income. URA is urged to follow up this tax with a view of ensuring compliance. 

Accounts for the period ended June 2002 – 2005

Queries from the period in question were treated exhaustively from the Auditor-General’s special audit report. 

The special audit report:
The Special Audit Report was prompted by the allegation of fraud which was suspected to have occurred between 1 July 2004 and February 2007. The Auditor General confirmed that this fraud amounted to US $232,011. 

The crime was committed by some staff in the finance department and the matter is with the Police. Another sum of US $23,920 could not be traced to the relevant bank statements though the bank slips reflected the money. Documents to complete the accountability were received by the committee and referred to the Auditor-General. 

Verification revealed that US $10,020 was still not accounted for. The accounting officer was directed to cause recovery of this money. 

Conclusion

The committee examined ten accounts which were presented by the Auditor-General in the past nine years. It is a reflection of a backlog, which can be frustrating when tracing some of the accounting records, and is very taxing. Those individuals who were affected expressed shock, surprise and lack of memory of what was raised and put before them. Ours was a constitutional duty and other stakeholders too were commanded by Article 164 to play their role.

In conclusion, the committee shares with this House one of Mahatma Gandhi’s thoughts and I quote, “We want to change their minds, but not to kill them for weaknesses we all possess”. The report is intended to improve the service delivery by the National Drug Authority and not to destroy it or punish anybody. I beg to move that the report be considered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Chairman, and as we have agreed, I will direct the Hansard team to reproduce in full the text of the report. I also want to thank you for doing nine year’s work in one report. I hope we shall improve with time. 

(Full text of the report to be found in Annex I of Issue 31)

4.43
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora Country, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for doing due diligence on the National Drug Authority and clearing that backlog. 

Madam Speaker, given that it is a report covering nine years, I appreciate the fact that some of the issues may have been overtaken by events. But allow me to point out that National Drug Authority‘s mandate is making sure that quality and efficacious drugs for both humans and livestock are available at all times in our country. 

I have noted that on several pages of the report, there is mention of laxity on the part of the then acting Executive Director, Dr Lule. On several instances, Dr J.C Lule, acting Executive Secretary, is being implicated. One of the issues was that he was involved in okaying re-importation of drugs from a factory called Ningbo 2, which drugs were actually found to be wanting in quality. 

I note on page 15 of the report, in the recommendations of the committee that Dr Lule accepted to take responsibility for the decision that he made which led to the importation of a counterfeit drug. On the same page, there was mention that Dr Lule should be referred to the National Medical and Dental Practitioners Council for appropriate action. I think that is asking for too little. 

That a counterfeit drug can get into the country – before even the National Medical and Dental Practitioners Council takes other professional action on him, there ought to be criminal charges on him; this is criminal. He could have caused mass deaths – I can call it genocide. All of you honourable members know how much danger counterfeit drugs can cause to the consumers. I would like to know, what exactly happened to Dr Lule and what happened during his term of office? 

The chairperson mentioned a number of other un-reconciled bank statements; monies were lost and in all those findings, Dr Lule was implicated. I want to know what happened to Dr Lule and the money.

Then the committee made note of Pharmacy Profession and Practice Bill, 2006 which is already in Parliament. My view is that the National Drug Authority Act required serious amendment. It is true that some of the mandates spelt out in the National Drug Authority Act were pulled out and pushed to the Bill. But our committee has since observed a number of challenges, I do not want to pre-empt the content of our report on the Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006. 

This morning the hon. Minister of Agriculture also talked about the Food and Nutrition Bill that is due to come here. This Bill also touches the NDA Act. My opinion is that we need to have those Bills brought together so that by the time we amend the NDA Act, we know how we will have framed the Food and Nutrition Bill. That is why I think it is a bit difficult for us to just jump into the amendment of the NDA Act before we clear the other related laws.

Lastly, the committee talked about a big number of members to the NDA Board and that it should be reduced to nine. But I am not quite sure whether that is in conformity with the NDA Act and whether the membership of the board is not mentioned in that Act. If it is so, then we cannot go ahead to recommend the reduction to nine when the law states 20. The best we can do is to amend the Act. I beg to submit.

4.49
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, particularly the chairperson, for this report. However, I think this report, which was hurriedly presented, has a lot to bear. The report is detailed but the actions to be taken by this House – in the special audit report there is something on frauds. When you look at that analysis and the manner in which it is being handled - number two on how bank slips amounting to US $23,920 were handled - it leaves a lot to be desired. At the moment, I believe the acting Executive Director is still in office, with all this fraud. I would like to say that the mess in the book keeping is intended.

I used to drive on Yusuf Lule Road using the left, when going home and the right, when coming to Parliament. But I did not know where the home of the National Drug Authority was. However, after knowing it, I one day took an effort to go and watch what goes on there. I would like to say that in relation to the number of vehicles that were parked there – I got to realise that a sweeper was driving a vehicle like a land cruiser. This is the reason we do not have drugs in hospitals. I am saying this because when you look at the amount of money lost, it leaves a lot to be desired about the management of NDA. 

In respect to the observations and recommendations in relation to employment, you realise that they one time offered a job to a person who had come third during an interview. But how do you do such a thing? That should be something to be investigated and action taken immediately; because for a board, which has been tasked to find the best person, to choose to offer the job to the third person and nothing is done about it, shows that corruption is now at its highest. I am amazed! 

Reflecting on the speech of the President on Independence Day Celebrations, in which he said that he had reported to God that he had failed to handle corruption and that we should not expect him to perform the way God did during creation as captured in the Genesis book of the Bible, it is exactly what is happening here. Who are these people who can take money and nobody cares? And they continue working in their offices! My concern is that –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: I thank you Ndugu Gutomoi for giving way. I thought I should clarify on something because we all listened to His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda on that day. I would like to say that during his address to the nation at the Independence Day Celebrations at Kololo, the President took off time to appraise the country on the measures that government is taking to address corruption. He also talked about the new soldiers that are being deployed to handle corruption. He clearly indicated that as Government, we can announce a programme for fighting corruption, but that it is not like God, who could say, “Let there be day”, and there was day. As human beings, he said, we can state a programme and all we need is to make sure it is implemented. That is exactly what he stated. 

He did not say that he has given up on the fight against corruption. And please, let nobody try to think that government has given up on the fight against corruption, because they will be caught up on the wrong side of things. I thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Yeah! Thank you very much for the clarification. However, I still think that when His Excellency related his speech to a report to God in that manner, it meant he had been defeated. So, we have to support him. 

Therefore, may I, through you, call upon the President to start with this body immediately, using those soldiers who I think are ready to start the work because this is the dirtiest of the institutions in this country? Thank you very much.

4.56
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak to this report. I thank the committee for presenting a good report.

However, I would like to make some observations in relation to what appears on page 8 about the recruitment of the executive secretary. What hon. Gutomoi has been saying needs to be taken seriously because this is part of the issues that confirm the laxity in fighting corruption. Somebody sat for an interview but eventually the third person in performance took the day. What best words can you use to explain that situation, if not corruption? I think we really need to be very serious because I believe the first and the second persons who lost to the third person, who happened to be a board member at that time, were not incompetent. They were competent and qualified and that is why they emerged the best.

I would like to say that we have so many Ugandans who are suffering from similar situations relating to employment in Government institutions. I have a report, which I will actually soon table to the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. That report relates to somebody who did an interview with UWA and emerged the best, but because of one reason or the other, this person was not offered the job. As Parliament, we need to pronounce ourselves as far curbing such kinds of things is concerned. We must offer jobs to people who deserve them.

On page 10, the committee observed that the NDA is not recruiting assistant district drug inspectors. My district borders Sudan and there is a lot of smuggling from Southern Sudan and DR Congo to Uganda. There are some businessmen who prefer to go through Southern Sudan and enter Uganda from the North. Some of them are dealing in drugs. So, if we do not get enough staff to man those borders, how are we going to ensure the stoppage of the importation of counterfeit drugs, which is a very big problem? Last week, it was reported in the media that a big quantity of counterfeit drugs had been smuggled into this country. I believe some of these drugs are already with the community and people are already using some of them. 

When it comes to drugs, that is a question of life and death and that is why we need to be very serious. I would like to call upon the NDA to look into these observations very critically and recruit enough assistant drug inspectors at district level so that the quality of the drugs in this country is assessed and monitored. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. The report educates us a lot about the lack of co-ordination relating to the way we are handling drugs in this country. 

We have got a problem in Uganda. We are the only country in East Africa where anybody can walk in anytime. There are so many entry points and anybody can bring in anything and nobody will notice. You can even see from the way drugs come in; it is because of these so many entry points. There are 52 points, but we are only policing 12 of them. So, there is a very big problem. I think the Minister of Health should take it up seriously. We should ensure there is control at our borders as far as the entry of drugs into this country is concerned. Otherwise, the message in here is not good for our people. 

On that basis, I am not surprised that there are so many fake drugs on the market here in Uganda. Of course, I would have expected the committee to make a strong recommendation in regard to this. Maybe they could have given a timeframe, for example, that in two years NDA should be manning at least 30 entry points. They have the money that they are investing into Treasury Bills; they can use some of this money for the purpose of saving the public from the dangers they are likely to face because of laxity.

The report says there is a challenge in regard to recruitment of staff in the districts. I know that NDA is also supposed to inspect the numerous drug shops that are mushrooming everyday in the countryside. However, we are told they do not have staff and even in those districts where they have such staff it is by courtesy of the district councils. I think this is another matter that they should take up very seriously. They should recruit the needed staff to ensure drugs are inspected and those drug shops are licensed in order for them to deliver as expected. I am saying this because I know that many of them start as drug shops but behind there are clinics. They keep giving injections and prescribing and administering medicine, which is wrong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even operating on people.

MR YIGA: Yeah! Even operating people! So, you can see that the country is in a very big problem. That is why I am saying the minister should take it up. I have actually appreciated his overzealousness these days in a bid to improve health services in this country. So, please take up this issue also to save our people.

On the issue of staff, we are told that NDA is managed informally; they do not want to recruit the required staff. I think the committee would have told us more about the causes of all this. Is it political interference? If not, what is it? I do not know how we can have such a parastatal under a ministry like that of health with professionals operating like that. There could be a problem, which the committee should investigate and report to Parliament. Maybe it is political interference that is causing all this. We would like to see NDA turning into one of the best managed parastatals in this country because its activities touch the lives of our people.

There is the issue of a gentleman called Dr Lule who took it upon himself to defy a decision of the board. I do not see a strong recommendation in this report in regard to this issue. They are just saying that maybe the Uganda Medical Board should handle. They should have come up with a very strong recommendation. For example, taking stock to discover the losses we have incurred because of his laxity and weaknesses. We should come up with a strong recommendation to punish such people so that in future, any person recruited as an executive director should see that as an example of what Government can do to you because of such behaviour. Otherwise, what I see is just some sort of information –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of that committee. I have been forced to stand up because that is the second comment regarding Dr Lule. I would like to say that despite these recommendations, we were told that this matter is also in court. He was taken to court and is currently facing court charges because of his misconduct. So apart from the court case, we decided to recommend that even the professional body should deal with him and possibly even deregister him. 

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I would once again like to thank the committee. This is a very clear example that shows that Parliament has got a very big backlog as regards handling of the Auditor-General’s reports. 

5.05
CAPT. EMILY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very good report that they have brought to us. 

I would like to make a few observations particularly from page 5, observation No. 4, about the discontent among the veterinary professionals and their representation on the NDA Board. I strongly support this observation. I would request that the Ministry of Health and whoever is concerned seriously looks into that because many diseases that are transferred from animals to humans mainly go untreated. You have to travel long distances to get the medicine. If you fall sick from sleeping sickness in Serere and you have to go for treatment, you might have to be referred to Tororo. That is the only place where you can find a drug for sleeping sickness. However, if this medicine was brought closer, even if every referral hospital was given drugs for sleeping sickness, this would suffice a little bit. So, the Ministry of Health needs to look at this recommendation very seriously. 

Diseases such as Rabies, Foot and Mouth Disease, Anthrax, Sleeping Sickness, Nagana in animals, even Tetanus - medicines for tetanus are also very rare – are diseases that are very common. So, I strongly support the recommendation of the committee that these veterinary professionals need to be adequately represented on the board so that their issues are adequately addressed. 

The issue of recruitment of staff for NDA at district level has been talked about on page 10, but there is a lot of abuse of drugs at district level. On a market day, on Wednesday, in Serere, you will find all kinds of doctors. They call themselves doctors, but when you look at the doctor, he has hardly gone beyond Senior 4. Some of them have not even gone beyond Primary 7 and they are called doctors. So there is need -(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, Capt. John Emily Otekat is known for being very aggressive on matters of discipline, especially of teachers in his constituency, to an extent of even canning some of them. I would like to get clarified as to why he cannot handle these quack doctors if he can beat teachers who are not even selling chalk. (Laughter) These ones can even kill by providing inappropriate medicine. He cannot tackle them but he beats teachers who cannot even sell a piece of chalk.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Thank you, hon. Johnson Malinga, for that clarification. The issue of quack doctors needs to be addressed by the Ministry of Health as recommended by the committee. They are all over the place and nobody seems to care. What do you call them now? Are they still called DDHS? When the DDHS come around they just look at them and leave them do their work. 

Again on page 5, on the recommendation of the committee about the mandate of NDA to include food regulations like it is done in other East African countries, the ministry needs to look at that recommendation more seriously. More resources, both human and financial, should be availed to NDA to cater for the new mandate of food nutrition because there is a lot of junk food that is being brought into this country and nobody checks on it. Not even the body that is concerned with checking all these foods does that. When you look at the drinks that are brought into this country, their quality is lacking. 

One of the mandates on food nutrition is that NDA should advise people on what to eat. Many diseases that we are grappling with, like Gout, require just sensitising people to avoid eating red meat. So, NDA should be facilitated to make sure that we do not fall sick because of poor eating habits because most of the sicknesses that we suffer from – (Member timed out_)

5.11
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you. I appreciate the work of the committee on this report. My overall impression from this report is that the National Drug Authority seems to be a place without much control; a place full of confusion. When you look at this report, on page 13 it says, “Reference is made to mafia groups - not even one but many - within the NDA, a place full of intrigue, lack of trust, backstabbing, conflict, obvious struggle for power at different levels ….”  

I shudder to think of what happens to people who work in the National Drug Authority. If you have an organisation that is described in these terms it, therefore, begs the question: what sort of leadership do we have at the National Drug Authority that they can head an organisation described in these terms? 

It is not surprising that this report is talking of vast sums of monies lost. The bank accounts seem to be messed up. Dollar accounts are mixed with shilling accounts; bank statements are misplaced or lost. To me, it looks as if National Drug Authority is a place where there is deliberate confusion so that monies continue being lost. Yet, honourable members, this is the place that controls drugs for all Ugandans. I, therefore, ask this question: who is supposed to oversee this organisation? Who should be keeping an eye on how they are operating? 

I have looked through this report and I thought that at the end of the report, in the accounts of 2007, we would be able to see that the situation at the National Drug Authority has improved. However, I do not seem to be able to come to the conclusion that matters are much better in 2007 than they were in the 1990s. I do not seem to come to that conclusion. 

Two years ago I was in China and I heard a story that really impressed me. I heard a story about a very high official, not only in government but in the ruling party as well, who had deliberately allowed contaminated food into the market. I do not want to repeat here what happened to that official. [Hon. Members: “He was hanged.”] So I ask myself the question, how can we tolerate this sort of thing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And for nine years!

MS LAGADA: I want to talk about these district drug inspectors. In this country and in the countryside, many citizens do not go to Government hospitals. The citizens of this country seem to believe in what they call clinics. The clinics, which many times are actually just little drug shops, are where the citizens go for treatment. Now, if you do not have people down there, how do we guarantee that the drugs being sold in these drug shops are actually not expired drugs? Can we be surprised that many people die from Malaria? It is very possible that when you feel sick, you go to a drug shop and end up buying expired drugs and the sickness continues and you die.  

In my home -(Interjection)- my home is called Kona Kamdini and it is famous for its chicken. All the chicken you eat in Kampala incidentally comes from Lango -(Interjection)- not your chicks but chicken. In my place, somebody has something that originally started as a drug shop, then it became a clinic and somehow it has now become a place that even admits patients. That place admits human beings, but when you are about to die, they chase you away. I have always wondered how this place can operate in this manner and we keep on losing children, women and nobody is there to take action -(Member timed out_)

5.17
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good report. 

I am really concerned because what we are discussing touches on the lives of the citizens of this country. When you look at the report, as hon. Lagada has put it, it is just full of confusion. Bearing in mind that this is something that touches everybody, we ask ourselves where this country is going if we cannot have sanity in an area like National Drug Authority that directly affects the lives of the people.

When you look at the inspection levels in the villages, it is seasonal. You will hear that officials of the National Drug Authority have gone to such and such a place almost once in a year. So, you ask yourself, before this period and with these people taking drugs, what kind of health care are we giving our citizens? 

Members talked about the size of the board. Personally, I would not mind about the size of the board if we had good reports from them. But now the board has 22 people and what is ironical is that there is almost no work done. This is what the report shows. 

We have talked about the inadequacy in human resources in this country. The issue is that we do not pay these human resources well and when it comes to health, it is a problem. If we do not have these professional medical people - the pharmacists - then it is very disturbing.  

They say that the equipment used in national laboratory control is not adequate. Why is NDA there if they cannot fully control the quality of the drugs?

There is also another issue, of a one Mr Muhairwe. They say that he did not find conflict of interest when he sat interviews and yet he was a member of the board. When you read further, you find the issue of Dr Lule. The board sat and they agreed that they should blacklist a given company, but this man goes ahead in his communication to add his own views as a person. I believe he is not in Luzira; he must be at large. What then are we doing? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to give this information. I totally agree with what you are saying. There is a total mess in there to the extent that we have had all the past three executive directors leave NDA through Luzira. At one point, they stole the executive director’s passport from his drawer. They blacklisted a member who had qualified to be the chief internal auditor until the committee intervened. So, it is a total mess. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: As I conclude, there is hope now because the President of this country has made it clear that he has renewed vigour to fight corruption. We pray, and as Members of Parliament we must support him, because if we do not do that, this country will be in a mess. So, I support the President and urge Members of Parliament to do so.  

The cancer that is eating this country is corruption. When you look through the report, everything rotates around corruption. So, what is this monster that we cannot really fight? The laws are there. The minister was talking about the courts but I do not know if the courts are really –(Interjection)– I do not know. I do not want to talk about that arm of government. There is a problem and we must be serious. Otherwise, thank you. (Laughter) 

5.22
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you. I also stand up to thank the chairman and his committee for the report. However, I have to declare that I am a member of that caucus although I was not there when they were doing this -(Interjections)- I am just a new member. 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a new member? 

MR BUSIMA: Very new.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR BUSIMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was getting worried. (Laughter) I do concur with my colleagues on the contributions they have made on the Floor. Reading this report, one sees nothing but a total deliberate act to “eat” government funds. We use the word “eat” because whatever recommendation, whatever year, you find people in the finance department are not properly keeping books; the bank reconciliations are not being done or they are not accounting. With this, you start to wonder that if a body like the National Drug Authority is failing to keep simple things like books, you cannot take them at their face value. You have to look at what is behind their back. From the report, what is behind their back has come out - be appointed and feast on Government funds. 

This animal called corruption has reached a stage where, honourable colleagues, we have to sit down and come up with something. It apparently needs all the three arms of government to address the issue of corruption that has become cancerous. When you read the report, a man like Kakwemeire who was in charge of the laboratory was fired and the IGG took steps and recommended that the man must be reinstated. Although he investigated the case, you find they could not reinstate him. What has happened? 

Someone has just mentioned here that equipment at the National Drug Quality Laboratory is poor. No, that is not true! I know the equipment was recommended by the National Drug Authority and purchased. However, because of corruption and lack of the right personnel, what do we have in this country? Waragi is killing people. How do we allow enguuli or waragi in sachets to be sold in our markets without the people in charge of drugs making a recommendation? Why? This is serious and it just shows that somewhere, they were paid to close their eyes. 

We cannot accept this because the lives of some of us who partake of that are in danger. I am now not even enjoying my drink because someone is not doing his job. I am worried ­–(Interjections)– No, I am not going to take it because my life is in danger because somebody is not doing his job. We cannot sit down and accept that. Honestly, as Members of Parliament we cannot. Somebody has to do his job. If it means us telling him, we shall find a way of telling him. 

Let me talk about the board, which I think at 22 is big and a crowd –(Interjections)– but I do not want to address the numbers but the remuneration of this board. In most cases, these people are paid just per diem to attend those meetings and you may find that probably per diem is not inviting, so they do not turn up and they leave all the decisions to management. 

Sometimes these people are too busy. I was reading that there was a whole director of CID on the board. How can he be there when there is a lot of crime being committed in the country? They should have looked for somebody, probably in the CID department, to be there and not the whole CID boss of this country. You can see the problems where you have a board that may not perform very well. I would like to copy an example from another country. These people called district drug inspectors are not enough. We need real policemen trained in capturing people who are selling illegal drugs -(Member timed out_)     

5.28
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you. I also thank the chairperson for presenting the report. According to this report, NDA is one of the worst organisations, if not the worst organisation, in this country. It is terrible. This is an organisation where there are recruitment irregularities. The chief executive directs that to be appointed, you do not have to be the best, otherwise they cannot take you. A financial auditor was irregularly recruited. How can you have such a thing? This is where procurement is done wrongly. 

This is an organisation where if you do the right thing, they fire you. The man tested and said, “These things are wrong” and they said, “You are in the wrong place; why are you saying they are wrong? You go.” 

Madam Speaker, this is a terrible organisation, where revenue collection and banking is wrong. This is where debtors are not bothered - you take money and do not worry. So, are we surprised that we have fake drugs in this country? 

People are using the little money they get and they are not buying drugs because of NDA. We are spending a lot of public money to buy drugs and we are buying fake things. I do not even want to read this report now. What we want now is for the minister to tell us what they have done from here to somewhere else. If the minister does not convince us that from this situation point A, we have gone to point B where there are improvements, I will be very disappointed. 

I am confident that with the NRM people, they are going to tell us that we have moved from A to B. (Laughter) The only reason NDA is giving is that they are thin on the ground. One man says these drugs are wrong and you chase him! So, this is why when the President came up and said we need patriotism –(Interruption) 

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much my friend, hon. Byandala. If I look at the list of the Members on this committee, I find that the Minister in charge of Primary Healthcare was a member of the committee and participated in writing this report. So, if he is called upon to implement, I think he has got to implement with the fore knowledge that definitely, he did a good job to make all these recommendations. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, hon. Okecho. You have supported me and now that hon. Kakooza was a member of the committee and is now a minister, I think he is going to tell us whether we have moved from point A to point B. But as I conclude, this shows us exactly why we want these patriotism classes for people to improve.  All those people who are against them can see why we needed this money. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just before I allow hon. Alaso, Mr Minister, really this story is very sad; a story of lack of total supervision, of a laisser-faire nature, where no one is in charge. NDA is just running on its own. We have got people who are unemployed but there are vacancies and they have been sitting there for years. Is it a problem with the structure of the law? Is it the Act that is the problem? When are you amending it? 

5.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee. I want to challenge the House. This was a 2008 report and we have not been able to give it priority in our very heavy duty mode, but I hope that with time, such matters will find priority in our busy schedules, as soon as the reports are ready.

Having said that, I am forced to ask a few preliminary questions and before I make my comments on this report, I think the issues happening with NDA are really known to the Ministry of Health, which is the parent and supervising ministry. I am almost forced to ask them before I say anything; what have you done since this mess happened, since it has been happening under the watchful eye of the Ministry of Health, which was meant to supervise it? What comes to my mind now is that there is a complete lack of political leadership and supervision because NDA has been left to rob this country. The elements in NDA have been left to kill us as Ministry of Health watches. Really, this is very annoying. Look at the issue of recruitment; does this NDA have a human resource policy? Do they recruit like they are recruiting for a burial or something in their village? (Laughter)

How does it happen that you have an established policy providing for an internal auditor and people just sit and say, “You will not recruit an internal auditor because he is going to snoop around and see that we are stealing?” So they pack aside the internal auditor. They then say, “You are not going to recruit a procurement officer.” The human resource officer is going to do the procurement without following the law in this country and we are all here and the Ministry of Health is facilitated to supervise, with all the ministers and all the technical people. Really, I think we should take the Ministry of Health on rather than the NDA for letting down this country in terms of supervision. 

What comes to mind is that NDA has been left to be an avenue for massive corruption and outright theft where nobody cares and the people who were put there are not willing to execute the mandate of the National Drug Authority. They are just there to pursue their motives, get the money and eat it and do whatever they want. No wonder, Madam Speaker, we have stock-outs, we have fake drugs and we have the so-called quack doctors. 

I am reminded of an incident in Jinja where two people were given fake drugs and the incident kept appearing on TV for a long time. The people started swelling and had bruises all over their bodies and I think both of them died. Up to now, I have never heard a statement from the Ministry of Health assuring this nation. It looks like there is a cohort; the NDA and the Ministry of Health have connived to do something sinister to kill this country. 

While I appreciate the report as presented, I take issue with the committee simply wondering whether Mr Muhairwe did not see the conflict of interest. Mr Muhairwe did not have to see the conflict of interest; he actually was a fulltime beneficiary and he wanted that conflict of interest to be ignored because how does a member sit on a board to interview himself and appoint himself? The only recommendation by the committee is that they re-advertise. I think this committee should have told us that Mr Muhairwe should immediately vacate that office because he got into it in a very illegal and unjustifiable way. He should immediately vacate the office for his deputy or whoever is there to run business while we sort him out. It is really wrong to wait for an advertisement when lives are in danger. 

I want to address myself to the issues of fake drugs and blacklisted companies. Were these drugs recalled? Did anybody care to follow the tracks that Dr Lule can go in for a blacklisted company, bring drugs which are apparently [Mr Kakooza: “He is in court.”] No, waiting for him to be in court - Madam Speaker, you help me control hon. Kakooza because I am partly angry with him. For him to say, “He is in court” when Dr Lule managed to bring drugs that were from a blacklisted company and the same drugs are being consumed and we have incidents like the one we had in Jinja, I think is irresponsible on the part of the minister. When these drugs were brought in from a blacklisted company, I think this country needed to be assured of whether there was an effort to track the drugs, to recall them and to get them out circulation before all of us get poisoned by these drugs? –(Member timed out_)

5.38
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report that is eye-opening, a report that is showing this country that we are really in bad shape, health-wise. NDA is the Authority responsible for the lives of all Ugandans but I am really perturbed by the level of irresponsibility of the board members and those running the Authority, the level of irresponsibility by the managers of the lives of Ugandans. I would not hesitate to call them murderers. 

You remember NDA had expired ARVs and yet Ugandans out there were dying of HIV. We have NDA bosses who are really taking this country at ransom. They are charged for abuse of office and they are let off scot-free, they are continuing to rob this country left, right and centre and nobody is bothered and yet when other government officials get into trouble like this, they are interdicted but nobody has bothered to say, “You should be on interdiction as we see how best to run the Authority.”

I would wish to propose that an overhaul is done for the whole board and possibly new administrators put in place. This will mean that we look into the Act and see how best we can replace the mafias as referred to in the committee report. Otherwise, we should not entrust the lives of Ugandans with a group of mafias. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, thank you and I thank hon. Kiiza for accepting the information. About a year ago a medical team of American troops came to Uganda to give services to our people especially in Eastern Uganda and Soroti and they flew in their drugs. Some of the drugs were discovered by the Medical Superintendent of Soroti when they had finally finished their work and handed over the remaining drugs to be used in the hospital.

They were discovered to have been expired and the Medical Superintendent actually rejected that offer and that is how bad things are because they should have been monitored as they were flying in.

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, are you suggesting that these Americans flew here to treat us and came with drugs to treat us also?

MR OKUMU: Yes, they came with the drugs themselves. They flew in with the drugs and these were American troops, I think who came to offer services in the region. They came in different groups. There is a group who were basically veterinary doctors. These ones concentrated in Northern Uganda but these other ones were treating human beings in Soroti.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to clarify that the troops who volunteered actually worked with veterinary officers and the drugs they were using were cleared and not expired. I know about that group because they worked with our veterinary officers. But this was the same group; I do not remember them treating human beings. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I have clarified. There were two categories of American troops who came at different times. The ones who went to Soroti came earlier; they conducted their activities and then the other ones whom the minister is now aware of because he is the Minister in charge of animals, went to Northern Uganda and they came in later and treated animals.

This matter came up in the Public Accounts Committee where the Medical Superintendent of Soroti Hospital came and complained how these expired drugs were being imposed on them and this is how bad things are. So, the monitoring aspect remains a problem.

I also want to give hon. Kiiza this information; and the House to show how bad things are. This is about stale and illegible cheques. Stale cheques are still being treated as reconciling items in the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stale cheques?

MR OKUMU: Yes, stale cheques are still being treated as reconciling items in the bank reconciliation statements. Furthermore, management continues to receive more bad and un-payable cheques. So, if we cannot even see that we still use them; things are still bad.

MS KIIZA: Thank you hon. Okumu for the information and possibly submission. But I wanted to say in addition to his submission that the National Drug Authority which is supposed to be responsible for the regulation and control of the drugs that enter into this country; they are supposed to ensure that the lives of humanity are really protected and taken care of but it is the Authority that is possibly happy seeing Ugandans suffer the way they are suffering. 

It is quite unfortunate and I would request the Minister that you have to put in extra effort otherwise the lives of people who are dying at the expense of the irresponsibility of you officials will be on your head and when we reach heaven and they will ask you “Kakooza did you protect the lives of Ugandans?” I do not know whether you will be able to give God the answer or you will say, “My Lord, I did not take care because I did not monitor my ministry very well”.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker and want to say that the hon. Minister should take action because the lives of Ugandans are at stake. 

5.47
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I would like to restrict myself to the report and before I do that, I would like to thank the committee for the report, which I think is very comprehensive.

Many people have spoken and I am sure what they have told this Parliament indicates their indignation about the National Drug Authority. NDA is that institution which was put in place by an Act of Parliament to regulate drugs coming into Uganda and I think they have been doing that.

The report covers the years 1995 to 2006. I wish this report had been discussed long ago. It has been ignored a little bit and I think what Parliament is doing now is a post-mortem. The role of the NDA as stated is, “To ensure only high quality drugs, efficacious drugs and cost-effective drugs.” I think that is what the Authority should have done and should be doing.

But I must say the Authority is implementing the laws of this country and according to the report of the committee, National Drug Policy and Authority Act, 1993 is weak and leaves out many outstanding issues in the management of the Authority. These are the implementers. They are working under a weak law and reviewing of this law is the responsibility of the ministry under which NDA is. I do not know whether this has escaped the attention of the ministry. 

I am not going to talk about the financial matters, but as far as the Authority is concerned, I think it is a Government institution and there is a ministry which oversees this Authority. Are we saying that the ministry has given up on the Authority and yet it is very important for the lives of the people of Uganda? As a responsible person, I would blame those people who are responsible for monitoring the activities of the Authority. The board of the Authority is appointed by the Ministry of Health and the board is responsible to the Ministry of Health. Is the Ministry of Health aware that the board was not doing its work for which it was appointed? If it was aware, what did it do?  

Personnel in the NDA work under regulations and they were appointed under regulations. If these regulations are weak, who is responsible for reviewing them and making them up to date? (Member timed out_)

5.52
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, this report reminds me of a story by one of the prominent members in this government who told us that during Obote II government, this Member did not go to the bush but he remained and fought Obote’s Government from within. So I started thinking, does this government now have people fighting it from within? (Laughter) If it is not so, some of these things are very obvious. You will just realise that there is complete structural failure that is deliberate and caused by the board which is supposed to be supervised by the Ministry of Health. So, the Ministry of Health should have known long ago that this board must be overhauled if they were not fighting the government from within. (Laughter)

The biggest problem in the NDA has been around only human resource management. If it had been handled, we would not be lamenting. For instance, look at recruitment. A board member comes in to sit for an interview and he just passes. Which kind of regulation is that? Can’t we even think that he probably pulled out some of the papers of other competitors so that he was able to go through? He was No. 3 but still he was given the job. This should not come here; it is even administrative. Tell him to resign. He is not supposed to be in that office.

Secondly, on placement, you recruit a human resource officer and you make the human resource officer the procurement officer. Look at that. Do you need to be told? You have one legal officer for the whole of this country and there is no department. The man works alone and I have not even seen the reporting system. Where do you report? For example, I have not seen the kind of policy these people are using. Like hon. Alaso has said, I think you just walk in kayoola, you do whatever you want, make your money and move away. 

I do not know what to say but when they tell us that they do not know who is supposed to employ the District Assistant Drugs Inspectors - these are people who are stealing drugs from the hospitals and selling them and you do not know them? Who regulates them? They are selling expired drugs to our people in the villages. They call them “doctor” – we call them “Amuge Dr” because they are not the usual doctors. (Laughter) They are all over. In my constituency, they gave a child medicine to swallow with this - what is this drug they use to treat the dead body - and when the mother tried to complain they put the mother in the vehicle and disappeared with the child. I think the child died and we could not trace them. These are the kind of people we are talking about.

I am insisting that the board be overhauled. That is my very humble proposal. It must be completely overhauled. Let the system begin working. Let us look at the structure; let us look at the policy. But this issue of somebody just saying, “We do not know who handles.” Hon. Kakooza, I know you are trying your best but let me tell you, if you could do some work on this, we will give you another kisanja even if we are not the ones who are supposed to appoint you. (Laughter) Otherwise, if you leave your office without this, we will tell Ugandans that you failed and that there are people fighting from within. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Minister. (Hon. Byanyima rose_) Hon. Byanyima are you on fire? (Laughter) 

5.57
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I am really at a loss because the way this report has been read and debated shows that we are not serious people.

Hon. Kakooza was a member of the committee and later he was promoted to be a minister, but he has not done anything. What is he going to tell us today? (Laughter) Either we move a motion to get him out -(Laughter)- but what else is he going to tell us? 

To me this is an institution that is supposed to save our lives. Hon. Kakooza joins the ministry as a minister; he does nothing and then he comes to defend a report to which he is party -(Interjections)- he was. You signed the report. I do not know but hon. Kakooza should put on another coat apologise and ensure that something is done. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you are pre-empting his response. You are breaching rule 60; you are anticipating what he is going to say. Yes, honourable minister. 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true I was a member of the committee and I was party to the recommendations. What we investigated was true. When I was appointed I took interest in these recommendations and when you look at these recommendations - I will go one by one and tell you how far we have gone. We have covered almost 70 percent of these recommendations. I can read them one by one and what we have done. 

One, the board is big. There is a National Drug Authority Act. We have prepared an amendment to reduce the size of the board and this amendment is with Cabinet. We are soon presenting it. According to the law, they have 19 board members and this is a big number, which we also found to be very costly to Government. We are yet to revise the law. That is how the law is. 

Two, the border entries; I can tell you and I can assure you that currently there is no border entry where there is no National Drug Authority. That is why if you have been reading the newspapers recently, you should have read that we have established a squad within the ministry which is going all over border entries. You saw that in Busia, we arrested people -(Interjections)- no these are different people within the ministry -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Byanyima stated has come to pass. It is barely a year since hon. Kakooza became a state minister. Three months ago, we went to Northern and Eastern Uganda, to all the border posts from Oraba to Busia, but we did not see National Drug Authority staff in over 80 percent of the border posts we visited.

I have a copy of that statement that the minister is reading. We had raised the issues of inadequacy in personnel in all these places. It has been stated there because there was no procurement department, no finance and administration department and no IT department. In one of it, they said they have only recruited one person in the IT department. 

In the legal department they have only recruited two more staff. Now, nothing is mentioned about the department and it says they are still looking for money in order to recruit. Where have the magic 52 minus 16 staff - because there are 52 border entry points to this country. Where have those magic people come from to cover all these border positions given the fact that we had just been to these border points recently?

I think we must be honest to ourselves and help this country. If things have gone wrong let us admit and ask, how do we move forward? (Interjections) So, is he in order to continue to lie because he has joined the front bench yet he is a signatory to this statement here? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have inspectors at the 52 entry points or not?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, the ministry has taken a decision and we have given a directive - the letter is there - for recruitment to all the border entries -(Interjections)- I have the letter and I can present it. (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are the ones who have been complaining that we have not been discussing your reports and now you want to delay the report further. Let us get the answers. Be precise, tell us the truth and we move on.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, according to this report - when you see us - if I quote what hon. Okupa was saying, all that he has stated was not there before. There was no recruitment officer. You are talking of ICT but now he is there. The procurement officer was not there and now he is there. The board was dissolved -(Interjections)- and it was overhauled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, do you want solutions to this nine-year problem or not? He is updating us. You said you wanted to know where he is at the moment.

MR KAKOOZA: Exactly! And it is true, Madam Speaker, I have evidence here on all that they are stating and I can lay it on Table -(Interjections)- if I am allowed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is true that we want to obtain a final solution and it is also true that we want to be of help to the Ministry of Health; otherwise we would not be considering this report. 

What we require of the minister is to be honest to the point that he is exact. When he tells us that there are people at border points and then he shifts and says that the IT has one person, we find a discrepancy there. Let him go very systematically and help us if it is true that he has recruited these people. In which border posts are they? Because, three months ago, the committee he has told us, they were not in existence.

We do not want the minister to gloss over, actually my own inclination, when the minister is responding, is actually to ask for a more formal response. He should come back to the House on another day and bring the details - the extent to which he has addressed this problem because the off cuff remarks do not seem to be helping us. The minister is gambling between appeasing the anger and actually presenting the situation as it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am interested in finding out what the minister is doing. Why are you stopping him? Honourable minister, you say that this is the board that we have resolved; this one we have appointed; that is what we want to hear. You respond one by one.

MR KAKOOZA: I can tell you I was part of the committee and I know what was happening there. Now I am a minister and I am implementing the recommendations I made. The board was dissolved; it is new. You told us to revise the law. I have told you that National Drug Authority according to the number, it is 19. We prepared a paper for Cabinet to accept to amend the law. You cannot resolve it without amending the law -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you made your report let the minister answer. If there is something left out, he will stand up again. I am also interested. I was not in your committee.

MR KAKOOZA: If anybody looks at section 5 of the NDA Act, what is the number of the members of the board? I cannot reduce the number without amending the law. I have to bring it here on the Floor, it has to be amended and we accept it because it is costly.

You recommended that the board should with immediate effect communicate to the Ministry of Health and appoint a representative of UPDF to sit on its board. The ministry received the communication from NDA Board. That section 3(2) of the Act states that it is the Chief of Medical Services, Ministry of Defence, to sit on the board. Not until we amend the law, the ministry is still examining how to get a UPDF represented on the board without twisting the law. We are trying to accommodate all the recommendations you told us. 
 
You recommended that NDA safeguards against private use of funds; and the board to receive reports on the financial status in each of its meetings. NDA should stop investing funds in any financial instruments including Treasury Bills. It is recommendation No. 5 and that is what we did, we stopped them. We said that because they don’t monitor, they should not invest and waste public funds. They have stopped, that is the current position.

The board received reports on sittings on the financial status of NDA, from its audit committee. We have got internal auditors now who are bringing reports on the NDA and which are audited by the Auditor-General. This is what you told us to do and we have done it.

The recruitment irregularities; the committee learnt about the irregularities in the recruitment of the current Executive Secretary, Mr Apollo Muhairwe. The response was that we re-advertised for the second and third time. We found out that the third person, Muhairwe went through. We could not go against the law and the recommendation which was given –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him finish and then if there are other issues you can raise them later. You take note of the areas you want him to talk about.

MR KAKOOZA: You gave the recommendation of Edward Muganyizi who was best candidate for the job that he should be appointed as the Chief Internal Auditor and he has been appointed. It is in the report and he is now in that position. I was also part of the committee. That is why I told you at the beginning that I took keen interest in implementing all, because now I am the minister and the authority; I can direct.

Recruitment of staff in districts; as you know members, the recruitment of staff is under the Public Service Commission. The recommendation you gave was that NDA should gradually recruit its required staff at the districts specifically, in order to effectively supervise and control their activities. The ministry went ahead and we are recruiting zonal inspectors, who will be responsible for a district as it existed at independence.

There was also a recommendation for the authority to set up a procurement department and recruit staff as provided by the PPDA Act as a matter of urgency. The department now has got a PPDA officer who is recruited there. NDA is still following the PPDA law and guidelines including monthly reporting. 

About the legal department, he recommended that the legal department should be strengthened to analyse laws and provide appropriate counsel for the Authority. The legal department is being expanded and the positions of an additional lawyer and enforcement officers have been established and the vacancies advertised. 

He recommended that NDA should advertise and recruit staff for the IT department in order to improve its operations. As I speak right now, there is an IT officer. [HON MEMBERS: “Only one!”] Of course, it depends on the resources because you cannot recruit without resources.

Madam Speaker, they recommended that verification of accountability of documents should be made to the satisfaction of the Auditor-General and any outstanding balances accruing should be refunded to NDA.  NDA changed management of its property and they are currently being managed by Bageine and Company Advocates, which was not there before.  

The Auditor-General examined the balances and NDA is still pursuing Kabyesiza and Company through its lawyers to recover the outstanding amount of Shs 40.6 million. I have a civil suit which is demanding that money and I can lay it on the Table; the evidence is here.  

Out of the recommendations, Dr J.C Lule accepted responsibility and his case should be referred to the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council for appropriate action. 

Madam Speaker, you have heard from the evidence from hon. Okupa, and the information that we have a case in court. It is being handled and the minister has recommended that because of his conduct, his licence should be de-registered since he is not working. 

Another recommendation of the committee was that NDA with the opinion of the Auditor-General’s management should safeguard its assets. Now, all assets have been included on the asset register and have also been engraved. The committee is free to go and check this. 

The licensing permits and certificates; the Auditor-General reported that licence numbers were being allocated manually instead of having them printed. It was, therefore, difficult to reconcile the manual with the computer register. Currently, all the licences are computerised and computer generated. 

Steps are underway to gazette all NDA guidelines and statutory instruments. The First Parliamentary Council has been requested to prepare a draft which the minister will eventually gazette using a standard procedure. 

Audited accounts in the opinion of the Auditor-General from 1999 to 2005, had most of the recommendations pro-active which were meant to improve on the performance of NDA as it executes its mandate. I would like to assure Members that as we stand now, we are implementing according to the law. 

I would also like to appeal to Members and emphasise that I personally do not have any kind words for fake drug dealers. And if the committee allows, I will present seven cases to it for investigation of people who are tampering with the expiry date of the drugs and the law will take its course. I will present those cases to the committee and they verify. I don’t have kind words for those counterfeiting drugs for we cannot compromise the lives of human beings. (Applause) 

Hon. Beatrice Lagada talked about the conflicts. As you know, we are going to revisit the law and we are not going to tolerate the intrigue in the ministry because it cripples the efficiency of NDA. 
 
Madam Speaker, you remember that I became a drug inspector and that is why I have been making impromptu visits, and also given out my hotline which is open 24 hours –(Interjection)– yes, for 24 hours; and we have introduced a covert operation team within the ministry which goes around checking in hospitals all over the country and anybody found doing it will be brought to book. 

The report has been clear that what has been happening in NDA was not the best. But we are trying to take action and we are trying to improve; we have got a surveillance team on NDA and even the President has gone ahead to announce a squad that is going to be reporting to him daily.   

On the quality of the drugs as Members have said, we need to fight corruption and integrity together because unless all of us participate – I can assure you, Madam Speaker, when I became a minister I gave out a hotline on which patients call me everyday and we have managed to arrest doctors who have been stealing drugs and taken them to court. So, all of us should participate in fighting corruption. 

Hon. Alice Alaso talked about political leadership in the ministry. We have new ministers in the ministry; we are taking action as recommended by Parliament and things are working out, unlike the way they were before.

Hon. Yiga talked about Treasury Bills. I have said that we stopped NDA from investing in Treasury Bills. Hon. Otekat said that the drugs for sleeping sickness are far. I think there is a new hospital, which was introduced in his constituency. It is in Amolatar and the new drug called Leprosol, which was previously not in the country, was launched recently. This was in collaboration with World Health Organisation. I think we are going to have a number of drugs for sleeping sickness.

I want to appeal to Members that what was stated in this report was true, but we are trying to improve on whatever they recommended. I think if we put up a combined effort, we shall do better. Thank you very much.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, first of all, I appreciate what the minister has said. However, when a committee of Parliament brings a report like this and more so the oversight committee, the major objective is to make sure that systems are functional. Where systems are functional, some of these items will be limited. This was just a report of the committee and it had not been brought to this Parliament. 

I am so surprised as to how the minister came with a prepared response on each and every item as if - I believe that a committee report is not a final report, unless this report has been passed by Parliament - it can even be passed with amendments; but Parliament can throw out a committee report. So, my concern -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you want? Do you want solutions or not? You have complained of nine years of rot, he has said, “We have made an effort”. He has put it on record and told you what he has done. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am not disputing what the minister is saying or has done. What I am saying is that in his presentation, he should have had a different style. For example, by saying, “On this item where the committee recommends this, we have done this”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, first of all, you have said we have not been debating these reports; so there is no standard format for answering. On that note, I put the question that this House adopts the committee report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received the report on the Old Taxi Park and we asked the clerk to reproduce some documents, which were issued last year. I hope that they spared time to do so. We shall consider that report tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 October 2009 at 10.00 a.m.) 

