Tuesday, 19 October 2010

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I hope you had an enjoyable weekend. In the gallery this afternoon, we have our son, Moses Kipsiro -(Applause)- a double gold medallist. You are most welcome! 

Also, this afternoon, we have students of Mbale Municipal Primary Teachers’ Association. You are welcome! We also have students of Arlington Academy of Hope from Mbale District. When you are introduced, you are supposed to stand up so that people can see you. You are most welcome!

BILLS
 FIRST READING

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

2.59
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010,” be read for the first time.

MR NIWAGABA: It is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications, which I wish to lay on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for consideration and subsequent report to Parliament.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO MOSES NDIEMA KIPSIRO FOR WINNING THE 5,000 AND 10,000 METRE RACES AT THE 2010 COMMONWEALTH GAMES IN NEW DELHI, INDIA

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move a motion in this august House for the resolution of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to pay glowing tribute and accord the appropriate national recognition to, Mr Moses Ndiema Kipsiro, for his heroic feat. This was during  the just-concluded Commonwealth Games in New Delhi, India, where millions of sports lovers globally, witnessed the national flag and anthem of the Republic of Uganda being hoisted and sang respectively twice in recognition of the two gold medals won by our gallant hero who is now seated in the VIP gallery. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes? Seconded.

MR BAKKABULINDI: “WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE that on Wednesday, 6 October 2010 and on Monday, 11 October 2010 through the excellent individual performance of Moses Kipsiro at the 19th Commonwealth Games in New Delhi, India, won the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres athletics long distance track races in 13 minutes, 31 seconds 25 micro-seconds and 27 minutes, 57 seconds and 39 micro-seconds respectively, thereby winning gold medals for Uganda in both events;

AND WHEREAS in winning the two gold medals Moses Ndiema Kipsiro becomes the first athlete to run and win a double gold medal feat at the same Commonwealth Games in the two longest track races of the 5,000 metres  and 10,000 metres track race in 72 years since New Zealand’s Cecil Mathews performance at the British Empire Games –(Applause)- in 1938.(Applause)

WHEREAS during the Commonwealth Games in New Delhi, India, Uganda continued to be recognised as a country of world-class excellence among the international community of sporting nations because of Kipsiro’s achievement; 

AWARE that this triumphant victory presents a requisite impetus for the promotion of sports among the peoples and especially the youth of Uganda for national health and future national glory;

RECOGNISING that this achievement by Mr Moses Ndiema Kipsiro enters his name into the growing list of elite Ugandan athletes who have won Gold medals at international levels, including but not limited to the legendary John Akii Bua (RIP), Boniface Kiprop and Dorcus Inzikuru;

AWARE that Mr Moses Ndiema Kipsiro has through determination, stamina and faithful persistence and love for Uganda deservedly excelled in the field of sports generally and in athletics especially; to the extent that the mention of his name instantly draws respect and repute, for, Uganda epitomised when the main arena in New Delhi had to stand up to attention in honour of the Ugandan National Anthem;

CONSCIOUS that it is now the practise of this Parliament to appropriately and timely honour and recognise all those Ugandans,  young and old, male and female,  who have deservedly excelled in various fields of human endeavour, including sports;

FURTHER AWARE that Uganda also won two gold medals at the 18th Commonwealth Games in 2006 in Melbourne, Australia, courtesy of Dorcus Inzikuru and Boniface Kiprop in the 3,000 metres Steeple Chase (Women) and 10,000 metres (Men) respectively;

CONSCIOUS that the current enabling environment in Uganda is conducive to promoting sports development from the grassroots countrywide;

RECOGNISING that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is committed to establishing sports facilities in the country, including the establishment of the National High Altitude Training Centre in Kapchorwa and thus Uganda is on the correct path to producing many Kipsiros;

RECOGNISING that His Excellency the President appropriately maintains a portfolio of State Minister for Sports in Cabinet and that the Ministry of Education and Sports has appropriately and timely established the Department of Physical Education and Sports to steer sports development in this country since 2005 with four gold medals;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Eighth Parliament sitting in Kampala this 19 day of October, 2010 at Parliament House that:

1.	Parliament collectively congratulates and pays deserved glowing tribute to Mr Moses Ndiema Kipsiro’s tremendous feat of achievement for himself, family, fellow athletes, coaches and the nation at large;

2.	Parliament formally registers recognition of the great honour and pride that Mr Moses Ndiema Kipsiro has earned especially for the country and the people of Uganda, which  ought to automatically qualify him for consideration as a national hero;

3.	Parliament urges and encourages all Ugandans with potential talents in sports especially the youth to emulate the example set by the said Moses Ndiema Kipsiro as an accomplished athlete through hard work and determination;

4.	Parliament commits itself to increasing appropriation of funding for sports and physical activity especially for grassroots sports development;

5.	Parliament recognises the role of the private sector in promoting sports development in Uganda, and that Parliament institutes appropriate legal incentives for the private sector to increase its support and contribution towards the suitable development and achievement of sports in Uganda;

6.	Finally, Parliament collectively registers recognition of the benefits of physical education and sports to individuals, citizens and the nation at large and therefore urges Government and development partners to support and promote physical education and sports at all levels in the country.”  

I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, allow me justify the motion. Hon. Members, sports have become an established tool for economic development, for social and political mobilisation, for peace and unity, for marketing not only individuals and companies but also the country, and of course a tool for health, physical fitness and leisure.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will recall that in 2005 when Inzikuru won a gold medal in the World Athletics Championship in Finland, the Government in its wisdom rewarded Inzikuru with a house. Similarly in the same spirit, the government, through Cabinet, has resolved to reward Moses Kipsiro with a house and a four-wheel drive vehicle -(Applause)- and the ministry is committed to the development of sports in this country. A lot of infrastructure and human resource development has been done, including the introduction of Physical Education as a compulsory subject in schools. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Toskin.

3.11
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand here to second this motion and I want to sincerely appreciate the Government of Uganda, first of all, for having taken the step to improve sports activities in the country. I know for a long time this has not been possible because there have been a lot of constraints to our sports personnel especially the athletes but of recent, we have witnessed Government try to do much more than before. 

I want to use this opportunity on behalf of the people of Sabiny-Sebei to thank Government for what they have been able to do for Kipsiro; first of all, in helping him with his training and for sending him to India with his colleagues. 

I want to thank the Uganda Athletics Federation and the Olympics Committee and the rest of them who have been working together. It is not a mean achievement; it is not easy to achieve this. For a long time, our athletes have been trying but they have not been able to make it. 

I want to inform this House that the Sabiny people and their brothers in Kenya, the Kalenjin, would actually be doing the same but because the others are more facilitated, ours have not been able to show up. Sometimes they have been going to Kenya to practise with their friends. So, that is why I say that Government should use this opportunity to do much more than what has already been done. 

His Excellency the President has promised, and of course we already know that there is a training facility being constructed in Kapchorwa in the high altitude areas; he has also promised to establish a modern track in Bukwo where Kipsiro comes from. As the Sabiny, we have actually asked the Government to upgrade that facility into a stadium so that other games other than athletics can also be promoted in that area. 

But the most important thing is to tap the talent, which is available in the whole area. There is a lot of talent and as we speak, we have over 20 international athletes coming from the Sebei region but all along they have not been able to make it to what Kipsiro has done. But they can still be trained and assisted. 

So, we call upon the Government and the ministers – we appreciate what Government is already doing but we think we should do much more than that so that we can have at least a stadium where these people can train from.

Mr Speaker, we also appreciate what Government has promised to do for Kipsiro – giving him a vehicle – we know that the vehicle will help him to mobilise his friends, not only in the Sebei sub-region but also other parts of Uganda. We want to ask Government, as a token of appreciation, now that Kipsiro has reached this level, a modern, decent house should be provided for him. [HON. MEMBERS: “It has been offered.”] It has been offered? Okay, I want to thank Government for that contribution. 

We want to appeal to Government – at the time Kipsiro was running in Delhi, his parents and colleagues could not even watch or listen to the proceedings. They were instead getting rumours because in the whole of that area, there is no radio or TV signal from Uganda. (Laughter) We now want to ask Government – the Minister of ICT is here and we have talked to him, even before Kipsiro went to Delhi that it is not very difficult to put a booster there. Why do we feed the people of Kapchorwa and the whole of Sebei on news from Kenya and Tanzania? This is one thing our Government should be able to do. It is not a difficult thing and can be done so that all parts of Uganda can be mobilised through TV and radio

The other big interest is infrastructure. The roads: We are planning to take Kipsiro back home and invite all the people of Uganda to come and witness the unveiling of the gold medals in our home area but we are worried how we shall reach there; there are no roads. (Laughter) We want to ask Government - I know this has been in its programme all along but we want to ask Government to expeditiously work on that road. If the tarmacking programme is still on, we want the road to be opened so that it is passable so that our colleagues, the Members of Parliament and other Ugandans can come to Bukwo to witness this wonderful celebration.

Finally, I want to inform Members also that in the President’s good will and gratitude about Kipsiro, he has agreed to support the people of Sebei to organise a grand welcome party in Bukwo – a big one, a very big one. (Applause) I want to use this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to invite you and our colleagues the Members of Parliament to join us during that function –(Laughter)– and I hope our friend would have made the roads by that time. Thank you very much. 

3.15
MS EVERLINE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving this opportunity. I am Tete Chelangat Everline, Woman Member of Parliament from Bukwo District, the golden district where Kipsiro comes from. (Laughter) 

I stand to second the motion moved by the Minister of State for Sports, honourable Bakkabulindi, to congratulate the double gold medallist, Kipsiro Ndiema Moses. Kipsiro has made everybody happy and to smile. We are proud and we shall be proud forever. I say, “Kongiy, Kipsiro kongiy. Thank you, Kipsiro for making us proud.” (Laughter) 

The woman who gave birth to Kipsiro is an extraordinary mother, I am sure. [HON. MEMBERS: “And the father?”] And the father, of course! (Laughter) She deserves to be called a “golden mother” and the father a “golden father”.

Mr Speaker, allow me join my colleague, hon. Toskin, to sincerely send greetings from the Sebei community, in particular Bukwo District. They left yesterday, after receiving their son, Kipsiro. About 500 people came from Sebei sub-region to receive Kipsiro. Kipsiro’s victory, to me, is by God’s grace. It is not because Kipsiro is very powerful, but it is by the grace of God. He is not greater than others. Even in the days of Jesus, God did miracles. For example, He did it for Bartimaeus, only one man among the many. He healed a crippled man and also raised Lazarus from the dead, among many who died. Even today, Kipsiro, among the many, has won two gold medals. So, God answers prayers. 

The victory of the double medallist, Kipsiro which we are celebrating today in Uganda, is a contribution of everybody’s effort, including the Parliament of Uganda. Above all, the commitment of Kipsiro himself; he is a determined person. I remember he made a statement while in Delhi, “I will run until I die” and surely he made it. [HON. MEMBER: “But he did not die.”] He did not die but he has come with medals, after the President spoke to him on phone while still in Delhi. 

I want to say thank you to the parents who bore Kipsiro. They have contributed a lot. Government’s support through the Ministry of Education has also contributed a lot to Kipsiro’s success. The National Sports Council also deserves credit for the work well done; the Uganda Amateur Athletics Federation that nurtured Kipsiro, making him what he is today. The International Olympic Committee tirelessly did its best to ensure Kispiro won in the Commonwealth Games. 

I also thank the Indian community who supported him, without forgetting my home district, Bukwo Local Government. They have contributed a lot towards Kipsiro’s victory, especially the sports officer, Mr Mella Siya. He is there and should be recognised. Amidst all the challenges, he managed to bring up Kipsiro; and his primary school teacher, Mr Leonard Erimiya – he was in papers yesterday – has done a lot.

“Who is Kipsiro?” people may ask. I know Kipsiro, not because of what he is or because of what he has done but from the time he was born. (Laughter) Yes. Kipsiro comes from a family where everybody is a runner. Kipsiro’s father and mother are both runners –(Laughter)– and the MP is a runner. (Laughter) Hon. Members, you are sitting on gold - I run! (Laughter) Above all, he comes from a Christian family; the mother is a very strong intercessor in the Church. That is why Kipsiro is what he is today. Mothers, pray without ceasing for your children to excel.

Mr Speaker, I told you that I personally know Kipsiro.  While in school at St. Elizabeth, Kidetoko, in Soroti with Kipsiro’s in Bubulo High School, the two of us were friends; we were the stars of the day. And above all, we were athletes at the time. 

I also would like to inform Members that I am an athlete and if given opportunity, I can bring a gold medal here. (Laughter) Please, do not let me sit on that gold; just motivate me. Before I came to Parliament, I used to hear of iron ladies but I think; I deserve to be called a golden lady because I now come from the golden district.

Moses Kipsiro was born in a village called Sunghora to Mr and Mrs Mutai. As a child, he loved running. He started practicing running while he was still in primary three. Kipsiro had a vision and very strong faith. While he was still a little young boy he would follow athletes. I remember one time he followed the district sports officer at a place called Chemuron where there was an athletic competition – he pursued his carrier amidst many challenges in Bukwo District. One of the challenges was cattle rustling and killing of people which were very rampant. His family was displaced from Sunghora where they lived because of cattle rustling to Chesimat as you may have read in the newspapers. At that time he was only three years.

Hon. Members, Kipsiro’s life is an encouragement. It does not matter where you come from or what you are; what matters is what God sets for you in life. Kipsiro’s talent was discovered while he was still in primary school at Chesimat. Then he was still a small young boy who loved going for long races. As you may know, most of the long race runners in Kenya are Kalenjin – like Hon. Toskin Bartile has said, we are part of that tribe –(Interjections)– yeah! We are the only Kalenjin tribe on the Ugandan side. Kipsiro Moses progressed from parish to sub-county then district up to national level and today he is a world star.

My colleague, hon. Bartile Toskin said something about roads. Let me first point out that we have lost many Kipsiros in Bukwo District because of many problems, for example, cattle rustling. And so many potential athletes have run away from Bukwo to Kenya with those talents because of the bad situation in that district. 

I want to inform you that there are many men and women in Bukwo who can run, but who have been frustrated by the problems in the district. One of those problems is communication. For example, Kipsiro’s own mother could not access a television set to watch her son do it at the Commonwealth Games. Those people who had the capacity to walk crossed to Kenya to access television sets so that they could watch Kipsiro do it in New Delhi. So, I request that Government expeditiously installs electricity in Bukwo District to enable other people also access Kipsiro given that he is now a public figure. In addition to that, the road to Bukwo should also be worked on immediately. (Laughter)

Kipsiro is a hero and we are going back home, but like Hon. Toskin Bartile has said, we cannot go through Uganda; we have to go through Kenya to get there. So, I request that Kipsiro be air lifted to Bukwo District. (Laughter) He made us proud. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Yes, hon. Alaso.

3.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion as moved by the Minister of State for Sports. I indeed congratulate Moses Kipsiro and I would like to say, in Kupsabin “Kongiy, Kipsiro.” (Applause)

Watching Kipsiro while doing it at the Commonwealth Games in New Dheli gave me a true sense of being a Ugandan. For once I had an understanding of what makes one feel patriotic –(Interjections)– yes, that feeling of seeing Kipsiro wrapped in a Ugandan flag and the National Anthem of this country being sang, really made me feel very Ugandan. (Laughter) Actually at one point I attempted to even pretend to be a Sabin. (Laughter)

So I would like to put on record our greater appreciation to Moses Kipsiro for making this country very proud – those are the things that we need our country to be known for – greater and hot talents; great achievement.

Before I submit on two or three issues, I just want to request that the house, which the Government is giving to Moses Kipsiro, be a Kampala House. I hope that it is not going to be a house in Bukwo, but a house in one of the very good suburbs of Kampala.

This day and the days that have passed, have been days of celebrations and joy. As we celebrate this powerful achievement, may I remind Government and the Ministry of Education and Sports to address the key issues of investing in sports? 

As we talk, the sports sector in the Ministry of Education and Sports is still underfunded. I hope you now have realised that if we put money into sports, we can bring out those truly patriotic feelings that we are looking out for. If we put money in the sports, we will tap talents countrywide; we will tap that sense of national unity. I actually called Hon. Bakkabulindi on phone and asked him to let me go with him to pick Moses Kipsiro from the airport, but I was unable to do so because I was a little far. Why? Because I was feeling truly Ugandan!

I would like to urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to look into matters of talent identification. I don’t know the odds that Moses Kipsiro has had to go through to become this international figure but I can imagine that somewhere in Kalangala, Bundibugyo, Moroto, Serere, there are so many Moses Kipsiros whose talents are being buried unrecognised.

Let me urge Government to go in and run talent identification camps because I am sure that if we invest money in talent identification, we will be celebrating more gold in years to come.

The other area of my interest is the upkeep of those people who do us proud. After they have done us proud- We are lucky that in the recent times we have had some interventions for Dorcus Inzikuru and now for Moses Kipsiro but there are a number of our athletes and footballers out there who have done this country proud and they are living in very squalid conditions. They are facing hard times and living in very dilapidated buildings. I would like to implore Government to follow up these people as they are the true heroes of our time. 

In Teso where I come from, there is an old man called Etolu who was once a high jumper. Those are people we should look for. He won a gold medal for this country but I don’t think that we remember that he once did this country proud. (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable for giving way. About those who are left after making Uganda proud, there is one who was called Aya. She died miserably. She was never looked after at all. So I wanted to just let you know about Aya who made Uganda proud. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Betty Aol. Actually the sad story about the late Aya is that during the latter years of her life, she was surviving on crushing stones in a quarry to make ends meet. We really need to put money into a scheme that will maintain the people who have done this country proud.

Finally, I would like to remind hon. Bakkabulindi that we are yet to get into the final bits of the Sports policy for this country. You know the concerns that our schools raised especially when children get injured when they are participating. You also know the gap that we have in identifying talent, which is out of school, because we only have a structure for participation within the school going but those outside schools with the same talent do not have the same exposure.

I would like to implore that Government puts money into this. Once again, I want to say congratulations, Kipsiro. You have done us proud. (Applause)

3.37
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, National Youth Representative): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion on the Floor. Obviously I am the National Youth Member of Parliament and our golden Kipsiro falls under my constituency. I want to thank him so much for this glory that he has given to this nation. I also want to thank the family, the people of Bukwo and all those who have been behind this victory.

I am a sports woman and I also used to be an athlete before my weight challenged me and I know the value of sports. I want to emphasise that although Government is mandated to promote sports, there has always been a weakness in the Ministry of Education and Sports. We tend to focus much on education and leave out the sports part of it. That is why many of our young people’s talents are not being developed or promoted.

You go to most of the primary schools and there is no time for playing football. They don’t even have football grounds. In the villages, those other children who want to play football or athletes can only run when they are going to the well because there are no playgrounds. They can only play football using balls made from fibres. So we need to attach a lot of value to sports. Sports not only promote the health part of the human being but it is also an employment opportunity.

When I look at the golden Kipsiro now, he is worth millions and is kind of getting a job for himself. There are so many young people who are talented and who can earn much from their talents.

So as the mover has proposed, Parliament should put more money in the sports sector. The local governments should budget and implement sports activities because even if we put money at the national level and the local governments don’t plan and budget as well, still the local talents will not come out.

I want to inform this august House that we have been lobbying for sports promotion with the UN Habitat where I have been participating since I have been in this House. Together with UN Habitat, we have come up with an understanding to promote sports and together with Masaka Municipal Council; they are going to build for us a sports academy, which is going to be taking care of so many sports activities.

I think Government should invest a lot in this. I also think that sports is one of the ventures that the government should get involved in to promote patriotism because as hon. Alaso has said, watching Kipsiro with the national flag and anthem, we can see patriotism. We have invested so much money in promoting patriotic clubs, which are not going to bring out what we really want from our young people. I believe we should promote patriotism through visible activities and programmes that you can also be proud of.

So once again, I want to congratulate you our golden Kipsiro. You deserve everything and all opportunities whether a house, air lifting - you deserve everything because Kipsiro is lucky. He is a living hero and we are happy to be talking about someone who is a hero and living and still earning more victories. We thank you and we pray for you that God will bless you with more gold medals and so many other things that you will achieve in your life. Thank you very much.

3.44
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate two people under this motion. First and the obvious one is of course, Moses Kipsiro for the wonderful achievement he has made for Uganda.

I watched both events and I was thoroughly impressed. I was slightly shaken in the second event because I thought Kipsiro would be overtaken by the Kenyan but he held his ground and finished first to the joy of all my colleagues who were with me. I wish to congratulate him.

Unfortunately, Sir, this and other achievements that Uganda has got in the field of athletics recently seem to be based on individual achievements. I cannot pinpoint any individual in authority who can come up and claim that he has nurtured any of these people to their present day successes. 

As we have heard already, there are a number of young men where Kipsiro comes from who could have been assisted to have further achievements in the field of athletics; but, Sir, we seem to be doing very little; it is unfortunate. 

My second congratulations go to my friend and colleague, hon. Minister Charles Bakkabulindi. (Applause) I congratulate you, Sir, because without raising a finger, this gentleman constantly has successes flushed upon him. The honourable minister promised us a sports policy some years back; we have not seen any. (Laughter) I would want to know from the hon. Minister how much money each ministry has deliberately apportioned for athletics. I would want to know how much money was given to the Cranes recently and whether the amount of money which was given to the Cranes to go to Nairobi was at the level at which the sports people wanted?

Mr Speaker, the achievement of Kipsiro has made the minister to realise that physical education is a necessity in primary schools something that we knew when we were growing up; something which was a normal thing for us. Now the minister is just realising it today. Doesn’t that deserve congratulations? 

Government must come out and deliberately direct its attention towards sports if we are to get more achievements along these lines. We are not going to work on the basis of “ad hocism”. Today some young man on his own gives an achievement and Uganda is up happy and yet the government has not done a single thing for him! 

Lastly, even after these young men have achieved we must nurture a culture of remembering them. Who, for example, in this House remembers that hon. Aggrey Awori was a fantastic athlete? Which one of you? Which one of you remembers a gentleman called Amukun? Which one of you remembers a gentleman called Ogwang Bua who was the first captain of independent Uganda to go to the Commonwealth in Melbourne in October 1962? We have so many of them. 

Why can’t we build a house of sports fame so that all these famous people: Awori, Ben Wacha, Amukur -(Applause)- so that the young men who will be coming after us will know that they are not re-inventing the wheel but they have their fathers and grand fathers who were also as good if not better than them? So that they can look forward to trying to achieve what has been achieved before. I thank you, Sir. I congratulate Kipsiro; I congratulate Charles Bakkabulindi. (Applause)

3.49
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues and all Ugandans in thanking our golden boy, our hero, Moses Kipsiro, for bringing us glory and honour which we are all enjoying right now. We are walking with our heads high. It was such commendable work! I really thank whoever made it possible for Kipsiro -(Interjection)- not only Government, I thank members of the family and everybody who made a contribution. It wasn’t a solitary effort; I know there are people behind that achievement. 

It was even such a great moment for us as a nation when our boys, the Cranes, almost did the same in Nairobi. I read screaming headlines in The Daily Nation and all the papers how the streets of Nairobi were painted yellow -(Interjections)- yes, for once I was happy that the streets of Nairobi were painted yellow. (Laughter) And again the “yellow” flag being hoisted in New Delhi - I mean the national flag which is predominantly yellow. I was very proud, I felt highly elated and thanks very much to our boys, the Cranes, and the great funs that travelled all the way to Nairobi and all of us who made it possible.  

Having said that, I would suggest that this is a golden opportunity for us to reflect on the achievements and be able to plan on how we can register more achievements apart from this honour which Kipsiro, the Cranes and a few others that I cannot mention now have brought us. Yes, there has been a mention of the suggested increment in the sports funding and the associated facilities but the question I would pause, “Are these achievements a result of a well designed programme or they are just happening by accident or our boys like Kipsiro are doing it against all odds?”  

The question we have to ask ourselves, “What is our national policy in promoting sports in this country?” We would start with the sector itself. Personally I am not comfortable, hon. Minister, that sports is not a full ministry. When I look at hon. Namirembe Bitamazire as the full Minister in charge of Education and Sports, I do not think she is - with due respect - I would love to see a situation where hon. Bakkabulindi you are a substantive minister for sports; a cabinet minister in charge of sports, why can’t we do that so that we have a full minister responsible for sports and not a minister of state?  

Two, the facilities; as a Member of Parliament for Kampala Central, I am worried about the national facilities for sports. Hon. Bakkabulindi, you know the status of Nakivubo Stadium; it is a white elephant; it is something that has gone to the dogs. I do not know whether you have any programmes of upgrading it; of modernising it or you are just waiting for an investor to come and put a shopping mall there? The same thing goes to all these facilities; Buganda Road Sports Ground -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, hon. Lukwago, for letting me give you this information and for also expressing your concern about the development of sports. I want to tell you that sometime back Cabinet approved the modernisation of Nakivubo. The paper was passed. As we talk now, the technical people are drafting the modalities, which are going to be under the Public-Private-Partnership arrangement, and the people at Nakivubo are aware about that. 

Let me use the same opportunity to also inform you that there is a sports policy in place. I will give you a copy and I will give my colleagues a copy of it.

Similarly, you were asking whether there was funding for these activities. With this trend that we have of the Cranes, where I had to give six buses for morale boosters to go to Nairobi, something that is very rare; we spent Shs 65 million. In the recent Commonwealth Games in India, we spent over Shs 500 million. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for the information. You know that at one time Nakivubo Stadium was supposed to be turned into a bus park. You are aware of that. KALITA and others invaded it. We are not sure whether it will remain a national stadium. Again, there are –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you hon. Lukwago for giving way. Just yesterday – I just wanted to let my colleague, hon. Bakkabulindi, know that part of the land in Nakivubo stadium has been sold to some purported investor. And this is very serious, Mr Bakkabulindi, because as we continue debating this victory some other people –(Interruption)  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order because this is misleading the House, and some of our fellow politicians participate in misleading society. What is happening now near the parking yard just in front of Nakivubo, there is a piece of land that belongs to City Council. Recently the same issue was raised and we took our surveyors there and we surveyed all the boundaries of Nakivubo, including the park yard. That piece of land where you see development is none of my business but City Council’s. Therefore, is my colleague in order to stand firmly, majestically as he was and pose and talk with confidence, while misleading the House that Nakivubo is selling part of its land? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that it is out of order to lack information? (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, allow me complete my submission. The point I was making was preservation and modernisation of our national sports facilities. Of recent there has been a wave of disposing off these facilities. The minister is aware of this. Buganda Road Primary School’s sports ground was sold to some investor; they are about to take it away. But more recently, had it not been for the intervention of Parliament, the Lugogo play grounds – you are aware about Nakasero Primary and many others; I will not list all of them but I will also talk about Namboole. 

After the NRM delegate’s conference there was a complaint that the facilities were broken down. Mr Speaker, if we could come up with a policy, where probably political activities could be taken elsewhere, away from Namboole Stadium, I would really support it, particularly NRM activities. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: There is a consensus on this motion. Maybe I should give opportunity to hon. Lumumba and we close this because we have a lot of business. I would also suggest that the committee in charge of this sector should scrutinise it and make a report so that we have a full fledged debate on the matter, otherwise there is consensus. When I look at the list of items for today, including the other CHOGM report, I think its time we really conclude this matter.

4.01
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much. I want to congratulate my brother, Moses Kipsiro. I want to raise only one issue. Given all that the minister has told us, is what we are awarding Kipsiro equivalent to the advertisement he has given this country? 

Look at the Ministry of Tourism and Trade - the money we spend in that ministry is more than the money we spend in the ministry of sports but Kipsiro has now advertised this country to a high level. Is what we are rewarding Kipsiro equivalent to the money we spend in the Ministry of Tourism? Thank you very much.

4.02
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in congratulating Mr Kipsiro for what he did for this country. 

My observation is that we are here praising the gold medallist, which is also befitting, but what about the other members in his team? It is true they did not bring us any medals but they participated and represented us. As a way of encouraging these –(Interjection)- some people are calling them tourists but I do not believe they are. They indeed represented our country and I think it is befitting to reward the whole team although our gold medallist would get something extra. 

Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament are becoming sports officers of some sort in their constituencies. Wherever you go, you will find these young men and women asking for balls and Ludo charts, but when you look at our budget, there is nothing in it to assist us face this challenge. 

I am suggesting that –(Interjection)- I won’t suggest that. I am withdrawing that suggestion because I saw so many eager eyes on the other side. (Laughter) But what I was saying is that we have a problem as MPs. We have become the source of funding for sports activities in our constituencies and this is because the sports ministry is not funded properly. We don’t have anywhere to turn to when you are moving around and people are asking for a ball, a Ludo chart or a playground.

Finally, I want to suggest that private companies which sponsor sports activities in this country should be recognised because at the end of the day, it seems as if it is the business of Coca-Cola, MTN, Zain to deal with sports. How do we encourage these private people who invest in sports, Mr Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, do you want to say something in conclusion? 

4.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I support the motion. Moses Kipsiro equalled a record last set as already noted 72 years ago when they were called the Empire Games. Just think how far the world has moved in that huge time. Well done, Moses. (Applause)

Secondly, Moses started off in a most disadvantaged way. His primary school in Kapchorwa was far away that it was some times completely cut off from the rest of the district – that is where it may have ended had it not been for a school teacher called Mr Leonard Erimiya –(Applause)- remember that teacher. The teacher initiated sport weekends and sport days at the school. Other schools should emulate Erimiya. 

As you have read, His Excellency, the President has given Shs20 million to Mr Kipsiro for removing the curse of no medals as of late and two gold’s at that. He is also to build a camp house for athletes and to also up grade a training field in Kipsiro’s home in Bukwo District and you have also heard that a vehicle and a house will be availed to him. (Applause)

Some people may also say that we remember also those two great athletes; Akii-Bua who broke the world record at 400 metres in the Olympics and Dorcus Inzikuru who broke the world record in the women’s 3,000 metre steeple chase. That disadvantage is also followed by mighty deeds. But the majority will clearly say that the talent in Uganda is there in plenty and what is needed is to unleash it by better facilities, by better coaching and even by better diet by those who are good enough to take part.

Finally, because I am a man of few words –(Laughter)- Kipsiro has contributed significantly towards marketing the good image of Uganda. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that should be the end of the debate on this motion. But I am reminded that actually the motion was supported by three other Members of Parliament; moved and supported by hon. Toskin Bartille, hon. Tete Chelangat and hon. Elijah Okupa. I think it is fair to allow the third seconder of this motion just two minutes so that we conclude. (Laughter)

4.09
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you so much for having recognised that. I join the rest who have joined our motion and resolution here in seconding and supporting. 

We do congratulate Moses Ndiema Kipsiro. When we were in Nairobi for the Cranes, it was an inspiration for us who went to watch the Cranes. You would see Ugandans with the placards reading, “If Kipsiro can do it, why can’t we beat the Harambee Stars?” There were 68 buses from Uganda in Nyayo Stadium. 

For the first time, I was putting on the yellow colour. (Laughter) We were there all dressed and full of patriotism. Of course we were disappointed that there was no one from the Executive to represent but we were there. Hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Hood Katuramu and myself took charge of the Executive as well –(Laughter)- we represented you. Mr Speaker, that is the spirit that sports brings to this country and to the world. 

We thank this Parliament for having facilitated those who travelled to Kenya for that. It shows the interest and the importance the Speaker attaches to sports activities. We thank you and I hope it will continue. 

We also thank the appointing authority for having put hon. Bakkabulindi, a sportsman to be in charge of sports because we now see the results. When you deploy the right people in the right place, you get the results. 

The first Commonwealth medal was won in 1954 by Patrick Etolu. It was a silver medal. To date, we have 13 medals in the Commonwealth and out of those, there are four gold medals. We have all those people who participated in the Commonwealth Games and brought us medals. 

I just want to suggest that all these people need recognition right from Mr Etolu, Benson Esepai, Amos Omolo, Judith Aya – of course may her soul rest in eternal peace – William Koskei, Silver Ayo, Peter Rwamuhanda, Ruth Kyalisima, Dorcus Inzikuru, Boniface Kiprop and of course now Moses Kipsiro; we are not looking at the Olympics. So, those are the Ugandans who have made this country proud. 

I was happy when the Uganda Tourist Board jumped up very fast to take up Moses as a tourist ambassador. I hope they will not only stop at that but should go beyond that in order to market this country.

Lastly, I only got a bit disappointed the day Moses Kipsiro came back because I had expected Ugandans to have stormed Entebbe in big numbers. I was so disappointed that Ugandans who love football and sports decided to turn up in big numbers for Gaetano for what he did -(Laughter)- and very few turned up for Moses Kipsiro who had sold Uganda’s image. I think Ugandans should get serious and really show solidarity and support. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is still clear in your mind and now it is my duty to put the question to the motion moved by hon. Bakkabulindi.

   (Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.14
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, this is a statement to Parliament on the circumstances surrounding the arrival in the country of copies of a book entitled, “The Correct Line? Uganda under Museveni”. 

Recently, two consignments of books arrived in the country. Due to irregularities in the necessary documentation, there was a delay by the customs authorities and the security agencies in releasing the consignment to the consignees. Circumstances surrounding the consignment are as follows: 

Declaration P37649 in the name of Makerere University Council was lodged to customs by DHL International Ltd. The declaration was for the clearance of packages of printed material. 

On scrutiny, it was established that the consignment was from Milton Keynes, USA. It was consigned to Dr Fredrick Golooba Mutebi, Makerere Hill Road, Makerere University, Kampala. 

Given the fact that the consignment was being cleared in the names of Makerere University Council and not in the consignee’s name, Dr Fredrick Golooba Mutebi, the entry was queried. The query has not up to date been answered. 

Mr Speaker, I am sure Members will appreciate the fact that customs authorities are duty bound not to release goods to a person other than the consignee; unless the consignee so requests and applies for a change of ownership. This is an absolutely necessary requirement. If not adhered to, goods can end up being released to the wrong person, which results into litigation and claim for damages. 

On the same day, another declaration number P5935 was lodged in the name of Olive Kobusingye. The declaration was for identical goods. This caused confusion and attracted police attention. Therefore, pursuant to Section 86 of the East African Community Customs Management Act, this consignment was released to the Police on 09 October 2010 for investigation. 

Police investigation of the confusion caused by two declarations for identical goods was completed. The Police have asked the relevant authorities to handle the matter of the two consignments in accordance with their rules and procedures. 

The consignment lodged in the name of Olive Kobusingye, however, was released. The one which was in the name of Kobusingye had no query and was released to the consignee. 

4.19
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP, (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make the following observations on the statement issued by the Minister for Internal Affairs. With due respect to you, hon. Minister, I expected a more detailed statement than what you have put to us. Some of the statements that you issued are not even contained in this official statement which you have issued. A few minutes back, the minister said that the consignment, which was to be received by Dr Olive Kobusingye was released to her, but it was not stated here. 

The issue which is a surprise to me in this statement I if the issue was about the consignee vis-à-vis the consigner – if you are interested in protecting these goods and making sure that they are handed over to the right person, then the goods should have been returned to the consigner which is DHL –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you Chief Whip for giving way. Changing the name on a consignment is allowed – maybe hon. Kirunda Kivejinja has never known that. I can import a car in my name and decide to have hon. Elijah Okupa clear it in his name –(Interjections)– I have experience in what I am talking about. 

So, these items that we are talking about are not taxable and even if they changed the name on the consignment, there is no loss caused to Government. Government is just trying to play on people’s psychology. There was no need for the goods to be withheld; they would have been cleared in whatever form.

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Mafabi for that information. I am inclined to think that the circus that surrounds these goods is about the content of the goods; if not, is it the first time that goods have been received in this country in this form? (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Chief Whip for giving way. One week ago, the minister told us here in the House that the reason the books were being held concerned security. Now, in this statement, I do not see anything to do with security; the reasons have changed to swapping of the name of the consignee and the people who lodged documents for clearing these goods. So, it is now raising doubt as to the reason why these books are being withheld up to now.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, if it is about the content of the books, then I am happy the Monitor newspaper is already serialising copies of this book. In which case, even if you hide the hard copies, we will already have access to the content. It is already on the Internet and it is being run in the newspapers – and we want to know the correct line – line “Entufu”.  Thank you.

4.24
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Kivejinja for this statement. First, I would like to join my colleague who was questioning the proper record in relation to the report of the minister. In his report, it is not clearly indicated whether the second consignment had been given to the consignee. 

Two, the issue of the change in name should not have caused the amount of trouble we are trying to associate with this consignment. It either indicates that there were other interests in keeping the books or there was incompetence on the side of those handling matters at the airport. I suspect that at the airport, there was no such level of incompetence but rather, this was a deliberate act on the side of Government to find reason either to delay the books or have them consigned in a different direction.

Page 2 of the minister’s statement has lack of cohesion in No. 2 where he says that the management of the airport authorities and the customs handed this consignment to Police on the 9th of October. This same minister is telling us that Police investigations into the confusion caused by the two declarations for identical goods were completed and the Police have asked the relevant authorities to handle the matter -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Kyanjo. The day we raised the issue of the capture of this book, the following day Uganda Revenue Authority through the Commissioner for Customs, Mr Malinga, issued a statement that URA did not have any problem with the consignment. He said they had released the consignment and Police had taken over. If you look at the Daily Monitor, you will find that statement by Uganda Revenue Authority. So, I do not know the authorities at the airport the minister is talking about. It is in the newspapers.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think what we need to know is whether Government has any claim on these books now? Aren’t we interested in the current position? What is the current position? Can you please guide us on that? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for giving this statement to Parliament. 

I would like to further clarify the importation procedures at the airport. Ownership of goods is verified by what we call an airway bill. When you import goods, they are accompanied by an airway bill, which among other things mentions the owner of the goods, the consignee and the consigner. In terms of other importations via the sea and so on, there is an equivalent of a bill of landing. A bill of landing is evidence of ownership of goods. In this case as the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has said, the goods were consigned. The airway bill read Dr Frederick Golooba Mutebi as the consignee, the owner of the goods. The goods were entered into the customs form and in the customs declaration form; they mentioned Makerere University Council as the consignee. Ordinarily, Uganda Revenue Authority is supposed to protect ownership of the goods. So, they queried that entry because it was in the names of Makerere University and the consignee was in the names of Frederick Golooba. 

On discovering that anomaly, customs raised a query in terms of a query notification. They call it query notification or amendment form. In that form; they queried the ownership. They said ownership had to rhyme with the documentation. They asked -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is; if the matter was just for URA, how does Internal Affairs come in? (Interjections) Who invited them to come in-(Interjections)- and for what reason?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the Deputy Prime Minister mentioned that when there were two consignments of similar goods and they realised they had been consigned to Dr Golooba, yet they were supposed to be entered in the name of Makerere University, ordinarily, there was suspicion -(Interjections)- that is why both consignments were held.

THE SPEAKER: My question was: what is the current position?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the current position is that the consignment that was properly declared in the name of Dr Kobusingye, according to the information we have obtained from the Commissioner of Customs, has been released.

THE SPEAKER: Very good.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the second consignment -(Interjections)- let me finish! The second consignment that had been undeclared is still in the hands of URA -(Interjections)- pending the rightful consignee claiming it. This consignment will be released to Dr Golooba as soon as the query is answered. Either Dr Golooba claims the consignment or notifies URA that he has transferred ownership to Makerere University Council. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give and for the correct record of this House is that the consignment, even in Dr Olive Kobusingye’s name, has not been released. Even as we talk now, she does not have a single book. You are still holding onto all the books you impounded at Entebbe International -(Interjections)- Airport. Therefore, it is wrong for the minister to come to this House and mislead the nation that you have released the books. You have not released even a single book to Dr Olive Kobusingye. (Mr Kyanjo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us do this. Let URA write to me tomorrow about the position of these two things. The letter should be signed by the Commissioner-General. I will read the letter. I think it is finished.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RESUMPTION OF WATER SUPPLY IN SOROTI MUNICIPALITY AND SURROUNDING AREAS

4.33
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues; I am making a brief statement on the status of water supply in Soroti. 

Colleagues are already aware that on 10 October 2010 at around 11.00 a.m., a floating island stormed Awoja Bridge where we have our water supply, and washed away the installation of the water supply treatment plant. On the same day, at around 2.00 p.m., I received a call from the area Member of Parliament about the problem. I also notified the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication and the managing director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation who are managing the treatment works at Awoja. 

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation dispatched personnel to carry out the emergency installation of pumps set to alleviate the problem and between then and 16 October, NWSC was busy repairing the works and I am happy to inform you that on Saturday 16 October at around 10.00 p.m., installation of a pumping platform, the pump assembly and the electrical works were complete and pumping resumed. 

The water supply to Soroti, Kaberamaido and Amuria was fully restored on Sunday morning, 17 October 2010. 

For a permanent solution to the repeated occurrences of floods, the NWSC and my ministry are going to construct a new Water Abstraction Intake early next year during the dry spell. 

In brief, Mr Speaker, that is what I had for the Members.

4.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister. I came from Soroti on Saturday and we had given the minister, through you, a directive on Wednesday to help the people of Soroti. So, we are happy that on Sunday we saw water flowing. I must thank her for that timely effort. (Applause)

4.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to register my appreciation indeed on behalf of the people who live in Soroti town to the Ministry of Water and Environment for doing its best to help us sort out the water challenges that had been presented by the collapse of the water pump. We thank you for your intervention; we have water restored in Soroti and it is our prayer – just like Oliver Twist, we still ask for more – that while we thank you, we would like to ask you to look at a bigger pump to increase the supply. As a blessing in disguise, we take advantage of this and ask you to give us a bigger uptake plant so that we have more water coverage for Soroti. 

We would also like to ask the Ministry of Water and Environment not to entirely abandon the supply of water in municipalities to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Following what happened to Soroti in the last few days, we realised that we still needed operational boreholes in the municipalities and this may happen to any municipality if your main water supply is disrupted. So, we hope that the Ministry of Water and Environment will continue to look at rehabilitating the other alternative water sources in the municipalities. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ROADS AND BRIDGES IN THE COUNTRY

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I promised this House on Tuesday that I would bring a comprehensive report on the status of roads in the whole country on Thursday. On Thursday, we had a special Cabinet meeting, which took the whole day and I could not fulfil my obligation and I apologise for that.

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you need?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, there is the Sub-Saharan Africa Conference on Transport and infrastructure going on in Munyonyo, where the ministry and UNRA are attending and it ends tomorrow. I, therefore, beg that on Thursday, I will bring the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, bring the statement on Thursday. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT CONCERNING THE ARREST OF SULAIMAN KIGGUNDU BASUDDE OF KISENYI

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in the Parliamentary Session of Wednesday 29 September 2010, a matter was raised by hon. Erias Lukwago, in regard to the arrest of Sulaiman Kiggundu Basudde of Kisenyi. Hon. Lukwago reported that Mr Kiggundu was picked up by plain clothed security operatives driving a double cabin vehicle on Friday, 24 September 2010 and taken to an unknown place where he had been held incommunicado. 

We have established that Mr Kiggundu was arrested in Kisenyi Mengo by the Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force on 24 September 2010 on suspicion of being linked to a terrorist group, which had intentions of carrying out fresh attacks in Uganda. This suspicion was based on the following grounds:

1.	Mr Kiggundu’s telephone number had been analysed and the communication data revealed that he was remotely linked to one Omar Awadh, currently detained in Uganda on suspicion of involvement in the 11 July terrorist attack on our nation.

2.	He was also in constant communication with Sheikh Segawa Mohammed who was also in constant telephone contact with one Omar Awadh also known as Abu Sahal, a suspected al-Qaeda associate. Sheikh Segawa Mohammed was traced, arrested and interrogated and I am happy to report that both Sulaiman Kiggundu and Sheikh Mohammed Segawa have since been released but investigations continue. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.42
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for the statement. I wish to register my sincere thanks to the Government Chief Whip, hon. Migereko, for the timely intervention when this matter was raised. When I raised it the first time, he made a communication and a copy was given to me and to the Minister of Internal Affairs and indeed the following day, Sulaiman Basudde was released and he was received by his family members. 

I thank you, Minister, for that timely intervention but when I look at this statement, it is really wanting and it poses a serious threat not only to the suspects but even innocent Ugandans if we are going to just be picked like that. The Minister indicates that Basudde was picked by plain clothed people who did not identify themselves and the Minister is silent on where Basudde was detained. The fact is that he was detained at the offices of JATF in Kololo, which is a well known place for detention of people suspected to have committed crimes related to subversive activities but it is not a gazetted detention centre. 

The Minister is fully aware under the provisions of the Constitution that even a suspect has a right to access his doctors, lawyers, and his kin. These are rights provided for and guaranteed under the Constitution but there are procedures to deal with people who are suspected of having committed particular crimes. In this particular case, I have since talked to Mr Basudde about this gentleman that you are talking about – Sheik Segawa Mohammed – and this is a matter which causes threat to some of us. The gentleman mentioned here is an in-law to Mr Basudde. 

Mr Speaker, tell me, if I make communication with my relatives and you come and pick me up and take me to a detention centre where I am detained incommunicado, are these not serious matters? So, the Minister should tell us how suspects of this nature can be accessed because I remember registering a complaint here on the Floor. I tried to access Basudde at the offices of JATT but I was blocked. So, how do we access the suspects who are detained at JATT? Detention in un-gazetted centres and blocking people who want to talk to these suspects, are serious matters of national concern, which the Minister should address. Otherwise, I thank you for releasing Basudde and I call upon you to release others who may be languishing there without charges in courts of law. I thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a very small clarification from the Minister. We have been informed that Mr Basudde was arrested by people wearing civilian clothes and they did not identify themselves. I would like to know from the Minister, if people come to my place, dressed like me, and they want to arrest me, without identifying themselves, if I resist?

THE SPEAKER: I think your complaint must be about them not identifying themselves but not being in uniform because certain sections of security are not in uniform.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Okello-Okello, the arresting officer did identify himself to the suspect but we do not have to go and advertise to each and everybody. I do not know whether he means that when we come to arrest somebody, we should tell the whole village: “We are the guys.” But he did identify himself to the suspect and picked him. And indeed hon. Lukwago rang me saying, “Somebody has been taken.” And I said, “Hon. Lukwago, please report to the nearest police station.” I hope you reported to the nearest police station and were given the right information. Thank you.

4.47
MS BETTY NAMBOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I have ever been a suspect, several times. But in this particular case, I have ever been suspected of being a terrorist in this country. I have ever been arrested by people in civilian clothes, who came chasing after me. At first, I thought they were car robbers, trying to hijack me. But finally when I was arrested and driven around this country for weeks, I know what Basudde went through. 

We do not want to stop security organs from fighting terrorism in this country but I think the way they are doing it is lacking. That Basudde was receiving constant communication on his phone from a suspected terrorist; these are important clues for security. But the best thing would have been for the security personnel to watch this person. When we are talking about arresting somebody in accordance with the Constitution, a person is supposed to be notified of the offence and is supposed to be kept in a place where he can access his lawyers. But you arrest somebody; drive him around the country for several days and finally - I understand the Police are still investigating this matter. But for sure we know that might even be the end of it. Because when I was arrested, I was finally charged with sedition. When I see the hon. Minister making a statement like this, I get worried. 

Our telephone numbers are known by everybody. Of recent, somebody has been sending me messages on my phone, saying, “I have reached safely”, not until I went to report to Police. What I am trying to say is that in future, people can even start framing others because my telephone number is in the public domain and everyone can access it. I cannot dictate who calls me and when. Then the next day, people will come, kidnap you and then they say; “Because you were receiving communication from somebody who is suspected of being a terrorist.”

Mr Speaker, I want to request the Minister to restrain some of these people. For your information, when Mr Basudde was arrested, some people were even approaching his family members telling them, “There are some issues to be solved concerning money.” We have heard about these things in the past – when people who had personal issues with others would frame them and these people are arrested as though they were criminals. I am not satisfied with this statement because it lacks a lot and when we allow such things to continue, people will be framed and arrested. I think the best thing for Police to do is that if they suspect Betty Namboze, they should watch her, follow her and arrest her only when they are very sure that an offence has been committed. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Katuntu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think we have finished. The statement has been made; the man was released. Apparently, after investigations, they were satisfied that he was innocent. This is what he did. I think we should go on to another important subject – CHOGM.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Members, you recall the other day, one Minister got up and said he wanted the minutes. I have them here. I also have the whole recording of the transaction. You know we have a permanent recording. I heard the Minister for Information and National Guidance saying, “Copies”. I have brought copies, showing members who signed for them at the reception. They are here and Members, you can see. I want to guide the Minister of National Guidance. 

There are those I delivered to the ministries. Here are copies, showing how they signed for them. If you want, I can allow the original to be put there but I think you had better keep it safely to avoid national guidance problems.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, when we broke off last week, Members raised the issue of copies of the CHOGM report and indeed when we moved out of the Chamber, because the chair had indicated that the copies were at the reception, many of us went there but there were no copies and he promised to avail copies to those who did not get, but up to now I have not received a copy of the CHOGM report. I also believe there are many Members who have not.

Mr Speaker, you have heard the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shout my portfolio and my name in regard to the copies of the report. But is it in order for the hon. Member to want to hide behind my portfolio by not giving copies to Members?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the duty of distributing copies of reports filed with Parliament is that of the Clerk to Parliament. Should it happen that some Members have not received copies I want to express regret that this has happened. However, I would like to say that there are sufficient copies at the reception now. I would like to ask the clerk to ensure the copies of this report are distributed to each of you. Otherwise, that duty is that of the Clerk to Parliament. I think let us receive a summary of what is in this report so that we can understand it in order for us to see how to proceed.

4.56
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I am a Christian – I want us to be clear – true, as you said, this is the duty of the Clerk to Parliament, but I would like to say that I have signatures of Members who have been signing in that book at the reception.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us proceed. I have solved that already.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, I only wanted to confirm that even your copy was signed for. Mr Speaker, before I go to the summary, hon. Rukutana, hon. Musumba and some other people said that we, as a committee, never gave them a hearing. That caused us to make an addendum to the report after being directed by the Deputy Speaker on that day. That addendum is on page 192. So, allow me read this before I go to make the quick summary – (Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Chairperson of PAC is talking about a report and an addendum in respect of hon. Musumba and hon. Rukutana having not been heard before. However, I would like you to guide us on the basis of my right to a fair hearing that was infringed upon as provided for under Article 28 of the Constitution. Up to now, I have not been heard yet they are also referring to me in their report. I need your guidance, Sir. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, my suggestion is to let us first get the summary of the content. After that we can look at any objections to it so that we see how to handle them. But that should come after he has presented that summary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, all that Hon. Hope Mwesigye is raising is in the report and all Members must read it.

You will recall that when the Public Accounts Committee presented its report on CHOGM to the House on 13 May 2010, you advised that the committee considers providing opportunity to all public officials whose names had been mentioned in the report to be heard. The named ministers and other public officials were: hon. Isaac Musumba, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, hon. Dr Ezra Suruma and hon. Ham Muliira plus the Executive Director of PPDA, Mr Edgar Agaba.

I wish to report that the committee met the said officials on 14 May 2010 and interacted with them on their roles as had been indicated in the report except Hon. Dr Ezra Suruma who was out of the country. Secondly, the following persons and institutions requested to meet the committee, but due to the fact that the House was on recess, it was not possible. So, we requested them to put their views in writing, which they did. These included: Mr Tom Matte, Mr John Bagonza and M/S Omega Construction.

This is, therefore, to present to you the committee’s findings as an addendum to the main report that has already been presented to this House.

I would like to begin with the roles of hon. Isaac Musumba, hon. Mwesigwa and hon. Dr Ezra Suruma. In paragraph (vi), bullet two on page 15 of the summary and bullet four on page 88 of the report, the committee observed that non critical roads that had been designed and worked on included: Serunkuma Road, leading to Enkombe Apartments at Shs 302 million, Golf Course Road parking and access road to Entebbe Municipality at Shs 176 million, and the variations on roads leading to hon. Dr Ezra Suruma and hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana’s residences, which cost Shs 362 million. All these roads had not been budgeted for in the CHOGM -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, which page is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are now on page 193, Mr Speaker.

All these roads were not in the CHOGM budget and so not considered critical, but were a cost that the taxpayer had to bear. The roads had not been approved by the CHOGM Cabinet Committee and Parliament. 

On page 16, the committee had recommended that hon. Isaac Musumba, also Minister of State for Foreign Affairs be held responsible for abuse of office and influence peddling leading to a loss of Shs 302 million; and that hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, the Minister of State for Higher Education and hon. Dr Ezra Suruma, former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be held responsible for abuse of office and influence peddling causing a loss to Government of over Shs 362 million. The committee recommended that the matters be taken over by the Inspector-General of Government.

Further findings, observations and recommendations

As earlier on indicated, the committee met and interacted with hon. Musumba and hon. Rukutana and hereby makes the following observations: 

On Serunkuma Road, hon. Musumba said that the basis of his request to have it constructed was the need to put in place a good buffer of accommodation facilities in preparation for CHOGM. 

He further informed the committee that Enkombe Apartments, to which this road leads, would be one of the most handy and suitable to cater for the needs of routine visitors who would find the main Kampala hotels fully booked. 

The committee, however, remained concerned about the criteria used for selecting this particular road that leads to that property among the very many roads leading to different hotels in Kampala. Hon. Musumba chose to take special interest in the road leading to Enkombe Apartments to cater for the routine visitors. He explained that he had requested staff to explore additional accommodation possibilities in the city that their report was, therefore, the basis of his decision to support the road to Enkombe.

He stated that the findings and recommendations, therefore, were the basis of his decision to recommend the Enkombe Apartments for support under CHOGM. However when tasked, the minister could not produce a copy of such a report or even name the staff that participated in the said survey.

Hon. Musumba denied playing any particular role under CHOGM. The committee, however, established that hon. Musumba was a member of the Infrastructure and Beautification Committee. Refer to the minutes of the 15th Cabinet sub-committee meeting held on 20th November. It is attached.

The committee, therefore, wonders why the minister did not take his request to the committee, of which he was a member, for consideration and approval but instead chose to push it to the Minister of Works and Transport.

The committee further established that hon. Musumba followed up the request he had made to have the road leading to Enkombe apartments worked on under CHOGM with a note to the Minister for Works and Transport stating that this was a necessary CHOGM road and that Enkombe was selected as a CHOGM motel, access to which needed to be worked on. We have annexed it in two and three.

In his response to the note of hon. Musumba, the Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira expressed concern that the request was badly timed since the CHOGM contract had already been awarded. However, hon. Nasasira promised that he would gamble around with the budget and see what to do about it. Indeed, the Minister for Works went ahead with the gamble and spent Shs 302 million on a non critical and non CHOGM design road leading to a non CHOGM designated place without any approval. The committee still finds hon. Musumba very answerable for influencing the construction of the road to Enkombe Apartments and yet the road was not on the list of roads designated to be constructed for CHOGM.

Secondly, the Enkombe Apartments were not on the list of CHOGM hotels. 

Thirdly, there were many hotels around Kampala like in Wandegeya, Rubaga, Kisenyi, Gayaza Road et cetera, which did not stand a similar chance to be considered by the minister. He instead chose and insisted on Enkombe. 

Fourthly, he stated that he never knew about Enkombe before and that his staff member is the one who surveyed and made a report to him upon which he acted. 

The minister failed to show such a report and name the staff member. While the committee established from the Registrar of Companies that hon. Musumba is not one of the proprietors of Enkombe Apartments, the committee wonders who and what then could have led the minister to Enkombe Apartments.

Fifthly, Enkombe Apartments is not a public asset or in his constituency for which the minister could be actively following up. 

Sixthly, hon. Musumba is the one who brought to Parliament the supplementary of CHOGM but these expenses were not included. Because the minister failed to produce evidence of a survey report or even name the survey team as demanded, the committee could not rule out beneficial influence peddling on the part of Minister Musumba for taking a unilateral decision to hand pick and support one particular private hotel, Enkombe Apartments, without subjecting the proposal to due process of selection. 

The committee wonders what would have motivated the Minister to act the way he did in the absence of evidence to support his decision, which led Minister Nasasira to an unprecedented gamble that caused a wasteful expenditure line of Shs 302 million of public funds.

A thorough investigation by the Inspector-General of Government should be conducted to rule out beneficial influence peddling on the part of hon. Musumba based on which the appointing authority should take appropriate action.

That hon. Nasasira be held liable for the gamble with public funds without taking due care and, therefore, causing loss of public money for uncritical purposes and without parliamentary approval.

On the evaluation of roads to hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana and hon. Ezra Suruma’s homes, hon. Rukutana denied any role in the construction of this road. He told the committee that he did not participate in any decision to construct this road nor was he involved in the sourcing of funds or identification of contractors to the road. He informed the committee that he was only pleasantly surprised with the construction of this road just like any other resident who lives along this road. The committee could not immediately get a direct link connecting hon. Rukutana to the construction of this road. Accordingly, the committee has decided to amend its earlier recommendation to have hon. Rukutana held liable for influence peddling arising from the construction of this road.

The committee now recommends that the IGG investigates the expenditure of Shs 362 million arising from the variations on the construction works on this road. It should mainly establish the motive of constructing a road that led to and stopped at the minister’s residence. Based on the recommended investigations, the law on the matter should take its course as well as the appointing authority.

However, the committee recommends that hon. Nasasira who unitarily authorised the valuations, be held liable. That is attachment four. CID investigations on most of these roads showed mismanagement of public resources and attachment five is appended.

Procurement of Security Equipment - Hon. Dr Ham Mukasa Mulira

In paragraph 2.4 on the procurement lapses and under the undisclosed expenditures on security equipment, the committee had recommended that hon. Ham Mukasa Mulira should be held liable for the loss of US $1.8 million as he was the lead person. Hon. Mulira appeared before the committee and gave the following clarifications:

That the Minister of Information, Communications and Technology (ICT) had no role in negotiations determining quantities, equipment, specifications, sourcing of the supplier  and the amount to be paid.

The ministry played no role in the procurement process as the process was handled by the Security sub -committee. M/S Bolton was presented to the Ministry of ICT by the Security technical sub-committee; that the role of the Ministry of ICT was limited to providing technical and policy guidelines and implementation of the project; and that the system was procured before parliamentary approval for the ICT loan in question. 

The committee established that whereas the loan was approved only in July 2007, the tri-partite agreement was signed way back on 11 April 2007 and negotiations had begun long before, in October 2006. The Turn Key Agreement signed on 11 October 2006 between Hawai and Uganda had a CHOGM figure of US $5 million which was yet to come. This figure was put there earlier to cater for hon. Amama Mbabazi’s request of US $5 million. This was a planned activity by hon. Amama Mbabazi and is attached.

It was further established that in the meeting of 12 September 2006, where hon. Amama Mbabazi presented the request of US $5 million to the President, hon. Ham Mulira was not present. It is impressive that the tri-partite draft agreement was taken on Friday, 23 March 2007 in the afternoon and by Monday morning of 26 March, had been cleared by E. Mawanda of the Solicitor-General’s office, and this is attached.

Arising from the submission of Dr Mulira, the committee observes that hon. Amama Mbabazi misled the committee that the President had directed that the security procures Tetra from M/S Bolton at US $5 million.

That hon. Amama Mbabazi went against procurement regulations by unitarily identifying a supplier and availing him a budget of US $5 million.

Hon. Amama Mbabazi not being a technical person raised the price from the initial bid price of US $3.2 million to US $5 million for unknown reasons and even went ahead to reduce the deliverable items. For example, hand sets were reduced from 2,500 to 600 only, mobiles from 1,000 to 100 only, bases from 22 to nine only. This reduction should have definitely lowered the price to below US $3.2 million but instead the price went up.

This clearly shows the hidden motive to defraud Ugandans. The proforma had discounts of up to 60 percent to many items. It is clear that it was made with the aim of taking away the entire US $5 million.

The system centre master got a discount of 56 percent that is about US $1,244,304; a remote disparity of 44 percent that is US $167,344,000. Spare parts took a discount of 60 percent, which led to US $176,359. Project services got a discount of 27 percent, which led to US $146,145 in addition to the overall 1.73 percent and then 4 percent earned 4.002 percent, which had no basis. And the attachment is there.  

By naming the supplier and the brand of the system, you flouted the PPDA Act. The specifications and adjudications were done by hon. Amama Mbabazi and his team and it is clear that the objective in negotiations was to benefit individuals against public interest.
 
The committee, therefore, recommends, in addition to earlier recommendations, that hon. Ham Mukasa Mulira be exonerated for the loss of US $1.8 million but he should have protected the funds of the ministry from being encroached on and being misappropriated by the CHOGM Security sub-committee. 

Hon. Amama Mbabazi is culpable and should be held as earlier on recommended.

The Role of PPDA in CHOGM Procurement - Mr Edgar Agaba

The report had mentioned failure by PPDA to protect the interests of Ugandans during CHOGM procurements. Mr Speaker, the PPDA is reported to have unnecessarily accepted waivers that led to loss of billions of taxpayers’ money. In the report, the committee had decided to hold the Executive Director of PPDA liable for these loses.  

However, when he appeared before the committee, Mr Agaba cited specific references in which the Authority tried to intervene to save taxpayers money. He informed the committee that he brought to the attention of the CHOGM sub-committee of Cabinet that the payment of Globecast should be in the range of US $2 million and in any case not more than US $2.5 million based on CHOGM events held elsewhere. 

He had advised that Uganda goes in for outright purchase of the media equipment for Globecast. Contrary to this advice, Government leased the equipment which was later on taken away by Globecast. In this respect, he observed that the country got a raw deal. 

He had always reminded the accounting officers to have the procurements planned in time. These reminders were not heeded to as entities wasted a lot of time for unknown reasons, which later created emergency situations. Specifically, his technical advice on the procurement of cars was rubbished by His Excellency the Vice President who was chairing the CHOGM Cabinet sub-committee, which would take political responsibility.

He also informed the committee that the PPDA never granted any request for retrospective authority. 

While the committee appreciates the political pressure that PPDA was put under, it still finds it liable for making unnecessary waivers that led to the loss of public funds. In some instances, such as the procurement of the executive cars, the PPDA rightly stuck to the law and refused to grant waivers. The committee, therefore, does not see why the PPDA succumbed to pressure in other instances and yet it is the final authority on procurement regulations.   

When tasked about the mandate of PPDA to grant waivers, he explained that this is provided for under regulations 339 and 340 of the PPDA Regulations. Further tasked to explain the available options when faced with a request for a waiver, he explained that the PPDA can opt to advise the requesting entity to proceed under emergency procurement or another allowed by the procurement method under the authority of the respective contracts committee. 

The committee was concerned that PPDA chose to grant waivers and, therefore, participating in the procurement process rather than to advise the procuring entities to proceed under alternative methods as allowed by the PPDA Act. The committee, therefore, established that granting of waivers was uncalled for and unnecessary in the circumstances and questioned the motive. Even when the waivers were granted, Mr Edgar Agaba never came out in safeguard to protect public interests but instead gave open cheques for entities to fill in whatever they wanted. For this reason, the committee still finds the Executive Director PPDA liable for granting unnecessary waivers, which led to lose of public funds. 

Mr Agaba should have put in regulatory safeguards and limited PPDA’s role to providing advice. They should have rejected all waivers and stood their ground as was the case with the CHOGM cars, which action was also commended by His Excellency the President in his letter to the Executive Director of CHOGM, Mrs Hilda Musubira which directed the procurement procedures to be followed in procurement of goods and services. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, by the time the waiver for M/S Globecast was requested for, there was enough time for Mr Agaba to advise for competitive bidding whereby M/S Globecast would have been considered alongside others. But he never did so and agrees that Ugandans were ripped off of US $2.5 million. He knew that M/S Globecast had done the same job in Malta for US $2 million but allowed Ugandans to pay US $4.5 million as an expense with non-delivery of equipment like OB van, satellite link and computers among others; these were taken away and the committee thinks he never did it in public interest. 

The executive director even granted a waiver for insurance, which led to a loss of US $1.3 million among others. He granted many other similar waivers which led to the loss of taxpayers’ money. He accepted many variations, which are suspicious. 

The committee finds Mr Edgar Agaba liable and he should be charged for abuse of office and recommends that disciplinary action be taken against him for failure to perform his duties as mandated. The committee, therefore, maintains its earlier recommendation.

In conclusion, the committee met additional witnesses on the advice of the House. There are other testimonies to enrich the committee’s earlier recommendations in the main report. 

I got a letter from M/S Omega claiming that the reason as to why they took the US $0.5 million in the report, but we have not seen any agreement which allows them to take the US $0.5 million in the report. So, we still maintain that they should refund the US $0.5 million. 

Omega Construction replied and said they did the work. We had no way of verifying the work they did and this is also here. But we still believe that they should be held liable. 

Mr Matte requested to meet the committee but he never came.

Mr Speaker, that ends the addendum. But as you had put it earlier, I want to quickly run through a summary of the report. I will not go through the whole of it because it was presented and it is open on the internet. 

The report was presented, we went through; there was the background, audit of the report, the methodology, the CHOGM and how the sub-committee of Cabinet was formed. 

The President in his letter was serious that the procurement process should follow the regulations but they were flouted and the letter is attached as Annex II.  

Hon. Hope Mwesigye is also here attached. Evidence of asking her to appear before the committee is here and how she came and walked away and her role in CHOGM is also clear. What she went and told the public that she cannot appear before the committee is also attached. She was given more than enough opportunities to appear but she rubbished the committee as you can read from the attachment. 

There were benefits which were anticipated to improve the infrastructure of roads in Uganda, refurbishing of State House, creation of business and opportunities, of course also improving the international image, increasing on the number of hotel rooms from 1,500 to 6,000 and tourists sites. These were some of the benefits which were anticipated and indeed we got some of them. But unfortunately, most of the roads have been washed away by the rains.

Mr Speaker, the total budget was expected to have been Shs 270 billion but it went above Shs 500 billion, and this is attached on page 11. The Ministry of Works did the roads; there were a lot of variations, which led to a loss of public money; a number of roads were worked on and the quality is also attached. 

This project was under Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the lead person – they were involved in hotels and accommodation – we have attached evidence of how the hotels were negotiated and the invoices which were received. And you will see that as much as I have seen one response saying that it is not true, you will see that for one day, they were charging Shs 800 million for a hall. An invoice is attached. And we believe that there were monies we should have got over the tune of US $2.4 million but we have never got it because Government officials were not interested. 

Mr Speaker, there were no guarantees about the monies which were supposed to have been paid to these hotels because before you are paid Government money, you should have put guarantees in place. These were removed by the Attorney-General. 

On transportation, we got BMWs. There was a variation which was done that said that we should have made outright purchase, where outright purchase for 204 cars would have been about Euros 8 million while leasing was supposed to have been Euros 4.7 million. And leasing would have been for four days. But if we had bought at Euros 8 million, we would have owned the cars up to now. And if we had decided to sell, we would have sold each car at about Shs 13 million to Ugandans, but nobody listened to that.

Given that there was an experience from Malta and Nigeria, which showed how those people organised by asking businessmen and the public to buy cars of a specific model so that they would use them for four days and later allow them to own the vehicles without paying taxes. That way the government never spent a shilling on purchase. But here in Uganda we refused that. I think we had a hidden motive. And the lead person involved in these CHOGM cars was the Vice-President of this country, His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya.

On publicity, we have talked about Globecast. Instead of spending US $2 million like in Malta, we spent US $4.5 million and we never got equipment. And this is where single sourcing was, and it is believed we lost US $2.5 million. This company was got through single sourcing.

There was a sponsorship committee which collected money. And we have attached it here. Some money was paid in the UK in millions of dollars and pounds and some was collected here in Uganda, where we got on the account almost half a million pounds, which was transferred to the UK and Ugandans made a big loss. We believe that this money which was collected should have been here but the Ministry of Foreign Affairs let us down.

Saatchi and Saatchi was appointed by the Office of the Prime Minister to do media and publicity and at the same time the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also employed them to collect money on sponsorship on our behalf and the agreement clearly stated that they should collect all the money and bring it to us but these people spent money at source, and we never got our money that they collected; and the procurement process which was done by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was done irregularly. 

On security, we spent US $5 million on getting the Tetra system. Earlier on, the sub-committee on security had said the bids those people had sent it showed that they would spend US $3.2 million. That was Balton. But eventually Balton raised the value to US $5 million having got the Minister of Security to tell the President that we needed US $5 million. 

The money was all spent yet even the deliverables were reduced but the value went up. We raised an issue – how can you get a discount of 60 percent on an item? Then really how much was the value? It means that these values were arbitrary and they were trying to work on them to get to get $5 million.

Decorations 

Decorations were under Ministry of Foreign Affairs but hon. Hope Mwesigye, the then Minister of State for Local Government, grabbed it and took it without following procurement procedures and we lost over - the bill which, and it is attached, is Shs 617 million that was lost by not following procurement procedures. And that is why she believes that we were wrong. She was also in charge of beautification of Kampala. 

We have a report from the PS Local Government saying these people who were working on beautification had not done anything and should not be paid. But they were paid yet beautification was not done. Because the contract never performed, the minister, Hope Mwesigye, failed in her duties as supervisor for beautification of Kampala.

Shimoni

Mr Speaker, you are aware Shimoni was destroyed. People paid money and none of this money was declared and the lead person in this again was hon. Hope Mwesige. We don’t know where she put our public money that she collected. She collected money and she should be responsible for the Shs 280 million arising from the contract of rehabilitating that place and the collections of the money.

The PPDA

Assets which are in hotels, like the equipment we bought, we said that these should be taken care of by the Government by taking them to government stores. We were told that there were no Government stores. We believe that if these items are left in those hotels, like Serena and Munyonyo, we shall incur a big loss.

Outstanding Bills

On the arrears, which were incurred without parliamentary approval, the concerned officials should be held responsible for abuse of office because we never told them to borrow money or get money without parliamentary approval. 

Maintenance of Infrastructure

We are saying this infrastructure is there. If there is no maintenance policy, the equipment will get spoilt and we will have a problem. We even questioned why lighting of Kampala moved from Shs 2.5 billion to almost Shs 19 billion and yet the lighting died. In fact, it died the same day.

Concerns on the Opinion of the Auditor-General

We discovered that the Attorney-General gave a lot of opinions. We believe the Attorney-General was giving those opinions to suit the circumstances of the day. For example he would quote the PPDA; then they would invest in wrong areas like J&M hotel. Somewhere he quoted the Constitution, which needed the law, but he hinted at public interest. We believe the Attorney-General’s opinions were what led to much of the losses. The Attorney-General should have been serious with his opinions, which he knew that if he gave them we would lose a lot of money.

Recoverables

We have not recovered all the monies. I hope they have recovered it now but the committee recommends hotel owners should refund US $4,432,919 for self paying guests within 60 days of this report. 

Hiked Rates 

Mr Speaker, hotel rates went up and we know this was because of CHOGM but they went up so high that the committee believes our officials who negotiated never gave us a normal deal because the rates could have gone up by about 25 percent. Even if they had doubled it would not have been a problem but they went even more than four times. We believe this was too high and the taxpayer lost money.

Sponsorship

Mr Speaker, that is on page 54 and we have talked about it. The company which was involved was headed by Prof. Dr James Mulwana. Of this, he had promised that the US $100,000 which Government contributed had been refunded but we have never seen this money in the coffers. Eventually, up to now, we do not know if we have seen it. 

But on the same page 55, the chairman of the Business Forum from the UK collected in our own bank here Standard Chartered – they collected 530,000 British Pounds and all this was all transferred to the UK and we believe that is not right because this money should have remained in Uganda.

What we identified that Saatchi & Saatchi collected was Shs 360 million where by they were supposed to deduct their 10 per cent commission but they took the whole money and I think they only refunded Shs30 million alone. 

Diversion of Public Funds

There was a lot of diversion of money meant for CHOGM like the roads. Some to deal with the general account – to sponsor the roads, hotels and what ever but this was contrary to the rules. Diversion should have got approval of Parliament. This is on page 56.

Withholding Tax

Many of these companies never paid Withholding Tax, which is against the rules of Uganda. We have talked about the rules of PPDA. I have talked about insurance and what happened with insurance is that they only picked one company, National Insurance Corporation without doing any other companies even if it was time because even PPDA told them, “Go and do restrictive bidding” but they went for sole sourcing and this led us to losing US $1.3 million.

We worked on Civil Aviation Authority. We put it to CID and the Auditor-General to make a formal final report on it but all the people who were involved, the CID has investigated and I think it is compiling the file against the culprits involved. Mr Speaker, I think I can rest my case like this.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, chairman. She raised a point before and requested that she comes after - you will come in after.

5.37
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): I thank you. This is the accountability committee and therefore it must be accountable, transparent, it must dispense justice and it must be seen to do so. 

As I said earlier, I am mentioned in several sections of this report specifically for the Shimoni exhibition, for the decorations and for beautification. I have earlier said that I have not been given a fair hearing. 

Mr Speaker, on 5 May 2010, I wrote to you a letter that in substance was telling you that the committee intentionally refused to give me a fair hearing and I think it can be confirmed by the manner in which the chairperson is presenting the report. 

Our Constitution is clear. Article 28 is extremely clear that every individual is entitled to a fair hearing. The principles of natural justice are very clear. I would request you, Mr Speaker to guide this House – (Interruption)
        
MRS OGWAL: The hon. Minister is making very important statements and I think it would be helpful to the House if we could have the statement written and distributed because she has been mentioned a couple of times in the report and we want to take keen interest in her defence. I would, therefore, wish to know from you whether it is procedurally right for her to speak without any statement presented to us so that we can follow up and see how we can tie it up with the report which has been presented to us. So, I would wish for you to guide me. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are suggesting is that it is better that she puts what she is saying in writing. But obviously she can speak without a statement. This is the advice we are being given. Can you put this in writing?

MRS MWESIGYE: I rose on a matter of procedure and I am questioning the procedure we are taking - that this report should not be debated before I am given a fair hearing and if you so rule, that the report be debated, then every section that touches me be expunged -(Interjections)- yes.

DR EPETAIT: I wish to draw the attention of hon. Members to page 2 and 3 of the report. The last paragraph of page two and continues up to page 3 talks about nothing but hon. Hope Mwesigye and how she walked out of the committee. It is stated – maybe, I should just start from, “That the committee wishes to report that hon. Hope Mwesigye, one of the key figures in the organisation of CHOGM who was specifically assigned to chair the beautification and decoration sub-committee was not interviewed. Earlier on and for reasons of other commitments on the part of the minister, the committee agreed to re-schedule her appearance four times upon her request. So, the committee did not actually refuse to meet the minister but when the minister finally appeared on 20 April 2010, she arrived at 10:28 a.m. and instead chose to walk out of the committee room after only three minutes.” – (Interjections) - I am quoting exactly what is in the report and so, I find it rather irregular for a minister to start saying we expunge everything to do with her when she is the one who declared to –

THE SPEAKER: I think this is what we have to decide because what you are reading is the report of the committee. Let us hear her case for not having been afforded the opportunity to be heard. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Of course, what is contained in the report is not true. The committee invited me four times. The two times the committee was not available – (Interjections) - yes. 

The one time I was out of the country and the fourth time I did appear and went into the committee room and there were only journalists and not even a clerk to the committee was present. I went away and later I rang hon. Nandala-Mafabi and I asked him whether they were ready to receive me. He said to me that they had finished writing the report and they had no business to do with me. 

If you so permit, Mr Speaker, I will read to this House the last letter I wrote to you having made all the attempts. My letter on 5 May to you, Mr Speaker, is as follows: “I have received a letter dated 4 May 2010 from Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chair of PAC copied to you among others. In the letter, hon. Mafabi confirms what he had told me in a telephone conversation …” -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you. Mr Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. This report was made by a committee of Parliament and I believe it is only Parliament that will decide what to do with it. I think the people who are mentioned in the report have no mandate to come and rule on what should be discussed or not. It is the Parliament of Uganda to take a decision on this report.

THE SPEAKER: No, she is making a case to Parliament on why she thinks this report should not be heard. Then it is up to us as Parliament to decide on her case. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we need to have the rules set right from the beginning. This is not only about the honourable minister raising an objection, but as you see, the report talks about a number of our colleagues in this House. How are we going to handle their cases? Are they again going to give their versions? We need to have the rules right from the beginning. 

Now the objection is from hon. Hope Mwesigye, the next minute it might be hon. Isaac Musumba, the other minute it might be hon. Rukutana and then hon. X, Y and Z. So, we are going to keep going back to the committee to hear evidence? And then, what happens to some people who are mentioned in this report and do not have the opportunity like these colleagues who have the privilege to present their cases afresh?

THE SPEAKER: The committees are committees of Parliament and their reports are meant for us to note, adopt and adjust. Reports do not become final until they are adopted by Parliament. So, this is what is going to happened. Having heard her case, it is up to you to decide on what we should do: whether we should consider the report or not. This report is not final; it becomes final when you adopt it with adjustments or without adjustments. So it is in your hands; you can reject it or adopt it but with reasons. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But we need to have the Chair guide us right from the beginning – 

THE SPEAKER: I have guided you and I assume you know that this committee’s report is subject to the approval and adoption of Parliament, because they work for Parliament. Then the findings of the committee are for you to see whether they are properly handled or not. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. The committee’s position is that they gave a fair hearing to everybody mentioned in this report. Even hon. Hope Mwesigye is mentioned in the report –

THE SPEAKER: We have not said that she is right or wrong. We just want to hear her case and decide whether the committee’s findings are right or not. It is not that we say, “The committee has finally decided” somebody has raised a case and we have to consider it and see how we should proceed. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the point I am making is that hon. Hope Mwesigye is raising what I would call a PO (a preliminary matter, which would officiate the report). If it is upheld by this House, then the report would be of no effect and it would have to be withheld. But the point I am making here is that I do not think it would be procedurally correct, before the debate kicks off, for hon. Mwesigye to say, “I was not given a fair hearing, and therefore the report should not be considered”. She should give her side of the story at the time when we are debating the report – (Interruption) 

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, there seem to be confusion. What I am objecting to is discrimination. This House has just received an addendum about hon. Musumba and hon. Rukutana, whom they had mentioned earlier without interviewing. I am simply saying I need to be treated like others. What is it about my case that is not with the case of the others? If hon. Mafabi is not willing to interview me, I would pray, Mr Speaker, that you put up a special committee to interview me, because I am entitled to a fair hearing before we debate the report, at least the part that affects me. That is all I am asking for! I wrote to you and it is very legitimate and constitutional as well. 

Is my honourable counsel and shadow attorney-general in order therefore, to mislead this august House when he knows the principles of natural justice and the constitutional provisions?

THE SPEAKER: In as far as she is concerned she is saying, “Do not discuss the issues concerning me because I was not given an opportunity to defend myself.” What my learned friend, hon. Katuntu, was saying – I would have liked to know the rules. If it is a situation that is not covered by the rules that is when the Chair should come and give a ruling. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, this is the second time that the CHOGM report has been brought here. I remember the first time it was brought we received a complaint from hon. Isaac Musumba and hon. Rukutana and the House in its own wisdom, and the findings from the committee Members decided that it was against natural justice not to give them a fair hearing. And on that day we agreed that a special arrangement be made for the two Members before committee. 

What now is at stake is the issue being raised by the hon. Minister for Agriculture, hon. Hope Mwesigye. We are now at a loss in the sense that the report says hon. Hope Mwesigye was invited and she turned up for the last time only for a few minutes and walked away. Not the entire Parliament was there to witness this. We wish to rely on the evidence being given by the Members of this committee. They will be the right persons to assist us now. (Interjections) No, please because without that, I do not think at this particular time we can be able to make an informed decision. Let the 25 Members of the Public Accounts Committee assist us as to whether they extended an invitation to hon. Hope Mwesigye and whether she -(Interjections)- waited. No, please my sister I am helping you because it was in the same vein that we were able to entertain the case of the two hon. colleagues: hon. Isaac Musumba and hon. Rukutana. 

So, if the entire Parliament comes up to find that you were not given a just hearing, then we can be able to, at an appropriate time, make some special concession but as of now, before we get to that, it becomes very difficult -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, how do we go to decide on that?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am of the opinion that there are people who are Members of this committee. The lead counsel is there; hon. Kazibwe. Why don’t you help us? You tell us the –

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the position as I see it now is that the case, which she is presenting, is against the committee. You have to have a mechanism of resolving who is telling the right thing. Is it the case that she was not given opportunity or she was given an opportunity and never utilised it? That cannot be decided by the committee itself.  No, no, the assistance I want from you is: how do you resolve this issue raised by her against the committee?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am trying to rely on the method we adopted the other time. We had the two ministers –

THE SPEAKER: No, the method you adopted last time was to advise the committee to give an opportunity to these people to go and present their cases and they did. After presenting their cases, the committee made conclusions which have been read by the chairperson. In her case, she is saying she was not given that opportunity. This is what she is saying. We have to decide whether what she is saying is correct or not. You have to decide this yourself as the boss of the committee.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the answer to this stand-off is on page 3.

THE SPEAKER: Page what? 

MR RWAMIRAMA: Page 3. If you look at the third last sentence, “The committee could not postpone other meetings it had scheduled and, therefore, failed to meet hon. Hope Mwesigye, the Minister of Agriculture. The committee, however, had required her to explain questionable expenditure ….”
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR RWAMIRAMA: To me, it appears she was available but the committee had earlier engagements - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I think we need to understand the position of the committee in the sense that while the minister was referring  to page 3, I am afraid you went to the end of the paragraph referring to hon. Hope Mwesigye. You needed to have looked at it from the beginning because the point of contention is, was hon. Mwesigye given an opportunity or not? From page 2 to 3, the committee is saying that we waited for the minister from 10.00 O’clock. We waited for her and when she finally came at 10.28 a.m. we were in the office of the chairman waiting for her. I am speaking as a Member who was there. When the clerk finally informed us that the minister had arrived, as we walked out of the office of the chairperson to the committee room, we found her walking out on us and finally talking to the press at the end of the corridor.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, for giving way honourable. The information I want to give is that there is empirical evidence. If this House needs that evidence, it will be tabled here where the minister was given an opportunity and she walked out when Members were there. She met the chairperson and she put it on record that she will not appear before that committee. It is on record. If this House wants to see that when she was stating it, we shall produce the evidence on camera. We shall bring here a projector and it will be seen by all.
		
MR ODUMAN: I have not finished. Mr Speaker, you cannot complete or discharge this matter without addressing yourselves to evidence in Annex 1 to appreciate the difficulty the committee was in. We invited the minister, we waited for the minister; the minister came and walked out. That is our report. The minister can say it is not true or it was true; but Annex 1 has serious matters. Mr Speaker, if you are the judge and the defendants accuse you of bias, accuse you of malice, accuse you of having pre-meditated intentions to malign, what would you do? Annex 1 –

THE SPEAKER: You get annoyed. (Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: Yes, Mr Speaker, it is the first annex among all appendices in the report. It says and the title is, “Hope Mwesigye, Kabale Woman Representative.” That report came out in the press shortly after that day. When you look carefully at the wording of the article, the first article after –

THE SPEAKER: Which page honourable?

MR ODUMAN: Annex 1 just after page 204. It is right ahead; the first annex after the signatures. Now, you see if you read that very carefully, you will find very serious statements and if you are the judge and you continue hearing that case, you would be in problems. It says and she is quoted. She is the one writing. “The fact that they, (that is PAC), did not show up indicates that they had pre-meditated knowledge of how they wished to bring me into disrepute. That they never intended to show up and instead met only with themselves after I left - exposes the intentions to politically malign me.” Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has punched on the integrity and intentions of the committee with – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think, from the facts as presented, it is clear that there must have been a schedule of the committee to meet the minister. There is no doubt about that. Forget about the four times because they had ignored the four times that she did not appear and there was another appointment for her to appear before the committee and she appeared but then what we have on record was that she walked away. So, we have to know what really happened. Did she come to give evidence and there was nobody to hear her and therefore she went away? Forget about the three times that she did not appear because this time she appeared. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want us to guide the House. On the day that she walked away, hon. Hope Mwesigye called me at about 12.00 p.m. and said, “Are you still there in the meeting and I come over?” And I said, “No, the meeting is over. We had scheduled to meet you today.” She said that it was okay but I think after some time when there was pressure in the public she called me -(Interjections)– I have letters, Mr Speaker. She called me on 3rd May at 7.00 p.m. and requested to talk to me and the clerk came with the phone. I wrote to her telling her the circumstances about her schedule – in fact I can make a printout of the phone – it was at 12.46 p.m. on the day of 20 April, the same day she walked away and went and addressed the press and we even have the recordings. We are lucky that we have our colleagues in the media who recorded it.

On 24th May I wrote to her - she had called me on 3rd May – and I said, “Madam we had talked and we had a schedule for you. We gave you an opportunity many times and the last time, you walked away and you called me at 12.46 p.m. and I said that as a committee, we have now ended …” and by the way, that was towards the end of our exercise. Hon. Hope Mwesigye was given the opportunity despite all the facts. The reason hon. Mwesigye and hon. Rukutana Mwesige come in is that they had never been invited and in the same meeting, we said that even all those that were mentioned who had not been given an opportunity be given. The issue of hon. Hope Mwesigye being given an opportunity on that day never arose, Mr Speaker. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are entangled in a situation where we are treating a matter of an individual who has taken herself to be special from the very start. The honourable minister was given the opportunity like every other person in the committee and she felt she had to find the Members seated and waiting for her and when she did not find them, she ran out. The other Members were capable of waiting for the committee and I am a Member of the committee in another aspect and ministers come and wait for us.  

Mr Speaker, I want you to help the House by using your usual ways of dealing with matters similar to this one that when we have a matter like this, you can institute an investigation. Recently, when we were talking about the monies in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, you instituted an investigation - as we proceed with the debate so that we do not treat the minister as a special case. It is a bad image to the public. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I am listening. I am handling this judiciously and you asked me how to do it but I thought you are the owners of the report as Parliament. Let me listen to you and find a solution and see how we resolve the case. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What we are discussing is a serious and important matter and we must get to the bottom of this issue. The committee is telling us that they invited the honourable minister and she did not go and the honourable minister also claims she went and they were not there. The writings in the document here are also conflicting. You have seen their documents say they failed to meet her. So, I suggest that as the House, we order that committee and the minister to meet at a particular day and time and come back so that this is solved because we are just going round and round. I thank you. 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, not long ago you reminded us that we shall remain Members of Parliament up to May next year. 

Secondly, there are a few proposals here floated. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal demanded that the minister puts a defence in writing and I also imagined that these two other ministers who pleaded with the House to be heard had an opportunity to also present their case before the committee probably in writing or with some evidence. 

Thirdly, if we believe that this House is respectable and can take decisions, then it is within our mandate that we can still put a case to the committee which can transact business on behalf of the House and after all the end of the world is not coming tonight. So, it is only fair that since the minister has also put a case that she has not been heard, we give her time. Let the committee also accept that they are transacting business on behalf of the entire Parliament. This is a committee of Parliament and therefore it is not strange, it is not new, it is not going to happen for the first time; it has happened before with other committees. So, let us not consume this little time deciding on what to do and so on. Let us proceed. 

I therefore humbly request you, Mr Speaker, that if the minister has now become Paul instead of Saul in that she has changed her mind and has accepted to appear before the committee, there is nothing wrong in her doing so. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: You have the powers as the House to hear, contrast with what the committee received and make a conclusion on it because the committee is your committee. It reports to you and as I have said, you can 100 percent adopt the report or you can adjust the report so that you accept 60 percent of it and make conclusions. You are the one to seal the report of the committee. The report of the committee is not final until you have adopted it and therefore if you feel you can say, “Okay, honourable member, give us your views on the issues raised by the committee” so that you decide the conclusion you make having balanced what they said and what they did not say, then you can do it instead of returning it to the committee.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that in making a decision, we also have to reflect on the future and the future is about how many times we will be accorded opportunity before the committees of this House and whether we do not use them or we use them and how many times we will ask our committees to go back to a witness who did not report. It is very important because at the end of the day, the dignity of the committee as well as the dignity of the person who should have been accorded the opportunity must be upheld. I can imagine what the Members of this committee are going to go through the third, fourth or fifth time. The House is going to ask them: “Go back and listen” and then they go back there and fail to get the minister to appear before them. It is very important!

THE SPEAKER: No, Mama, I was saying you, as Members sitting here, can receive the defence of a Member and make a conclusion. The committee will not say, “It is not our conclusion,” it will be your conclusion.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is actually the second thing I want to get to. First of all, we have been long with this report. I would like to propose, as you rightly observed, this House has the capacity now to receive the evidence, the position of the minister and integrate it into this report. They will make adjustments the way we want to.

One of my favourite childhood stories is that of the monkeys and the burning forest. I think this could easily become a question of the monkeys and the decision whether to set fire on the forest or not. It is going to be a very delicate balance whether the monkeys will agree that the forest be set on fire. So, my proposal is that let us accept to receive the minister’s evidence here and then we proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is being accused of very grave matters. I would, therefore, suggest that she be given a speak date and time to meet the committee so that it gives us a report to deal with. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think as I have said before, the powers on these matters are not with the committee. Committees just help you to do the work that you could do. Now if you feel that there is a problem with a committee on certain issue, you are entitled to receive evidence and make your own conclusion one way or the other.

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, it is true that finally the power rests with this House and in fact it is my hope that this House will listen to other people about whom this report has made certain recommendations. But the purpose of having committees is so that they can sort out things for the House. It is like drafting; if you got this whole House to draft a document, it would take you forever. But if you got a drafting committee and they come up with a working document then you can synthesise it as a whole body. That is why I think what the Prime Minister implores the House to do is correct. Give them one day; they meet, synthesise the whole thing for the House and she submits her side. And as I see the mood of the committee, it will not take very long to come up with recommendations. (Laughter)

I want to tell a joke. I do not know if you remember the last Communist President of Romania. He was called Ceausescu. Ceausescu was arrested with his wife and was going to be killed. But those who arrested him had the sense to say, “No, do not kill him. First bring him, we try him and kill him.” (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: I am extremely baffled by that analogy. The statement made by the minister - the insinuation is that even if hon. Hope Mwesigye were to appear before the committee, the decision is already taken. And the insinuation is that the committee has already formed an opinion and it is biased and what not. That is the way I perceive it. Is the minister in order to make such insinuations and at the same time calling upon the committee to listen to her?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what he was saying, in view of what has transpired, is that the committee may not be in the mood to fairly deal with this situation. This is what he is saying. And, therefore, either we undertake to deal with these specific cases against her as a House or we can set up another small committee. We can do it and there is nothing wrong with that because the committee’s report is supposed to come to us. And we may wholly or partly adopt it. We can have a mechanism of differing with the report. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal had said, “Let her put this in writing.” The reason was so that the House internalises her case and compares with the accusations made by the committee so that we reach a conclusion.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I remember Ceausescu and his wife with sadness. I was following your guidance and I wanted to see whether I could ask for further guidance from you. I have experience in appearing before this committee and was wondering how hon. Hope Mwesigye is going to be cross-examined here, with a lead counsel and records in the House - I think it becomes difficult! But I wanted also to ask her whether she is ready to face this committee after watching the exchange between her and the committee. But if she is courageous enough and I have never doubted her courage, and I hope the committee will give her a fair hearing, my first option would have been that she goes back to that committee, like hon. Musumba went. And since they survived and we are not like Ceausescu –(Laughter)– she will come back because setting up another committee also – we need one committee so that we can have one report. I just wanted your guidance on this, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER:  Sorry, I had given chance to hon. Seninde to speak first.

MRS OGWAL: She does not look like me.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. After listening to what colleagues are saying about this matter, I personally believe that it would be right for the hon. Minister to meet the committee, but the question is about the bias of the committee –(Interjections)– we may not be worried about that as Parliament because the decision has to be taken by us. However, for the minister to present a report – yes, we can debate that report, but I do not think it would be fair enough for the minister, after presenting the report, for us to begin cross-examining her from here. For that matter, I would like to humbly request the committee that works on behalf of the entire Parliament, to give the hon. Minister a fair hearing. I also request that we give this issue a timeframe within which it should be done and when the report can be presented to Parliament. This will enable us debate it fully.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think what has happened will teach us a lesson. We have pepped through the report although we haven’t read it indepth. It has given us the indications that the relationship, emotionally and in terms of work, between the committee and the speaker is not warm –

THE SPEAKER: You mean the Speaker, I?

MRS OGWAL: No, I meant the minister, Sir. I would like to advise that the issue of Minister Hope Mwesigye should not go back to the committee – I think the House can handle that issue. 

However, I remember while I was a Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee I was amazed at the humility of hon. Sam Kutesa. There was a time he came to meet the Members of that committee and they were not there, but he was able to sit there for one- and-half hours waiting for them. When we came in, he told us that he put aside that morning to meet that committee, which made us feel humbled.

What I would like the hon. Minister, who happens to be my relative – you have let me down; you should have shown that our family is humble –(Laughter)– and you should have demonstrated your humility by waiting for the Members. It was not proper for you to just go, there find journalists and walk away. You are a minister who serves the whole nation that has both simple and high people. Maybe you should have checked with the office of the chairperson. And being a mother, you are a woman and you can meet anybody. I think this is a test case and so I would like to say that we allow hon. Hope Mwesigye to bring a written statement to this House. We will listen to her, and read the report before deciding on how she can be accommodated. Otherwise, I know this will teach her a lesson.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Considering what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has just said, it is very important that this House observes and respects our Rules of Procedure. But at the same time justice has to be done. Though the committee has been suspected to be having malice aforethought, it should give this matter a second thought by allowing the hon. Minister appear before it. I am saying this because we will not be able to cross-examine the minister on that –

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the Members of the committee are human beings. First of all, she will go there saying they have a prejudice against her. So, I think hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s contribution should really be considered so that we can do it that way. So, hon. Minister, go and write your response to the claims against you and bring us the copies before we can see how to handle it.

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank this House for having prevailed upon the committee to give me the opportunity to be heard. I was heard and I would like to thank the Leader of Opposition now who made a very timely and important intervention at the time.

I have a simple issue to put before the House, with regard to the recommendations that have been made in the addendum. I would like to invite this House to page 265 of the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Which page? Where is it?

MR MUSUMBA: It is handwritten and at the end of the report. I also would like to invite you to read it along with Annex 3(c).

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to read? The entire page or what?

MR MUSUMBA: I want us to start with paragraph (xi). On that page, Sir, I would like to recap the chronology of events. The letter that I wrote to the Minister of Works and Transport was dated 11 June 2007; CHOGM was held between the 13 and 25 of November 2007. The contracts committee approved the award of contracts on 27 November 2007, long after CHOGM. On the 11 June 2008, nine months after CHOGM, Eng. Bagonza approved the order for the repair of Sserunkuma Road and it is all laid out. 

My question is: why am I being held responsible for something that I am not accountable for? My letter asked the concerned ministry to repair that road for CHOGM. The date for CHOGM was known instead, the road was done nine months after CHOGM. Mr Speaker, if you have a wedding for your daughter on Saturday, and you ask this person to slash the compound on Friday and this person comes on Sunday after the wedding, are you still going to hold this person responsible for something that has been expressly -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, as I see, what you are really saying here is that the conclusion is not justified. This is something that goes in the submissions that we will be making on the report. You are rubbishing the conclusion.

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, Sir. This was raised before -

THE SPEAKER: You are entitled and this is something you are going to show the House. You can say, “Look at this, does it make sense?”

MR MUSUMBA: Okay, Sir. Meanwhile, the House is invited to look at it now.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if we start the debate, I can call you to make your contribution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What is being attached there is a report from Police, which led to Eng. Bagonza’s - this is one of the problems, which led to Eng. Bagonza going to prison. But for purposes of us understanding, if you look at Annex 3(a) after the end of 2003 then the annex of hon. Hope Mwesigye then there is 3(a). On June 11th 2007, the letter which hon. Isaac Musumba wrote, you will see on 4 July 2007 that a few days after that, it is written that, “Arrange for immediate inspection of the road. The scope and cost estimate for the road repair work should be determined to guide decision making.”

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, if the chairman brings that, I have invited this House to read Annex 3(c) of this report.

THE SPEAKER: Can we say that we have started the debate now?

MR MUSUMBA: No, it is just Annex 3(c), which states categorically that additional works on Nakayima Road, upgrading of Sserunkuma Road - this is very important, and the date of approval is 27th November. It is here. (Hon Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, if you are making clarifications, normally you are at the hands of the person holding the Floor. That is why I said it is him to accept your clarification.

MS ALASO: Yes, I am seeking guidance or clarification. Mr Speaker, I need your help. What exactly is happening on this floor now? Are we debating the report? Are we getting a cross-examination of the report by the witnesses? I need you to help me so that I follow.

THE SPEAKER: I have said that let us start the debate. What hon. Musumba raised was in his defence. He was rubbishing the conclusion and this is something that comes when you are handling the report so I said as I see it, it is time we start the fully fledged debate on the report.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is about 25 minutes to 7.00O’clock. Following your ruling on the preliminary objection by hon. Mwesigye, we needed to give her time, which I think you must agree that she could submit by tomorrow 10.00 a.m. we shall go through it and resume the debate at 2.00 p.m. So, if she can submit that, we would be able to move forward with the debate.

THE SPEAKER: You mean she writes it overnight?

MR OKUPA: Yes, because the report has been with her. That is my proposal.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification. I agree with the ruling you made about hon. Hope Mwesigye but these Members who are coming up one by one appeared before the Public Accounts Committee and they are in this House. You are now giving them a second hearing. What will happen to Members who are not in this House?

THE SPEAKER: I have not received a presentation from them. What I have received is, for instance, from Dr Mulwana who has presented his case. Mr Chairman, I think you have seen his answer so I cannot speculate that there are others who are going to come. As far as I am concerned, I have not received the presentation from others who are not in the House. When that arises, I will find a solution.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, having heard your ruling that hon. Mwesigye writes to you and then you will decide how she is heard and where she goes to be heard, I would expect that after she has been heard then part of that report of her case will also be part of this report.

Sometimes you might relate hon. Mwesigye’s case to some of the cases that are in this report. I thought the debate would start after we have sorted out hon. Mwesigye’s case so that we all connect because some of it could be part of the defence of others.

THE SPEAKER: As a House, we are entitled to make our own conclusions and they become final. We need not return it to the committee. We shall say we have considered this and this, our conclusion is that and that will be part of adjusting the report.

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, I think whether it is today or tomorrow or any other day, we shall need to be guided on the manner in which we are going to conduct this debate. Because I get worried for example the question raised by hon. Wamanga-Wamai is implicit. It is saying: how will those people who are not here defend themselves? The implication is that nobody should defend themselves here because he is saying there are permanent secretaries, for example, who will not be here to defend themselves. 

As you have seen today, hon. Musumba at least initially challenged the conclusions of the committee and he will not be the only one. All of us want to challenge their conclusions. All of us want to challenge the contents including evidence that was tendered and excluded. All those facts are there so I think that without pushing the matter now, as we settle down to debating this report, we shall need guidance on how we shall conduct this. 

If anybody believes for a moment that this is gospel truth then we have a problem because there are many things in there that are contestable and will be contested.

I am not asking for a decision now. I am requesting you to ponder over this and in future give us guidance on how we shall handle this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the rules empower the Speaker, if something is not provided for by the rules, to make my decision and it becomes the procedure, should it arise, I cannot speculate. 

6.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I did write to all ministers and permanent secretaries who have been adversely appraised by the committee to give their response to you copied to all Members of Parliament so that when we are considering this report, we may take into account their defence. (Applause) What worries me are those people who are not permanent secretaries and ministers who may also wish to respond to what has been written here. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee and indeed this House is not a court of law. So what is going to happen is that the members who have the privilege of being present here will dully respond and will discuss back and forth through these responses. And those who have no opportunity to come here will also find an opportunity to respond in other areas where the law provides. So, there is absolutely no contradiction whatsoever.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is like Mr James Mulwana who has submitted his response and it is clear. Most of those you are talking about are employees of Government and if they have any response they want to deliver to us, they can do it through their PSs or ministers and then they submit them here. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This report on CHOGM has been there for the last one year. And the committee Members called various organisations and personalities, including ministers, to give their views and their defence. Now, they were given the opportunity before the report was written unless you are telling me that the committee did not do their work well. Now the report is here in Parliament and there is no need of going back to those people unless you are telling us that we take back the report to the committee and they do more work. (Applause) 

The case of the minister, hon. Hope Mwesigye, has been because there had been problems between the committee and herself, and that is why we are giving this special treatment to her. But what we are going to debate here is the report we have. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, the report has not been there for a year; the report has been with us since June. 

6.49
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I have a problem arising from the explanation given by the Rt hon. Prime Minister in the sense that as the chief minister, he was able to write to his ministers and permanent secretaries to show cause that if they had anything additional to give, they should be able to give it. I do not know when you wrote this letter but I am reliably informed that it is only hon. Sam Kutesa “Ceausescu” –(Laughter)- who has been able to respond to the Prime Minister’s letter. I am afraid that if we are going to wait for letters from the honourable ministers and permanent secretaries -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we are continuing with the debate tomorrow or on Thursday? Why not tomorrow? 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture still has to submit. Now if we are to start the debate tomorrow, shall we be skipping her part or we shall consider it as an incomplete report until that portion comes in? Certainly, we should not hurry; let us do it on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Thursday. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  From what has transpired this evening, it is like this report is going to be handled in a very special way because ordinarily, when a report comes to Parliament from a committee, what we debate is the report. 

The case of the hon. Hope Mwesigye was a special one; I would like to appreciate it as such. But from the way I am seeing, I think this is the issue the hon. Kutesa has raised, you really need to think about the rules and see how we are going to accommodate this unique problem. Because many of our colleagues are actually mentioned in this report and when they will be debating, naturally, it will not be debating a report. It will certainly be either providing evidence literally as witnesses including bringing documentary evidence if they so wish. So, my view is really to implore you, between now and when we meet, to think about the guidelines quite clearly.  

THE SPEAKER: No, when you say, “It will not be about debating the report,” debating the report may include criticising the report or the conclusion of it. Others will be praising and upholding the report. So, I do not mind whichever way it is because I cannot tell you how to debate the report. Once I give you an opportunity, you say what you want to say and then we eventually decide whether to adopt the report based on whichever conclusion. Otherwise, it will mean that you do not talk like this or that; no, I cannot do that. 

MR KATUNTU: The point I am trying to raise or labour to explain is about our Rules of Procedure; actually our Rules of Procedure say that you must disclose your interest if a matter has come for debate. Now, most of our colleagues who are mentioned in this report will actually have to first disclose their interest. Then we will be looking at either hearing additional evidence from them, at such, or them debating the report. So, there is really that conflict of interest.

THE SPEAKER: No, those affected by the report will say, “This conclusion on me is not justified because the committee did not take into account this and that fact,” so that we, the people who finally see the report either accept the explanation or go with the committee. 

MR LUKWAGO: The concern hon. Katuntu is raising, and I really appreciate the dilemma here, is to have people who are implicated in the report - and I am sorry I will use the term “suspect” - be part of the decision making body. Yes, you are suspects -(Laughter)– and you take part in the process of decision making because you will not only participate in the debate but also at the time of adopting the report, you will have to vote. That is the –

THE SPEAKER: There is no way you can exclude them because they are here carrying out their parliamentary function. 

MR LUKWAGO: The other aspect would be about the individuals outside Parliament. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister was calling for these people to make their submissions to him. The question I wanted to raise was how are we going to receive those submissions to be laid on Table? Is it by the Prime Minister or by the Speaker because we are not handling a trial – 

THE SPEAKER: How do you want to measure the conclusions of the committee without criticising them? I think we are entitled but it is for you who are the judges to accept the criticisms or not.

MR LUKWAGO: I think the procedure, Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Quote me the rule. 

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. I think the procedure would be those individuals who are disputing the findings and recommendations of the committee would find their way of giving their submissions either to individuals in their pigeon holes so that if there is any aspect which is being disputed, a Member would come and say, “No, I have a document from so and so”, and he lays it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why the document becomes open to the over 300 Members of Parliament so that you know. It is not a preserve of one Member but all of you be informed.

MR SAMMY LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this House is handling a report, which examined the Auditor-General’s report to this Parliament. I think the baseline is the Auditor-General’s report to this Parliament. Therefore, we gave the responsibility to the committee of this Parliament to investigate the findings of the Auditor-General’s report. Now that the committee has compiled it, having given opportunity to the people mentioned by the Auditor-General’s report, the committee in its wise findings made its own conclusion whose conclusions are being disputed. So, therefore, does this House want redress of the report that has been submitted to this House? We need to find the most appropriate way of approaching this report of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Can you help suggest an appropriate way of handling it? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, Government wishes to make one request. On Thursday, we are having a meeting of the National Executive Council of the NRM and it includes all Members of NRM of Parliament in this House. And on Monday and Tuesday, we have nominations for presidential candidates. So, when those are taking place, obviously we must partake of what is taking place over there. So we request that we start debating next Wednesday. I so request. (Mr Kyanjo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you a presidential candidate? (Laughter)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for wishing me to be a presidential candidate; I will not disappoint you one time. I appreciate the position submitted by the Rt hon. Prime Minister but I am also mindful of the integrity of this House especially yours, as a steward, regarding this report. 

I would beg that in light of the presentation by the Prime Minister, we then come tomorrow and deal with bits of the report which you have comprehended and then wait for those other details the following week. Otherwise, it is going to appear like we are dodging this report. 

THE SPEAKER: I think they are saying no to tomorrow because what will happen to a person who makes a contribution tomorrow without having commented where he wanted.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, there will absolutely be no problem. According to –

THE SPEAKER: There will be because you will not be allowed to speak twice. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, in the past we have agreed to proceed with reports as other matters come by. This is why I was thinking that we are giving special consideration to some individuals.

THE SPEAKER: But then again what will happen if we start tomorrow and then on Thursday we don’t break.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have carefully listened to the proposal made by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the reasons he has given are really valid in the sense that on Monday and Tuesday, people will all be in campaign mood, including my friend, a former DP, hon. Sam Kutesa. I therefore would like to buy the proposal he has made that we formally commence debate on this report on Wednesday next week. In which case, therefore, we will appeal to our sister, hon. Hope Mwesigye, that tomorrow, we get your copy so that we are able to internalise it -(Interjection)- is tomorrow really too short hon. Minister? You are a lawyer, you are well-facilitated as a minister, you have all the amenities and the issues are on your finger tips. Please, avail us your defence so that we are able to read it then next week on Wednesday we can commence debate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I thank you for the contributions made. The House is adjourned until Wednesday, next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.04 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 October 2010 at 2.00p.m.)


