Tuesday, 12 October 2010

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you to this meeting. The good news that we have today is about our brother Kipsiro who has made it again by winning a second gold medal. (Applause)

2.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): I rise on an emergency matter of concern. Yesterday, the Awoja Bridge which is a gateway to Soroti, Karamoja and parts of Sudan, was blocked because it had broken down. Trucks are diverted to go through Kumi, Ngora and then back to Soroti.

This is presenting a big problem in terms of access to Soroti but also the vegetation that blocked the bridge and created an upsurge in water levels has destroyed the water pump house to Soroti town, which is home to over 60,000 people and they have for five days gone without water.

The regional referral hospital in Soroti is in a very bad shape without water. The price of water in Soroti is Shs 1,500 per jerry can.

The House will recall that when flooding took place in 2007, we emphasised the issue of reinforcing the Awoja Bridge and we recommended for substantive works to be done and unfortunately not much was done. The Ministry of Works preferred to reinforce the culverts on either side of the bridge and no substantive overhaul as some of us had thought, was done.

The water plant in Soroti is also the same plant that has been supplying the districts of Amuria and part of Kaberamaido because under the extension project funded by BADEA, this was made possible.

When we talk about water shortage now, we are talking about Soroti, Kaberamaido and Amuria. The bridge developed a crack about a month ago and we raised this matter with officials from the Ministry of Works and we were told that it was not significant. We are now confronted with a situation where we do not have water and access to Soroti.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Works takes up the matter of repairs on this bridge very seriously. The ministry has been telling us that they are contracting companies, which will start the work in December. What will be happening to that part of the country as we wait? How does the ministry plan for people to access the region?

We had wanted the alternative bridge to be reinforced after the floods in 2007. I want to think that while we have diverted traffic to Agu Bridge, nothing has been done to strengthen it. 

The effect of the upsurge in the water could easily surprise us by cutting off access on the Agu Bridge. The bridge is very old, so my prayer is that Government should speed up the question of repairs. Now that the water house has completely collapsed, may be it is an opportunity for Ministry of Water to consider giving that area a bigger water plant; but in the meantime what do we do?
 
MR OMOLO: I came from Soroti yesterday at about midday. People were trying to remove the motor. If nothing is done in the shortest time possible, the whole road is going to get flooded. People are now fishing very close to the road. There is water all over the place up to Kapiri rock. Anytime now, the whole road will be submerged. The UNRA machine is only one and there are two Lorries. So, we need to add more machines and more Lorries if we are to remove that mass of land. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Alaso for giving way. It is true that the situation in Soroti town is pathetic. I know this because part of my family lives in that municipality. 

The information that I would like to give is that not very long ago, the sections that approach the Awoja Bridge on either side were done and as far as I remember, Shs 2 billion was spent to do that work, well even knowing that there is a separate contract where the ministry, through Uganda National Roads Authority, intends to do the section of the road from Mbale to Soroti which is going to commence in a few months.

It is unfortunate that given the situation on the ground, the country is going lose that Shs 2 billion. The minister knows, as well as I do that once water is allowed to stand on a pavement, it causes adverse damage to that pavement especially if traffic is allowed to go through it. At the moment, some limited traffic is able to go through Awoja and as I said earlier, that road - the Shs 2 billion investment is going to be lost. 

You also know that the bridge at Agu did not receive any rehabilitation worth speaking about immediately after the flooding in Teso. It remained very narrow, allowing just one vehicle at a time and I bet it will not allow heavy trucks like the ones that go to Sudan to drive across. 

So, generally, whereas there is an alternative route through Agu which is also a gravel road and the MPs of the area have advocated for the tarmacking of that road for many years now, our pleas have fallen on deaf ears. I would like the minister to tell this House how the Shs 10 billion that was allocated to the Ministry of Works to mitigate the problems associated with road infrastructure immediately after the floods was spent, because this is a question that will continue hanging over your head. Mr Minister, we as representatives of the people would like to know how that money was spent.

Lastly, the other piece of information is that the railway bridge across the swamp at Awoja has now been in a desperate state for over five years. This is a bridge that falls under the docket of your ministry and nothing is being mentioned, not even in your policy statements, that there are efforts being made to repair that bridge. 

Indeed, the country needs to be very sensitive to our crossings. Supposing the bridge across the Nile at Jinja had faced the same problem as the Awoja Bridge, where would the nation be? And this also goes for the Packwach and Karuma bridges. Egypt has eight bridges across the Nile in their territory while Uganda has only three. 

The NRM Government is putting the lives of Ugandans at a big risk. We would like to see some positive change in the way in which road infrastructure and bridges are handled. Mr Speaker, that is the information I wanted to give. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: It was a contribution, not just information. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: I thank you very much colleagues for that information. For me, it is really about when we get the bridge fixed. Is it earlier than December as we hear from UNRA? 

Secondly, how do we get an alternative and functional water house? That is what I really seek. I have a second issue. Should I first proceed or I first hear from the Minister?

THE SPEAKER: You have two issues?

MS ALASO: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us dispose of this by getting a reaction from the responsible minister first.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): I would like to thank my colleague for raising the matter and at the same time, I also want to sympathise with the people of Soroti, especially those in the town, for the shortage of water and the blockage of the bridge. 

It is true that water, I think from maybe Karamoja mountains, and what have you, pushed a floating vegetation of about one square mile and that vegetation is very heavy and the pressure has built up on the bridge. That one first caused the destruction of the water house. 

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation pump is tied to the high beam and that high beam was welded onto our bridge under the ground. It is this high beam that collapsed with the pump and went into the water. Those who watched television yesterday saw some swimming debris being removed by an excavator - that is part of the pump house and the concrete beam, which was part of our bridge. 

We have started working on this section especially by dredging the part which is near the bridge with assistance from the Egyptian aquatic team. We have a dredger there and I think it is the only long dredger we have in this country which is now removing the vegetation near the bridge so that water can pass under the bridge.

I want to assure this House that this is not a structural failure of the bridge. The bridge is still in sound condition and we only blocked the road because the dredger has occupied almost the whole road and we can only allow small vehicles to pass nearby -(Interjections)- I will later on give you the opportunity to speak -(Interjections)– I will give you. We had to stop these vehicles because the dredger now occupies the whole road. The best would have been to have a ferry or a dock but this is a long process and we are trying to relocate a ferry which we are going to carry on a truck from Nakiwogo to Awoja bridge; we are working on that so that we can put the second excavator on the ferry to speed up the removal of the vegetation, which is not a simple task. You can imagine how big one square mile of vegetation is! 

Mr Speaker, as I said before, the hole that people saw on the bridge happened on what we call an “expansion joint”, and that does not mean there is a structural failure on the bridge. It is true that Awoja Bridge has been affected by the floods, but it is still a strong bridge, and as soon as we remove the vegetation, we shall open it for the traffic to move. 

On the money spent on the extra culverts, to which I think even Eng. Amuriat can testify that they are doing a good job, otherwise, water would have already stopped the bridge. But as we talk now, it has not because of those extra culverts that were put there. We plan to have a brand new bridge on that section, and we are not going to destroy the old one; that is why we told you that we are still finalising the process of having a new bridge there. 

On Agu, I agree that we should do something on it, but we spent most of the money that we had earmarked – initially we had proposed a few culverts but later we noticed they cannot do the job. And it is true; we would have gone back to the situation of 2007 if we had not insisted to add on others. I think by now we have 15 to 20 crossings which we added on, which I think was a good move. So, we have not yet worked on Agu Bridge, but we are in the process of working on it as an alternative route to Soroti. 

I know this has caused a lot of inconveniences especially to the traders – and the truck drivers had found an easy way through Gulu and Arua to Southern Sudan, especially after tarmacking Lira Road; it became very easy for them and it was quite shorter. That is why that route is now the preferred route for the truck drivers. I know we have inconvenienced them, but this was beyond our control because we could not have stopped the movement of the floating vegetation. But we are working very hard to make sure that this bridge is re-opened as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker, I hope you will give me another opportunity to bring here the breakdown of the Shs 10 billion – you can give me two days from now, and I will bring the breakdown that was allocated by this Parliament immediately after the floods to mitigate the flood effects.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, do that on Thursday.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I will do it on Thursday.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, this is a proposal to you. About two or three weeks ago, you were asking me about Agu and I told you it is not as strong as it should be. I am wondering: is it possible for you to direct that the trucks which are using that route to come back and use the Kampala route; because if they continue, the bridge is going to collapse? If we allow them to continue, then the whole of Teso will be cut off completely. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I just heard the minister saying that the pump house at Awoja collapsed with the high beam. From my understanding, that high beam could have been one of the components of the bridge. Now, if it has collapsed, what does this say about the strength of the bridge as a whole? Have your engineers in the ministry made an assessment of the structural viability of the bridge? How could they have done that when the whole place is flooded? I think it would be good to take caution until the ministry engineers get the opportunity to assess the integrity of that bridge. Otherwise, in my view we might be risking lives of Ugandans.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, on hon. Okupa’s request, we might not do it completely, but we might tell those which are very heavy to use the alternative route of Jinja. On the high beam – they tied a pump on a high beam. They brought this high beam and welded it onto this bridge. So, when the water exerted force on it, it pushed the pump together with the high beam of the National Water and sewerage Cooperation; that is the one which fell into the water. But it has done no damage to our bridge. 

I have a team of structural engineers there; one of them has just returned and they proved that the bridge is still intact; we do not have any problem with the structural strength of the bridge, especially if we can quickly mitigate the problem of the floating vegetation.

But now the water has started flowing normally below the bridge. And this is the same at River Agu; so our worry is this: if we release a lot of water at a go, it can cause another problem down the stream. We are being careful on this; we are doing it gradually. May be that is why some Members were telling me that the trucks are very few. It is intended – we cannot do it very fast, we need to first leave the level of the water which has built up go down slowly so that it may not affect Agu’s structure in the process. So, we are doing it intentionally, we want to do it slowly. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. I would like to know from you, does the Ministry of Works have to wait until a weed surprises them at the bridge before they can start work? Isn’t there a provision for you to monitor up-stream and check whether the rivers are bringing sand and whether the bridges are under threat – couldn’t you have seen this coming? Why do you wait until you are shocked by some vegetation at the bridge?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, it is a very interesting question; it is more or less like what happened in Bududa because it was very difficult to detect that there was going to be movement of soil. This was far away, and on how it came to be pushed at such a high speed was not detected. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, the point is made; there is an emergency at Awoja Bridge, there is no water in Soroti town, so water should be provided because water is life. And in the meantime, you should carry out necessary work to restore the bridge. And as advised by hon. Okupa, you can divert the trucks which have been using Awoja Bridge to come to Kampala so that you can concentrate on working. I think that would be the solution. 

3.22
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that the minister is here and he has touched the issue of roads; I want to find out from him – the Ministry of Works took over a number of roads in my constituency -(Interjections)- I am talking about my constituency -(Interjections)- I do not know about the other parts of the country -  

Unfortunately, nothing has been done on these roads since they were taken over. The local government is not doing anything on the roads; the ministry has not done anything on the roads. The rains which have been going on all over the country have badly affected these roads. Oyam County headquarters is now an island. I have to manoeuvre through all sorts of panya roads to reach home and I am a Member of Parliament. When I get stuck, people say, “That is your work.” 

Mr Minister, when are you going to start working on these roads? When are you going to make our homes accessible? When you took over these roads, we heaved a sigh of relief. We thought at least something serious was going to be done. It just happened that you are worse than the local governments. When are you going to work on these roads? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the answer to what you have raised is an answer to many of us because even in my constituency, we have roads which were -(Laughter)- so, the concern is that you took over the roads, when are you starting to work on them? I remember we even had a supplementary that was intended to cover that one; so, the question is: when are you starting? 

3.25
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand on the same issue. Surely, the issue of roads and bridges! Many of my voters in Mbale live on the outskirts. Many live in Budadiri and they are not able to access Mbale. The bridge at Gweri was washed away. The other time, we witnessed people of Bududa planting banana stems on the roads. The roads in Bugisu are impassable because of the rains, but we hear the same stories. The minister comes here and tells us, “We are working on the plans; we are working on the designs”, all these years. 

The other time, the accounting officer of the Uganda National Roads Authority came and appeared before the Public Accounts Committee. We were shocked to hear the accounting officer tell us, “Oh, the roads up there are impossible to construct.” These are the engineers who should study all the weather patterns, the terrain, the conditions. We have seen roads in other countries constructed in very difficult areas, but the accounting officer came and told us, “Oh, it was difficult.” Now you can hear the Minister of State for Works telling us, “Oh, they could not go upstream to find out.” The situation is bad on all roads, bridges all over the country and the rains have come. It was even difficult for me to cross to the Chamber here. It has been raining heavily. So, the situation is bad all over the country. It is not only on the road to Soroti. It is everywhere. What are you doing about it? They must have inspectors. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is what I have said. The question, which was raised by hon. Wacha covers the entire Uganda. I think the minister should come here and give us an explanation about what is being done in view of the circumstances prevailing now so that it is one answer to all the queries because they are similar. But the main thing was about this Awoja Bridge, and lack of water in Soroti. That should be worked on as soon as possible.

3.28
MR SAMMY OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I just want to find out from the minister, one; Mbale-Namalu-Nakapiripirit-Moroto Road. Actually, it is almost closed. No person passes there now. Even now Awoja is threatening to close. I do not know how the people of Karamoja, especially the business community in Moroto Municipality and Kotido and Kaabong - at least Abim would be accessible from Lira. Actually Nakapiripirit - because those big Lorries ferrying stones to Tororo Cement have destroyed Mbale-Sironko-Nakapiripirit Road, it is impassable. We do not use it. Even civil servants fear to pass there because it destroys their vehicles. I do not know how the Karimojong will benefit. Because if the road is bad, then the business community from Mbale; half of the business centre for the entire Karamoja is in Mbale. That is a hub trading centre with everything. It also includes Lira. So, I would like to know. 

Secondly, on the same road, we were supposed to have tarmac from Miyembe to Moroto. But now, we have realised that it is from Moroto to Nakapiripirit. It does not bring any economic benefit. The people are actually saying, “I wish it was even from Miyembe to Nakapiripirit.” That would have done a lot for them because the other one is only doing this official business not economic-based viability.

In Moroto Municipality, Katikekile road was tarmacked for 2 kilometres in the 2003 policy statement. They went, graded and left it; the rains came and washed it away. They graded; I have been following with the immediate office there in Moroto because I normally go and consult. They have graded; they have even brought everything around but they grade and the rains come and wash it away after. They are repeating the same road; wasting resources; why can’t the ministry be more cost effective, do the road once and stop the wastage? Up to now, the road has not been tarmacked.  They say, “We are working. We are working,” yet they do a lot of wastage, which they could have used on another road.

Finally, Soroti-Moroto will also be closed. When I was coming back from home, I had to get people to guide the vehicle where to pass because the road was holding nothing but water. The small bridges which were there were already finished. People had to find a way of getting to Negetesro that is between Irir and Maktomet if you know that road called Maktomet or Matai. For that matter if you want to locate it; it goes to Kangole. That area where there is supposed to have been resettlement. So, you find that swamp. If the rains continue; then we shall also not access Moroto from Soroti and if those things – and you find the people given the –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think it is fair for us to let the minister get a comprehensive response to our queries? The minister should come on Thursday and make a comprehensive statement on the state of the roads and what is being done as raised by the Members. Do you expect him to answer these now? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I respect your ruling. As I had said earlier, give me two days, I will come and give more details on these roads. But maybe to react to what hon. Wacha has raised, I think I can work out a programme and bring it here because sometimes Parliament passes money here and when we go into implementation, these procedures sometimes bog us down but we have been working tirelessly and we are about to be there. I will also bring an explanation of that on Thursday. 

To my friend from Mbale, the good thing is that whenever I read or hear something somewhere, I rush there and when I saw something on TV about Bududa, I was in Bududa the following morning. I think it was in the newspapers and on TV where people said that they had planted banana trees in the middle of the road. Really it is not the whole road that is bad but it is a small section of about 500 meters that is very problematic because the road is below the surface. So, whenever it rains, murram is washed away and the road goes below the surface and all the water collects in that section. Actually, I went with a solution and I left an excavator there trying to get stones. I directed that we should use crushed stones instead of using the normal murram that we usually put on the roads and they are working on that. We shall get a lasting solution for those 500 metres that have brought problems.

I agree with the hon. Member from Moroto that we have a problem of the Tororo trucks carrying limestone on this road called Katekekire–Roro side. Now that we graded the road, it is among the best roads that we have in Karamoja. They have changed from using the normal trucks to semi-trailers. So, it is a very big problem and they know how to dodge the weighbridge at Mbale. They have even started moving at night using panya roads and I can’t rule out conniving with the Police. But we are following them and we know the panya routes and we are getting those people. They must pass the weighbridge and they must be fined heavily. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Minister and thank you, Mr Speaker. But does the weighbridge sleep at night so that they dodge it? I thought the weighbridge works 24 hours.

MR BYABAGAMBI: That is what I am saying. I accept that there must be some connivance and at the same time, I do know that the weighbridge works 24 hours because last week, I left Bukwo at 9.00 p.m. and arrived in Mbale towards midnight and I found the weighbridge there. I came from the side of Bududa and continued to the other side; so, I do not know whether they came to know that I was in the region or not, but I found them working. 

Those trucks are a nuisance and we have the same trucks on the Kamwenge-Fort Portal-Hoima road. They have built a new factory where we have got more than 200 trucks plying the route everyday. So, we have to mitigate that by controlling the axle load. We can’t stop them from using the road because it is specifically constructed to promote trade; but also, we have to make sure that the axle load is controlled. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come with the break downs on Thursday.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second issue is that the Ministry of Water and Environment hasn’t told me what they are hoping to do about the water crisis in Soroti. I do not know whether they will tell the House what plans they have for this water crisis. 

3.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for raising this very important matter. All of us who watched television last night could clearly see what happened and the water situation in Soroti is clearly out of hand. I will be passing on this information to the Minister for Water and Environment. I have been informed that a team has been sent to Soroti but she will also come here and appraise the House on what she is exactly doing to contain the situation in Soroti. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been here since the seventh Parliament and I recall a time when cows lacked water, Parliament was called and we allocated money for cows to get water. People in Soroti are dying because of water and you say you are going to contact the minister yet this is an issue that involves human beings? 

THE SPEAKER: No. The ministers concerned with water are not here and he said that he understands something has been done, but he is going to pass on the information that has been raised here to the minister and we have all agreed that water is life and something serious has to be done. So, maybe tomorrow, we will require the substantive minister in charge of water to tell us.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we can wait up to tomorrow. I really hope that the minister will be here to give us an update of what is happening. 

The second issue which I intend to raise very briefly has to do with the launch of a book which is slated for tomorrow. There is a planned launch of a book titled “The Correct Line? Uganda under Museveni” by Olive Kobusingye. I think this is a very important function and that Ugandans should have the freedom to read whatever they want to read under the Movement Government. It is important and that we should encourage young enterprising writers – ladies as such – but I seek clarification from the Ministry of Finance particularly the Uganda Revenue Authority because copies of this book lie impounded at Entebbe International Airport for the last one week or so, the book is planned to be launched tomorrow without copies. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance why they have impounded these books. 

First, because I think that there has been a waiver on taxes in regard to publishing, so there would be no question to do with taxes. Is it the thinking of Government that the content of this book is poisonous and that they just do not want Ugandans to read it? Mr Speaker, doesn’t this infringe on the rights of people to access and process information as individuals? Why have the books been impounded? That is what I am asking the Government of Uganda. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you. Government conducts its affairs in accordance with the law and I will find out whether the referred subject has been done in accordance with the provisions of tax - if it is the Uganda Revenue Authority - and I will report to the House on Thursday. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is good that my father took me to school. If a whole professor and the minister of finance does not know that scholastic materials do not pay taxes, then I am worried and you can imagine he is in charge of planning; I do not know what he plans if he does not know that books do not pay taxes. We are really worried. I think the President of this country is in disaster having such ministers. Is he in order to behave like that? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What you do is to give the information then the Minister will know. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, on a very serious note, I think the Minister of Finance is taking this matter lightly but he knows that for books and publications, we do not pay taxes. Therefore, in my view, the people at Customs are illegally or under whatever direction, holding this book but just using an excuse, which is not being told to Ugandans.

I still think that the books should be released. The Minister should direct the Customs people to release the books and we launch them and exercise our freedom as Ugandans to read whatever we want. Whether it is good, whether it praises Government or it does not, it is within our inherent freedoms as a country. So this thing of forcing URA to do things that are illegal I think is not fair and the Minister should act and release the books so that we launch them tomorrow.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, if only the honourable member had listened carefully to the statement I made. I said and I repeat: Government conducts its business in accordance with the law, and law is not confined to merely tax. It could have been done on another basis and I have promised the House that I am going to find out and I will report to the House. It is not merely impounding because of tax; it could be pornography or it could be some other things, which requires examination and verification in accordance with the law. I do not see the excitement and I do not see how hon. Mafabi simply makes statements and walks out. How is this related to his mother paying school fees for him? People had school fees paid for them but I do not how his stretches the argument to include mother paying fees, blah, blah, blah. The point is I will find out.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister, you are not very clear to us and you are not fair to this lady. A venue had been secured, money has been paid for it and we have received cards for the launch. The books have been there and they have tried in vain to - could you have a human heart and promise this House that in the next 30 minutes you consult with URA, let them tell you what the problem is and you get back here? It is just a phone call. This lady is going to lose money. We know how the owners of venues behave; the money will not be refunded. Can you save us and get us the information within the next 30 minutes. If it is for a security reason, you tell us. Be specific. You are a very powerful minister and not just a simple person. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Mr Speaker, let me clarify. The exercise of investigation will be done in accordance with the law. It will not be done by directives as if the directive does not follow law. If you have arranged for the launching of this book and you have just raised this matter now, in all fairness I would want Members to take me seriously. This thing will be done in accordance with the law and I am going to find out.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I can hear the honourable minister telling us to follow the law. But I thought the honourable minister who is holding the book should tell us which laws we have broken. The books have been under the custody of customs people at Entebbe, impounded for one week without any proper explanation to the author or to DHL who were contracted to deliver the books. So the problem is really with the minister who should tell us why he is holding the books.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you come back tomorrow with an answer.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I wish to present the annual report of Bank of Uganda for the year 2009/2010.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee study the report and make a report to the House as soon as possible.

PRESENTAITON OF PAPERS

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report for the financial year 2009/2010 for the Education Service Commission.

THE SPEAKER: The appropriate committee is directed to study the report and advise the House.

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Brian Asiimwe): Mr Speaker, the committee on social services wishes to present a report on the field visits.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, ordinarily, such a report should be presented to this House when the sector ministers are in the House. I am looking around but I do not see any minister from Health. Unless it is a ritual which Government does not take seriously, we are wasting time and some of us do not have that time to waste.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I have looked at the report and there is a list of members here. However, no one has signed, not even the chairperson. Can I be clarified if this is the correct report?

THE SPEAKER: Can you explain?

DR ASIIMWE: Mr Speaker, the copy I have is signed and I directed the Clerk to provide signed copies to Members of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe can you tell us what really happened – I now see a copy with signatures. What happened to the others?

DR ASIIMWE: It was supposed to be photocopied and presented to the House for all Members to access.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was the vice chairperson of that committee when this report was prepared. I would like to say that we indeed signed the report but I think the problem was at the level of photocopying. Whoever was responsible probably did not take the copy that had been signed. Otherwise, we signed the report as a committee; we got the required signatures.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the signatures I see here include that of hon. Prof. Anokbonggo, hon. Betty Ocan, hon. Arimpa Kigyagi, hon. Dr Epetait Francis, hon. Gudoi Yahaya, hon. Kubeketerya James and that of hon. Rwakimari who are the members. It seems they all signed one copy, which was supposed to be photocopied – there is evidence that the report was signed by the Members – there is evidence. For example, hon. Anokbonggo’s signature is here, hon. Kubeketerya’s signature is here and for all those mentioned above. So, it is not something that has been crafted in a minute.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, maybe to make matters simple, you could verify whether what we holding here, which is not signed, is the same with what your chair is reading before we can proceed.

THE SPEAKER: No, definitely they are not the same because what you are holding is not a printed copy; that is obvious.

MR OKUPA: I think this report that was done the other time because I can see signatures of hon. Rosemary Seninde and hon. Dr Baryomunsi who are no longer chair and vice chairs of that committee respectively yet the report is signed by them in those capacities. So, can I also get clarification on that, hon. Dr Asiimwe? I am asking this because even the one the chairperson was trying to show has no signatures of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson; only those you are listing signed it.

MR KATUNTU: Hon. Chris Baryomunsi actually said that they signed it –(Interjections)- that is what he said. I think we are being treated to some sort of drama and lies, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I think our rules require that a report should be signed by at least one third of the members –(Interjections)– because I was personally not around when the report was completed –(Laughter)– but what I know is that it was signed by the required number of members.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we should do is to take on another report, as we carry out investigations on this matter.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF UNIVERSAL PRIMARY EDUCATION AND UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION

3.57
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Brian Asiimwe): Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: I do not have a copy.

DR ASIIMWE: Mr Speaker, allow me to present the Report of the Sessional Committee –

THE SPEAKER: But you see, hon. Leader of Government Business, the issue that was raised by hon. Katuntu was that the reports are being presented when the responsible minister is not here. What are you doing about that?

3.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true the three ministers from the Ministry of Health are not here. But they had written to the Office of the Prime Minister to indicate that hon. Dr Kamanda would be holding the briefs. As you know he is a doctor is his own right and fairly knowledgeable on health issues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can you proceed with the presentation of the report? And I hope you are only going to read to us a summary.

DR ASIIMWE: Yes. Mr Speaker, allow me to present to you the report –(Interruption)

MR EUKU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. This report suffers the same fate and to make it worse this one does not even bear any name. So, how do we confirm that this report was produced by this House? So, is it in order for us to present it when it is naked?

THE SPEAKER: Naked! (Laughter) What has he said?

MR EUKU: Yeah! It is naked. There is nothing –(Interjections)– we do not have it.

MR OKUPA: The thing here is that we have three versions of the report. There is one without the list of the names of the members, one with that list, but with no signatures and the third one signed by a third of the members. And all these different copies have been distributed.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, there is a problem. The report that has been given to me actually has an attachment of names, but looks like the sheet with signatures that was attached to the other report you were reading is the same sheet that has been attached to this one. 

My sense is that they just got standard signatures and pinned then on different reports. In fact when you look at it – ordinarily when reports are being made, there should be a heading up here such that we can be sure that the people who signed this report are actually those people. Otherwise, these people just got anonymous signatures and attached them on this report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, it appears members doubt the authenticity of the reports. You will go back and convene a meeting with your committee members so that they can own or disown the two reports. With that we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.01 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 October 2010.)
