Wednesday, 13 October 2010

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Maybe I should start with the bad news; I have received a letter from hon. Loy Kageni Kiryapawo. I will read it. It is addressed to me:

“THE LOSS OF MY DEAR MOTHER, THE LATE IDAH BISOBYE KAGENI

I regret to inform you and through you, to inform the entire Parliament about the sudden death of my dear mother, the late Idah Bisobye Kageni, which occurred on Sunday 10 October, 2010 at her home in Kerekerene, Katira sub-county, Iki-Iki county in Budaka District. Burial will take place tomorrow 14 October, 2010 at 12.00 noon at Kerekerene. I request you to inform all the honourable members.”

This is the bad news. As we do, we shall observe a minute of silence. 

(Members observed a moment of silence)

Now the good news, although it does not affect us as a country, but I think as a civilised Parliament, we should note with pleasure the success in Southern America of retrieving our brothers that have been underground for months. (Applause) It has started today and they have been successful. We congratulate them and pray for them. 

2.59
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you very much. I am standing up to bring out a matter of national importance regarding Mulago and the environment around it. As you may recall, we had a bomb blast which claimed many Ugandans and security measures were beefed up. But much as the security measures were beefed up, the environment around Mulago has become totally impossible. 

Some of you who have chanced to go to Mulago recently, you may find that the stage which was around Mulago on Kiira Road has been removed and if you go behind, most of the gates have been closed and this has created an inconvenience. 
We are all concerned about security to protect the citizens against terrorists, but I would presume that if we are protecting the citizens, then we should also protect them against other impossible things that may emanate from that defence against security. We should not look at security per se, and suppress the rights of Ugandans.

In Mulago, you pay money to park, but already the parking is full. Most people who go the referral hospitals use taxis, but all the stages have been removed from there. If they are to drop you near Mulago, they have to take you as far as the museum, and if you have a frail patient, that frail patient has to walk or has to be carried, which is terrible. 

I would like Government to come out and help the people of Mulago. Recently, when the President came, it is one of the issues which came up and he responded that he was going to look at it, but without being aggravated. Those are sick people and they have their attendants and beyond there; the sick people have people who attend to them and they are supposed to go and look for food, but the behind gate was locked. They used to access the shops and the market at Old Mulago, but that has become totally impossible. 

So, I am appealing to Government to come out to help and open the back gate of Mulago and also to restore the taxi stages. It is a nightmare to get a person who is sick to reach Mulago if you are using public means. I wish the Government would come out and even the President, if it is possible.  

Rt hon. Prime Minister, we are appealing to you to open the gates and even restore the stages where the poor people – the wretched of this country use the common transport system we have where they are supposed to disembark; even when they are discharged from Mulago where they wait for the taxis. 

The soldiers there who are heavily armed are saying, “We are protecting the environment. People are spoiling the environment here.” But what environment really when that is a national referral hospital and if anything, if they have the CMI around there, why do they not shift some of the most sensitive activities to other areas and they leave the city centre for the people of Uganda? It is true security is important, but then security must also protect the people of Uganda. This is what I am asking for on behalf of the people I represent and even the entire Uganda because it is a national referral hospital. 

3.03
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for bringing up the concern. We who are in charge of this security, whenever there is anything, of course, our first reaction – (Interjections) I am just saying that we will want you to appreciate that whenever there is anything, we who deal with security, our first reaction is normally to ensure that there is absolute security. But I am going to visit that area and see the inconvenience done and appropriate measures will be taken.

3.04
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national or even international concern which is connected with the floods disaster. 

In my constituency, two sub-counties have already been affected by too much rain and then floods. 19 villages in Abala parish in Agweng sub-county have been affected and people are vacating the parish. The most affected villages are 10. 

One of the schools in the constituency and in particular in that parish, is called Abala Primary School with about 800 pupils. The school was closed on the 8th October and we do not know when exactly they will resume and yet they have 40 PLE candidates stranded. We have already brought it to the attention of the Prime Minister’s representative in Lira but so far, they started their work yesterday. 

Worse still, crops have already rotted and cassava and potatoes cannot be eaten because this has taken almost one month now. Day in, day out they thought the rain would subside, but even when I was there yesterday, it rained twice; in the morning and in the evening. I am told it rained again this morning. 

So, the school has been affected and I want to draw this to the attention of Government so that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, Ministry of Education, Health – because we are expecting the health facilities to have deteriorated since all the pit latrines in the villages are full. Also, in the schools, all the pit latrines have filled up. In Agak Primary School, which is also in Erute County North; the pit latrines collapsed yesterday night.  Now they are on the verge of closing the school.

Another area which is affected is in Aromo sub-county. It is called Adyere in Acut Kumo parish. Crops have been equally affected, especially sorghum and cotton. Cotton is now rotting and drying. Beans have also been affected. 

I am appealing to the ministry concerned to respond very fast so that mosquito nets are provided immediately. Also, the drugs should be provided. We have Abala Health Centre II which has not been functioning. It is there as a white elephant. This could be used to provide some health services for the community because they are now moving away from near the river in Moroto, which is at the lower end called River Achwa to the upper land of the parish. This would save the situation.  

Teachers’ houses also collapsed in Abala and we took the photographs. I think this one also needs immediate attention. Particularly, the pupils who are about 800 would want to migrate to a nearby primary school where there was an IDP camp. This means they need some shelter. Also, the teachers who are going to take up the challenge will need to be accommodated. Then the feeding process should begin. Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

3.08
THE MINISTER (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for this information. However, I would have been happier with this information before we came to this House so that I could mobilise to address the challenge because a minute of non-intervention is a minute lost. 
 
All we are trying to do is to minimise the effects of disasters. I will be making a statement in this House today. But really, we all need to be very awake. The most urgent action in these situations is to inform us early enough so that we can intervene. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, but the information might relate to Members’ constituencies. That is the subject we have. It is not a general discussion; it must be about his area. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: That is true; information has come in. After this meeting, I would want to talk to him in a bit more detail so that we know what action we could take, because we are prepared to take actions, but those actions are also measured according to the extent of the incident. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Is it in respect of his area? No, you see, this is under a special opportunity given to him. He came and explained to me and that is how we allowed him. It is not a general debate of a situation in Uganda. It is about his area.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you very much for that information, hon. colleague. I am going to send a team there to assess the magnitude of the situation, so that the health facilities will be equipped. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION & SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, I have got the information for the first time here, from my hon. colleague about the collapsing latrines and teachers’ houses. We shall also send a team, which will liaise with the district team and do the needful. I thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I thank the ministers for their immediate response. The same floods could probably be coming because of heavy rains. Aruu County, which I represent, borders his area. But what concerns me in relation to the heavy rains are the floods in Kampala City. Now that the Minister of State for Works is around, could he get up and tell this country - because yesterday, those of us who stay on Entebbe Road arrived home at midnight. It just rained for 30 minutes and the fire station was flooded quarter way at Clock Tower. The entire place was not passable and people are wondering, what is the Minister of Works planning to do about this? 

Now that Eng. Byabagambi is here, could you tell us, what exactly are you doing with all the doctorates, the masters and the people you have in your ministry? What exactly is going on, because every time it rains, Kampala comes to a standstill? Are you planning to buy some boats to enable some of us who are in a hurry access our places? It is now practically impossible for the vehicles. So, what exactly is going on in your ministry? Could the ministry live to the occasion? Even in Bwaise, it is the same. Yesterday, in Owino Market, people lost property. Could the minister tell us exactly what is going on?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, this country has different categories of roads. The roads within urban centres belong to local councils. (Interjections) Not all, but most of the roads within Kampala belong to Kampala City Council. Government has taken the steps of looking for the money to reconstruct most of the roads in Kampala City Council and the President mentioned this on Independence Day. But even where we intervened, we were sued by Kampala City Council for the intervention. Therefore, I urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to expedite the law of taking over Kampala City Council. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY BLOCKING THE ENTRY OF A BOOK ENTITLED, “THE CORRECT LINE? UGANDA UNDER MUSEVENI” 
AT ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

THE SPEAKER: Please, Minister of Finance -(Mr Kivejinja rose_) (Laughter)

3.15
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejjinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This question was put to the Minister of Finance as the one in charge of collecting customs and somehow, it fumbled and entered into my security arena. So, I am taking it up and I will be able to give you the exact position on when to solve the issue. (Interruptions)  I thought I could give you the details on Tuesday and not today. Otherwise, I can only tell you that there were two consignments of books at Entebbe Airport addressed to somebody called Dr Golooba and when Golooba came to pick his materials, he used Makerere University and it was at that point - and you know nowadays we are very alert. If anything happens and there is something suspicious, I am there. Therefore, I took position of it and I will be giving you the details of what is going to be done. (Interruptions)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This subject is on the Order Paper. How was it put on the Order Paper? Was the Minister of Finance not informed? The practise is normally for the ministry to confirm that it should be on the Order Paper. What happened in this particular case?

THE SPEAKER: This matter was raised by hon. Alaso yesterday and we suspected that this had been done by the URA and, therefore, the minister answerable for that organisation is the Minister of Finance and we expected him to come and explain. Unfortunately, he is not here but then his colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, seems to say that after investigations, it eventually had to be handled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that is why he answered. 

Otherwise, we would have loved to have the Minister of Finance, but he is not here. So, I do not know what response we are going to receive; maybe, what we can do is to say that we need an answer from the Minister of Finance tomorrow, who will tell us why the matter is being handled by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Otherwise, as of now, in the absence of the Minister of Finance, I do not know what you want to do. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am perturbed by the contradicting statements that the Minister of Internal Affairs has just stated. As we were getting in here, I was at the steps with hon. Kajara and I told him we were waiting for the statement and he said, “I am just running back; I have forgotten the statement in the office. I am running back to the Ministry of Finance to get the statement and …” 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us wait for the Minister of Finance to come. 

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I was here when that matter was raised. When it was investigated, it had security dimensions. So, I directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to take charge of this matter so that it may be handled expeditiously because I also feel strongly that when a book appears, it must be accessible to the people. So, I have directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to interface with all the groups including the security elements to sort it out and he is going to give you a reply on Tuesday –[Hon. Members: “Why not tomorrow?”] – No, tomorrow is not possible. Tomorrow, His Excellency the President requires the entire Cabinet at Entebbe –(Mr Okupa rose_)- hon. Okupa, are you a member of the Cabinet?

Secondly, this matter must be handled carefully so that we come with a solution. It has to be sorted out. I do not want the minister to come here and say there is this and that problem. He must solve it and I am also working closely with him to ensure that it is solved so that we come here and give you a solution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I seek from the Prime Minister is whether it is no longer a tax matter. Is it the issue of paying taxes that the books are being held at Entebbe? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: When a matter is being investigated, I do not want to give half information. It is always wise to complete the investigation and then give a well-researched answer. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to register my disappointment at this stage that the commitment that was made to bring the statement here for this afternoon has been abandoned, but most interestingly, that the Minister of Internal Affairs has now come up and said that books are a security matter. One would get an impression that these books have illustrations on how to assemble bombs to destroy this country which I think is not true because I do not understand [Hon. Members: “Have you read it?”] yes, I have read it online and so, I am defending something that I have read and as a keen reader, I know the substance of this book and I would be very happy that this matter is sorted. 

Tuesday is very far, given the fact that the book is –(Interjections)- yes, I am surprised that these ministers cannot listen; they are just – what is wrong with you people? Can you listen to me a little? I have been listening to the honourable ministers and I am disappointed they cannot even listen an inch. That is the intolerance, by the way, that they are even showing to the opinions in this book. 

But that is not what I want to say. What I want to say is that the real thing that confronts Government now is an attempt to manipulate an academic work, to manipulate an opinion, to attempt to hinder or to negate our freedoms to freely express ourselves. A book is an opinion; a book is an enterprise; a book is an idea that Ugandans should have access to. We would be launching this book this afternoon save for the fact that for no good reason other than that the book profiles the presidency of this country, you find it very unpalatable that you do not want Ugandans to understand it and I think this is very unfortunate. The right thing would be to release the books and give Ugandans an opportunity to form their own opinion. It is wrong for the government to try to manipulate even our thinking. It is enough that we get tear-gassed on the roads, but to even control what we think is unacceptable, and it is the epitome of dictatorship. This is unfair to this country.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you.  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House, officially, as Shadow Attorney General, that the courts of law scrapped the law on sedition. And what does this mean? That any literature you publish is free for public consumption. That is the hallmark of the judgement of their lordships in the Constitutional Court. Why am I saying this? If it is perceived to be a seditious material, you leave it to the public to judge. So, could the minister help us throw more light on the “security” concerns about this material? 

But according to my perusal of the Penal Code and any other laws, there is no publication that would offend the law ever since the law on sedition was declared null and void. This is the information I wanted to give. So, Government should not hide behind security matters to frustrate the efforts of educating Ugandans on salient matters. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I have a copy of that book. The Minister of Internal Affairs is saying there is a security problem. And I am not the only one with a copy of that book.  A few copies are already circulating and in fact it is also available online. We need to be very careful here. The road we are taking, according to my understanding of the minister’s statement, is that Government will start editing the books we read. That is what they are saying. The Prime Minister puts it correctly; “we are trying to see; we are working with people to see how to handle the problem.” Are you going to edit the book? This is not your book. (Laughter)

MR GAGGAWALA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Katuntu in order to misinform this House on an issue which the Finance Act of 2008 clearly states? Nothing should be imported by Customs that is not allowed. And you are being told those books are not allowed. (Laughter) Is he in order to start arguing for a case which the Minister of Internal Affairs has told you is unwanted material? You know very well that even in America, unwanted publications from Soviet Union are not allowed there. Even in Britain, unwanted materials cannot be allowed to be circulated. Is he in order to start arguing for a case which is literally impossible to convince this House about? (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

RESUMPTION OF WATER SUPPLY IN SOROTI MUNICIPALITY AND SURROUNDING AREAS

3.31
THE MINISTER (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof.  Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the Clerk can now distribute the statement.

THE SPEAKER: No, there was a statement on Soroti water. The minister is supposed to tell us the position because we had this matter yesterday and we realised the urgency of the matter. So, the minister had to come with a statement to tell us what is being done. I think it was being handled by the Minister of Works and he had told us that something was being done. We want to find out the up-to-date report.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, yesterday, I did not want to bring in another ministry but as of today, we are working together with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. We are using their dredger and there is a second dredger there. So, we now have two dredgers. We are dismantling a small ferry at Nakiwogo which will be transported tomorrow to Awoja. And together with National Water and Sewerage Corporation, we are trying to expedite the process of reinstating the pump so that the water supply can be reinstated within this week as we continue with the work of removing the floating vegetation.

MS ALASO:  Mr Speaker, I want to say that the water situation in Soroti remains very pathetic. It is unfortunate that the minister in charge of water is not here. Because what we are praying for, as people who live in the municipality, is that we would have a speedy restoration of water supply to the town. Yesterday, I said that Soroti has over 60,000 people living therein and the biggest challenge right now is managing the national referral hospital. There is completely no water. While I appreciate that attempt by the Minister of Works to explain, I would like him to take note of the fact that there is space available now if the National Water and Sewerage Corporation tried to do something. There is space available now from the dredging clearing that has been done and the pumping could take place. It is not about the water weed anymore. There is enough space that has been cleared to allow for a temporary arrangement to pump the water. 

From the attempts to recover the pump that have been going on in the last few days, the pump was picked up from the water, but it is lying there. What we would have loved to know is when the temporary installation will take place and when can Soroti town receive some water. It is not about the water weed. But I want to remind the minister that the water weed on River Awoja is actually three acres and not half an acre as it was said yesterday. I think that should help him plan better as he dismantles the ferry. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Yes, I appreciate hon. Alaso’s concerns about the hospital lacking water. But at the same time, it is true the pump has been picked, and it can pump, but that water has to go through a process of purification. That is what they are trying to put in place now. If it was a matter of just pumping the water, they would have done it within one hour. But you see, the whole house was destroyed and it has to go through this purification process, which they are installing. And I think they are working very hard to see that the situation is rectified. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us hope and please continue monitoring the activities in Soroti about this water. You can also keep briefing us on a daily basis.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. Since the minister in charge of water is not here, I would like to request that that minister makes a statement such that people get to know – because a jerrycan of water in Soroti now costs Shs 2000. We need a progress report on how far they have moved and when people should expect the restoration of water. Otherwise, it is going to continue to be a very difficult situation. (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabwegyere, do you have a statement for the House?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

EARLY WARNING INFORMATION TO PARLIAMENT ON COMING DROUGHT AND FAMINE AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL DISASTER REDUCTION WEEK, 11TH – 15TH OCTOBER 2010

3.37
THE MINISTER (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Judging from what has been already said about floods and waterlog, it is important that we inform this House on what Government is already observing and the guidance that we can give. So, this afternoon, –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that whenever an item does not appear on the Order Paper, when we get into the proceedings, the Order Paper is amended – 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Order Paper be amended. (Laughter) What happened is that the minister was supposed to have made this statement yesterday, but there was a power failure at his office and so he could not produce the copies. When I learnt of this, I told him to make the statement today. Otherwise, for the record, let the Order Paper be adjusted to allow the minister make the statement. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know you have always defended me against hon. Nandala-Mafabi. (Laughter) So, thank you very much. I will now read my statement.

Every year, the world marks the international day for rift reduction on the second Wednesday of the month of October. The global theme for this year is “Making Cities Resilient.” I would like to say that my city is getting ready.

Yesterday, the week kicked off with a match from KCC Gardens through the city as part of the activities to mark this week. I also used that opportunity to launch the report titled: 

“World Disaster Report, 2010 focus on Urban Risk.” I would like to lay on Table a copy that I secured for our Parliament Library. The report was compiled by the Red Cross and covers the global situation and I thought Members of Parliament should have access to it.

Much as natural disasters have affected our town and cities, rural communities have been affected much more. The national theme has, therefore, been adjusted to, and I quote: “Strengthening communities’ adaptive capacity to changing disaster risks.” 

The national activities to raise awareness on the importance of disaster risk reduction started on Monday this week and will run through the whole week. The activities included, a press conference; an awareness march along the streets of Kampala; speeches at the city gardens; television talk shows; a conference at Hotel Africana, which is still going on today; and documentaries being screened on UBC Television throughout this week. Reducing disaster risks is a priority for the preservation of our country’s development. 

Hon. Members, many people believe that disasters cannot be foreseen and, therefore, they cannot be prevented or their impact minimised. That belief is not true. Over 75 percent of the disasters that affect Uganda are climate related and, therefore, can be predicted and their impact significantly minimised if risk reduction actions are taken at the right time.

I take this opportunity to inform Parliament that the Draft National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management that was actually supposed to have been discussed this Monday, has been rescheduled. It is now ready and immediately Cabinet pronounces on it, I will contentiously bring it here for your information and participation in its implementation.

I am also happy to report that by the end of this year, we shall have no IDP Camps in the country. In fact all the IDP Camps in the North were literally closed by August 2010. Government will not face the burden of supplying food to IDPs anymore. I cannot tell you how happy I am to have been saved the agony of distributing food to people who have energies and can produce their own food. Immediately they got out of the camps, food is growing all over the place. This is demonstrable and the people, who have come from outside and visited Northern Uganda, have really talked glowingly of how successful this resettlement has been.

The coordination of the efforts of the various players in disaster risk reduction had improved through the establishment of the inter-ministerial policy committee for disaster risk reduction, the national technical committee for disaster risk reduction, district policy committees, district disaster technical committees, sub-county disaster management committees and village disaster management committees. This will be demonstrated and illustrated in the policy statement because disasters occur in villages. It is these villages where the centre of attention will be maximum.

The Office of the Prime Minister together with the Ministry of Agriculture has also established an inter-agency national food security assessment and early warning unit which submits to stakeholders, food security focus and maps quarterly. This has enabled us to know, in advance, when food stocks at household level are likely to run out and we are able to plan ahead.

Government is in the process of establishing a National Emergency Coordination and Operation Centre (NECOCO), which will coordinate all emergency response actors at national and district levels. The National Coordination Centre will be based at the Office of the Prime Minister and the district coordination centres will be located at district Police stations. They will all operate on a 24-hour basis. These centres are intended to give timely and effective coordination and response to emergencies. Hazard maps of the country have been developed and community risk education is going on.

I want to inform this House that we are publishing these maps twice a year so far, which give a report on the monitoring of our food situation in the country. Ideally, we should do it three times so that it is done every four months.

On Thursday last week, we transferred the first group of 406 Bududa landslide survivors to their new homes in Kiryandongo following the 1st March tragic landslides that killed people and destroyed property.

Tomorrow the second group of arrivals will be welcomed in Kiryandongo and we hope that by next month or early December, we should have completed that exercise.

I would like to thank all the people who have been involved in this. It should have been done earlier, but I can assure you that moving people is not as easy as many people think.

As we recover from the Bududa tragedy, floods, water logging and hail storms are destroying hundreds of hectares of crop in many parts of the country and this afternoon, we have already received many reports. I have reports in my office of the same thing. We are losing cassava and potato tubers and groundnuts, which are being affected by water logging. This is a serious problem. We need to address it more fundamentally to see whether we can plant earlier or harvest earlier. These are some of the challenges that we need to address.

International and national meteorological experts have warned that the current heavy rains will suddenly stop mid November and will be replaced by an unusual period of drought, severe water shortage and subsequently famine, probably leading to death of livestock in many parts of East Africa early next year.

All these are effects of climate change. Climate change is no longer a theory, it is a real issue. If you read about what has been happening in Pakistan, Haiti and South America, we are really in for trouble and we are now talking globally of mainstreaming disaster preparedness.

Today, the country is experiencing a bumper harvest of maize and other food crops, which have brought down prices. I take this occasion to advise Ugandans to preserve food. Please, let us tell our constituents that we must save some food because the period ahead may be difficult.

It is, however, unfortunate that our people lack the capacity to preserve most of their farm products and that is the reason why they are selling off quickly to avoid further losses by weevils and poor storage facilities. If that happens, at least keep the money so that you can buy when the situation demands.

I would like to warn Ugandans who are engaged in politicking from the time of the primaries to next years’ elections to allocate time for food production so that we do not have food shortages during this period of extended politicking.

I can tell you from my own experience and I am sure you have already seen it. We are moving the population left and right and there is time loss. When you lose time and you don’t produce, the stomach doesn’t wait for you. So, there is a problem and in anticipation, I am warning each of us that we should really encourage our people to cultivate and make sure that the food that has grown is preserved for a rainy day.

Meteorological predictions over the past three months have consistently indicated the coming season of an unusual drought. The next rainy season is likely to come in later than usual; so, again, I am not being specific but certainly this warning should be heeded.

I project over 50 percent of the country will face severe food shortages and many parts of the country may experience famine by February 2011, which may be worsened by low production during this extended period I have referred to.

The foreseen bad situation can be minimised if our people are informed of the looming drought and famine. I, therefore, call upon honourable members to use every opportunity when meeting the constituents, in soliciting support, but also warn them that the dry season may likely lead to shortage of food so that they may avoid selling all their food currently and preserve some of it in their stores. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

3.51
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for this statement and also sympathise with him because of the stress he usually undergoes at a personal level whenever disasters occur and he is burdened to supervise the provision of food to people who would otherwise be working for themselves. I see that, that stress had a bearing on him when he was providing this statement and he failed to show us what Government plans to do in the circumstance that these issues he elaborates happen.

A minister should go beyond warning farmers and asking them to keep money, and tell us what Government plans are. In the event that these issues are coming, what is he going to do with the food harvest? If there is a bumper harvest and people are selling food, can’t he cause Cabinet to provide funds so that we can store food in the silos? These are issues we would have loved to hear from the minister other than him coming here to warn politicians who are lamenting.

The second issue I want to comment on is on the global theme, “Making cities resilient, my city is getting ready”. I want to tell this honourable House that disasters are manmade. Everybody should know that all disasters worldwide are manmade and there is literature available to show this. If a mountain sinks and there is no humanbeing on the mountain, there will be no disaster; but if a mountain sinks and there is human habitation and people die, that is when it becomes a disaster. So, what are we doing as people to make sure that the recurrent disasters that occur do not recur?

Mr Speaker, if you looked at the only city that we have - Kampala City - this morning somebody was asking whether Government is going to provide boats. I would have expected the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to work together with the Ministry of Works and the city authorities to ensure that we develop building codes, which will ensure that disasters are minimised.

To do that, we should protect our wetlands to minimise the effects of climate change, have good drainage to ensure that water is channelled in such a manner that cities are going to become more habitable.

If the minister doesn’t know, when you look at international projections, in the next 50 years we are likely to have more urban areas than we may have rural areas because of the rate at which people are migrating from the rural communities to the cities in search of greener opportunities and this will create a bigger planning challenge for the ministers.

May I advise the minister that he should work with the relevant organs of Government and colleagues to ensure that we make cities more resilient; we make our communities more adaptable, but we also give a Government framework on how we are going to handle these things when they occur. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister for Disaster Preparedness for this statement. I think it is a good statement, but it is very shallow.

This is because when you look at the heading, “Early warning information to Parliament”, I think this is inadequate because I imagine that the minister thought that he needed to give this information to Parliament so that Parliament can take it to the public, but you cannot expect me to go and explain this to the public when the whole content of your statement is wanting. 


Why do I say this, Mr Speaker? I am saying this as a result two issues. One, as we speak now, disaster is ravaging the country. The minister does not need Members of Parliament to come and inform him. Government has structures throughout the country; even if there were no Government structures and Government was to rely on newspaper reports, they would get this. Even in today’s papers, you see disasters all over the country, especially in the North where there is a lot of heavy rain, in the East and in Kampala. So, you really do not need Members of Parliament to come here, you should plan early. 

My appeal is that it is always good to be in touch with the realities of disaster rather than waiting to be informed in Parliament. The whole meaning of the early warning would lose its meaning if the ministry itself does not even know what is taking place in the country. So, what capacity do you have to give an early warning to Parliament? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when you look at the minister’s statement, he is talking about - I quote him on page 4 where he says, “Today the country is experiencing a bumper harvest of maize... I take this occasion to advise Ugandans to preserve food. It is, however, unfortunate that our people lack capacities to preserve most of their farm products and that is the reason why they are selling off quickly…”   Really, if a government knows this is the problem of the people, what policy framework do you have in place to come up and improve storage facilities? People have done their bit, why can’t Government come and say, “What we need to avoid future hunger is to support our people to be able to preserve food.” Honestly speaking, this is an irresponsible statement. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Okumu for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that in the 60s, the UPC Government planned -(Laughter)– for this kind of situation. There are storage facilities in Kasese, Nalukolongo here, Tororo and Gulu; very big stores. In fact as we speak now, grass is growing on some of the roofs. The facilities are there; you just need to rehabilitate them, buy food and keep it for a rainy day. I do not know whether we have in place a government that is capable of helping the people of this country?  (Laughter) I thank you.

MR OKUMU:  Lastly, Mr Speaker my biggest worry is with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, when it comes to Parliament giving an early warning. I do not know whether they have the capacity because, for example, we have heard so many predictions. The ministers have come here and said, “There will be heavy rain; there will be a dry spell” and what have you. From April this year, all that Government has predicted to the people of Gulu has not come to be true. It has been raining throughout. 

So, I am really wondering whether we have enough equipment to really monitor the weather and precisely predict so that people can plan because they are now being taken by surprise. This rainy season has taken the people by surprise. Like in Gulu, it has been raining since April and is going on.  Even if you go and tell the people, they will not believe you because you have not been predicting rightly. 

So, my appeal is that Government needs to improve the meteorological department to have enough capacity with modern equipment, which is able to predict the weather. Otherwise, even me as a Member of Parliament, I would not believe in a minister coming on the Floor of Parliament and saying, “In November, the rain will reach its highest peak.” It reached its highest peak in Gulu in June, and it is actually continuing. So, you must have the capacity so that our people can have faith in weather predictions; otherwise they will rely on God; they will plant what they need and if the weather does not improve - of course it depends - they will turn to God and pray.  And I think this will be very unfortunate. 

Finally, I would like to appeal to the media that when a minister makes a statement like this, you should give it prominence on the front page. But sometimes you find that such a statement will appear in a very small corner and the people will not even be able to access that kind of information. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Nakaseke SDA Primary School, Luweero District. Join me in welcoming them; you are welcome. (Applause) 

4.02
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to start by appreciating the efforts of the Prime Minister’s Office in at least trying to put together a semblance of a report. (Laughter) Shallow as it may be, it at least gives us a beginning - where to start as Ugandans. And I would like to give the following counsel; one, could you kindly as you wait for the law to be enacted, publicise the measures that you think our people should take to ensure - in local languages, on various radio stations - so that this elitist information we are getting on TVs also reaches down to the people who will suffer most.

Two, could you please educate the young ones, especially in as far environmental sustainability is concerned. Look at, for instance, when there is disaster; let us assume there is an earthquake, what will a child of P1 – P4 do?   Why don’t you teach them simple measures to undertake if you are trying to reduce disaster? Say, the first thing that you should do is to run to a corner because it is believed that the strongest part of a building is in a corner; you are reducing on the disaster. 


Three, teach them to swim. Many children could find themselves dead simply because they cannot do a simple act of swimming. In places like Kawempe, Bwaise, and many other places in Eastern Uganda, swimming should be taken as an important aspect of children’s lives. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, as we talk right now, it is heavily raining outside. Even yesterday, it rained heavily and it is raining in Kampala on a daily basis, which has caused floods all over, in Bwaise, Kisenyi, Kakajo-Bukesa and everywhere. Instead of addressing the associated problems of floods, hon. Byarugaba is telling this nation to teach the unfortunate children of this nation in slums survival tactics of swimming. Is he in order? As an honourable Member of Parliament who should be looking for measures of saving our children, is he in order to tell them to swim? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think what has happened is that hon. Byarugaba was adding humour to the debate. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your very wise counsel. I would like to appeal to the ministry concerned to look at what is happening. We have a lot of maize, beans and other cereals going out to these middle men very cheaply, yet we are being told that there is likely famine coming.

Our cereals continue to be sent out of the country to Rwanda and Burundi, and we are watching. I expected the minister to come up with a suggestion that we are given more money to purchase these cereals and store them for a bad day.

There is this problem of the environment. I had an opportunity today of talking about Police vis-à-vis NEMA. When we met NEEMA people recently, they were complaining that the Police do not help them in any way to enforce their laws.

We met the Police today and we were shocked to learn that there is a whole division headed by a big commissioner to ensure that NEMA does its work effectively. These two departments should work together so that we see work being done in as far degradation of our environment is concerned.

MR MATIA KASSAIJA: I want to inform this House that the Police together with NEMA are now beginning to train a special unit of Police for environmental protection.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you for that information. You talked about these disaster management committees at various levels. (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: We are being told that the government is in the process of establishing a national emergency coordination centre in the Prime Minister’s office and that the district emergency centre will be at the district Police station. What is the arrangement? Is that a specialised unit of the Police? Or it will be run by officials from the Prime Minister’s Office, but based at the district Police station.

MR MATIA KASSAIJA: We are not creating a different structure. The Police hold many functions; so the Minister of Water and Environment did approach the ministry, especially after the nasty incidences that happened in Masaka where forest officers were brutally murdered by the population. 

We were asked to train a particular group of Police officers who will be very knowledgeable about environmental matters. We handed this Police unit to Ministry of Water, but it will remain under the command of the Police.

We should have started a few months ago, but we thought that we could approach this one a little bit later. This is not going to be a special unit in a manner of a different command. It will be a unit under the command of the Police, but specifically assigned to protect our environment.

THE SPEAKER: This afternoon we have teachers and pupils of Kumi Girls’ Day and Boarding Primary School from Kumi County. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR BYARUGABA: The coordination efforts are welcome. I am aware of the committees in the districts, but they are of no consequence. These committees do not even know what disaster means, they need to be told what to do. I have had several interactions with them and the only thing that they have done best is to ring me. They cannot even put down the names of the affected people. When you give out relief, it is shared amongst themselves. I would like to request the ministry to sensitise these committees on their duties so that we have a semblance of work being done.

You talked of the IDPs being a thing of the past by the end of this year. For the last four years, I have been talking about the more than 2000 people that were displaced from Tanzania and are now settled in Kikagate, not far from the official refugee settlement. They were not allowed in the refugee settlement as internally displaced people.  They have always gone hungry; they have a lot of disease. For the last four months, I took there only 50 bags of maize. Are we telling people the truth?

4.14
MR ELIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): I am extremely disappointed with the minister’s statement. The reasons advanced by the minister as to why the theme was changed are not convincing at all. The minister should revisit this matter because the global theme was not well thought out. “Making cities resilient, my city is getting ready”. This would have offered us a golden opportunity to assess the readiness of the only city we have in this country. How prepared are we to handle disasters in the capital city? You are saying that as much as natural disasters have affected our towns, rural communities have been affected more. Hon. Minister, this is not supported by evidence. I think you are looking at it in terms of human loss. I do not know the criteria you are using – the benchmark, but I would tell you this city is sitting on a time bomb if you did not know. The city is sitting on a time bomb! Today as we sit here and a fire breaks out, our fire brigade is just a stone-throw away, but how equipped are they?

Hon. Members, your city is in the hands of a private company called Fire Masters Ltd. If fire broke out in the city here and all these fires we have witnessed in the city, the markets – recently, Park Yard Market was razed to the ground; Kisekka Market – we are almost on a weekly basis witnessing fires in the city, but Fire Masters Ltd. is the only company available. 

This is the day the minister would tell us how we are going to equip our fire brigade. If we cannot afford, do we have a contract with Fire Masters Ltd. or are they just volunteers? Which city is that?

Secondly, there is proliferation of petrol stations all over. You move from one point to another and there are petrol stations all over. If fire broke out in this city, we are finished. (Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Lukwago for giving way. The information I would like to give is that a house caught fire in Ntinda about two years back. The matter was reported to fire brigade here. They had to drive from Clock Tower to go and fetch water in Port Bell and then to Ntinda; by the time, they arrived, the house was no more. 

The reason is that, given the shortage of water in this city, when the trucks are parked, the people use the water in the truck –(Laughter)- for themselves, and they finish the water. When a case is reported, the vehicles have to move to Port Bell at about 20 kilometres per hour. We are in danger as the Shadow Attorney-General is saying. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, hon. Okello-Okello.

MR KASAIJA: Hon. Okello-Okello, I am not sure about the question of people taking away the water from the fire tanks for personal use. I wish I can get more evidence. But the information which I want this House to share with me is that we have ordered for extra 20 fire engines and they should be arriving in this country any moment now. 

We are putting a fire engine per division with the plan to actually have two per division. So, if you are in Nakawa Division, we do not have to wait until somebody comes from the Clock Tower because you will contact your fire station in Nakawa and we believe that if we can improve on our traffic movements and discipline on the roads, a fire engine should be able to get to help. Therefore, the problem is being attended to. In other words, we may not be able to solve it 100 per cent, but definitely, we shall minimise the risks that you are talking about.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, hon. Minister, for that information. (Interruption)  

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much hon. Lukwago for giving way. I was really seeking this clarification from the minister. How many hydrants do we have in this country? Are they working? So, it is not about having those engines, but if the hydrants are not working or we do not have them, what will happen?

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you hon. Member for that information. But I think the Member should have given that information to the hon. Minister for Disaster so that it is included in the statement and it would be synthesised before it is brought here in a raw form. 

Why am I saying this? The point raised by hon. Katuntu about water hydrants in this city; we have less than 2,000 water hydrants in the whole of Kampala City! So, you can look at that kind of situation. I talked about petrol stations. Can you give us information as to the number of petrol stations we have in the city? How about access -  

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank the honourable member holding the Floor for giving way. You have talked a lot about the petrol stations within Kampala City Council and you are the Member of Parliament for Kampala City, especially the central district which has got the most concentration of petrol stations. 

Other Members of Parliament with whom I interact with, you find that they care a lot about their constituencies and they care a lot, especially when there is something wrong going on in their constituencies. 

Hon. Member of Parliament, I have never seen or heard you talking about the mushrooming petrol stations within Kampala –(Interjections)- when they are being built. You only come at the last moment for fire brigading. Why can you not do your role as a Member of Parliament for this central district?

MR LUKWAGO: Hon. Minister, I thank you for that. With due respect, I would tell you –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you should know that according to our rules, we should not go beyond an hour debating a ministerial statement. But what I have realised is that this statement as it stands was about drought and famine. Now you have gone into – conclude, please.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you. I was complaining about the change of the theme by the minister unilaterally because the global theme in my opening remarks I said was well thought out. 

If the minister would give us a statement about the disaster preparedness of our city on another day, I would appreciate it. But we need to debate the issue of disaster preparedness in Kampala where even children can die of storm water. 

Actually, in Kampala we do not have floods, but storm water because floods and storm water are two different things, but you can see we cannot afford to address that basic. So, this is a serious matter where I would request the minister to make a statement. I thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: I think I had said hon. Nandala-Mafabi and then just two, and we conlude. Maybe hon. Odit has – 

4.24
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I want to also thank the minister for his statement, but I am not going to take a lot of time. What the minister should have come up with, surely, is to ask for a supplementary so that he can buy food and put in silos. They are all over the country, instead of telling Members of Parliament to go and tell their electorates that there will be hunger. That does not help us at all. (Laughter)

Surely, we know that our people live from hand to mouth. The poor peasants sell their maize to get something to eat, but if you go to the villages and tell them, “Please save this maize for the rainy day - for February next year”, they are not going to do it. Instead ask this House to approve money to buy food for the silos because they are there - my friends the Swedish built them and they are all over the country, but they are empty. 

Ask Government to provide money and all countries are prepared. They are prepared and when we talk to some of our friends, they keep laughing at us. They say, “But surely, in Uganda you can harvest the whole year round and there is no winter. There should never be hunger in this country.” Today as I speak, there is a lot of maize in the East; a lot of rice in Bunyole; a lot of beans in Teso - everywhere. What are you doing about it? Ask for money and store food in the silos so that when February comes, we have got something to give to our people instead of telling us, “Oh, there will be this and that.” This does not help us at all. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

4.26
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, first of all, let me thank the minister for this statement. But the clear reference to the oncoming drought puzzles me, yet at the same time, we are talking about floods in the country. I do not know whether the minister exactly knows the causes of floods in our country. If you drive across the country, you will find that most of the streams and most of the water runways get flooded with every little amount of rain. What could be the cause? The minister should be considering why this is the case. 

The truth of the matter is that most of our waterways are getting silted, getting shallower and getting a lot of weed and, therefore, they can no longer hold water. Government should be able to think about de-silting some of these water points and runways. 

Two, the rapid development of infrastructure within the urban centres to the extent that we are reclaiming hills; we are wasting away a lot of soil and this soil has no way of being kept intact for agricultural activities. In the end, any little rain which comes drains off all these heavy soils down to the stream, causing further siltation in our water points.

What exactly is the ministry responsible for urban planning doing to ensure that it traps some of this excess soil which is being taken away from the hillsides in the course of encouraging construction of houses?

My other concern goes to the Ministry of Agriculture. We are talking about famine and at the same time we are celebrating over-harvesting by some parts of the country. But I am sure the ministry is trying to expose this country to a serious risk of bringing foreign planting materials without proper regulations. Some of the risks are likely because they are genetically-modified to bring in more elements, more metals, more chemicals and rendering imbalance in our soil. 

Also, whatever we pick as food for consumption can also cause danger to us. So, it might not be surprising that as we consume more and more of these products, we are likely to get diseases related to such kinds of foreign food and planting materials we have introduced in this country.

I want these two ministries to respond squarely to the causes; other than saying there is going to be a lot of rain, which is bound to bring floods and after a short spell of time, we are experiencing drought. We have an opportunity to trap most of this water in water traps and water reservoirs so that we can irrigate some of the agricultural areas in times when we need the water. Certainly, these are the areas I think the ministries should be able to respond to. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have two quick concerns.

One, I do not know which ministry would be directly involved, but we need to start thinking of banning plastic bottles for packaging mineral water. Yesterday, as I was driving home, there were some children begging for money through the windscreen of the car because they were busy removing buveera and plastic mineral water bottles, which had blocked the water path.

If someone in the ministry could think about having water bottles like the ones for soda so that the mineral water bottles are not easily mobile - because people seem to be throwing them everywhere. So, before -(Interjections)– no, no, they may not be expensive because you do not have to carry away the water, you just drink it. 

Hon. Dombo, you have been to Europe, you have seen these things. (Laughter) You drink and then – honestly speaking, a soda -(Interjections)- is Shs 500, but you will not find -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection. A bottle of soda is Shs 500, but you will not find a bottle of soda dumped by the road side. A bottle of water is also Shs 500, but because it is easily portable, people move with the bottle and throw it at the roadside. This is the leading cause of the floods at Clock Tower. If someone could think, now that we are in the budgeting period of banning water in mineral water bottles, it would go a long way in reducing floods.

Mr Speaker having said that -(Interjections)- on the last page of the minister’s statement, page 4, he says, “I project over 50 percent of the country will face severe food shortage and many parts of the country may experience famine by February 2011.” His word is severe food shortage. 

Then he goes ahead to say, “I would like to warn Ugandans who are engaging in politicking from time to time.” This one came in two paragraphs. If I can make reference to the Article 77(4) of the Constitution about the terms of Parliament; it says, “Where there exists a state of war or a state of emergency which would prevent a normal election from being held -(Laughter)- Parliament may, by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament, extend the life of Parliament -(Laughter)- for a period not exceeding six months at a time.”

Now hon. Minister -(Laughter)- being a professor, I think your choice of the word severe is not by mistake. It means at the time we are going to have elections is when we are most likely to have severe famine -(Laughter)- and because we are going to be politicking around, many people may die. Don’t you think it may be the right time to invoke Article 77(4) –(Laughter)- so that we leave people to rest? We can always have elections another time. (Laughter) So, I am just seeking your indulgence whether the famine may reach a level where a state-of-emergency is declared. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: The last contribution is?

4.34
MR NATHAN NADALA-MAFABI:(FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues for the minister. We want to thank the minister for his report, but of course as hon. Reagan Okumu said, it should be on headed paper; or is it headline of the newspapers? But he had said it is shallow so the moment it becomes shallow, it will have a problem of hitting the headlines. What I want from the minister are very few issues. 

You have shifted Bagisu to Kiryandongo and you remember the Bakiga who went to Bunyoro were told not to participate in local politics? Are these Bagisu going to be allowed to participate in local politics or is it going to be ring-fenced? 

Number two, you have talked about Village Disaster Management Committees. To be frank, I have never heard of one. I will be very happy if you can give us the names of your own Village Disaster Management Committee when you are responding.

On page 3, you said the livestock will die. I think he was just being polite. If 50 percent of the population is not going to have food, then it is the people that will die. But the true story is that he says people should stop politicking because politicking may cause disaster. The dry season in Uganda starts in November and ends in March -(Interjection)– well, maybe it used to, but that is how we know it and at the time of politicking, there will be no growing of food and currently, the second season of harvest is taking place and in that period there will be no harvest. So, are you failing in your own duties to use politics as an escape route instead of being responsible by collecting the food available and using it during the time of disaster; since, during the dry season of between November to March, there will be no growing of food in most parts of the country? 

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate, but I want to agree with my brother, hon. Alex Byarugaba, when he says that we should teach our children to swim. Let them learn to swim, but we had a case in Budadiri where this girl knew how to swim and a bridge was swept away and when the water rose, she tried to swim and she was taken. So, swimming is not the solution. We should be able to deal with the disaster. 

I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs; there are wetlands being destroyed which have caused water to flow into the roads. One is on the junction at Nakawa; the other is in Bugolobi; and another one is in Bunga –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to the honourable members in this House that in most cases, it is the small things that are ignored that matter in making a difference, especially when disasters strike. In the disaster-prone areas, for instance, children in schools are taught that when a disaster like an earthquake is looming, they must run to the bathroom because if the building collapses, this increases your chances of survival because you will have access to water in the bathroom. They are told that they must run, not to the middle of the building, but to the corner where the pillars are because the blocks are likely not to fall on them. They are taught swimming so that in the circumstances, they can save a single life because somebody knows how to swim. These are the simple things that we must encourage. Unfortunately, all public schools in Uganda which are owned by Government do not have any functioning swimming pools, especially for the primary schools. These are issues we must encourage our governments and our Members to strive and also plan for. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not object to swimming. It could be one of the subjects and many Members of Parliament here do not know how to swim, which is very dangerous and I would advise you to start the process because one day you can drown. But I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs: NEMA came and told us that they drew your attention to the plight of the wetlands at Nakawa, Bunga, Kyambogo and Bugolobi and that they asked you to assist them to remove the people who are destroying the wetlands. You went and inspected and deployed policemen for one day and removed them the following day and you told the investor to continue; now here you are telling us that you are protecting the wetlands and yet the purpose of these wetlands is to collect water so that either it is purified or it is not on the roads, and that we are able to have better lives. Who is this person allowing those investors to build in the wetlands? Are you the one doing it?

Mr Speaker, I want to give an example of food. I have a mud house in Budadiri and I have grown 5,000 kilograms of maize; where do I keep them in a mud house? They must be stored somewhere and the person that can store this food is Government; and if it is Government to store it, then you are failing in your responsibility. In 1986 when we came to power –(Laughter)- yes, I want to give you examples - the budget of Uganda was Shs 500 billion; you removed two zeros and it became Shs 5 billion, and it is now at Shs 8,000 billion. Despite the fact that it was a lower budget, it used to manage. What have we done, we who call ourselves the “good government” -[MR KIBANZANGA: “Correct line?”]- to deal with these problems? Is it not total failure for you to come and tell us that you were going to do something and now you cannot do it?

I want to thank my brother, hon. Bright Rwamirama. There was an issue in Kayunga involving some ministers - and hon. Kamuntu is one of them - who went and grabbed land claiming that it was ancestral land, so that they could settle their cows there. It is hon. Bright Rwamirama who stopped them. These are just criminals on your side. We must continue with that spirit of nationalism and if we had the Frontbench with only nationalists, then I think we would have gone far, but the majority are not. I can see one in Makindye selling land; this is very dangerous to these members of our Frontbench.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we believe there must be a total overhaul in disaster management and the government must come up with a good policy on how to handle disaster and the issue of food. It is time that we got money and invested in silos, but we should not use politics as the reason that there will be hunger.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think this ends the debate. It has been a long debate. Do you want to respond?

4.43
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): What does Government plan to do in case of disasters? I certainly did not think this was an appropriate time to come here and catalogue what we do. We know that in case of emergencies, food is important and we always deliver the food; we know that we must rescue and all these experiences are known to all of us, Members of this Parliament. We have had policies in place dealing with people in distress; we have been handling the case of Bududa and we are now settling them in and so on. So, I did not want to come here and say we will buy food; we will do this and that. All these things are in place, we do intervene when it is necessary and we succeed in doing a good job.

Secondly, the President has already commented on food storage. I am sure you are aware that the Ministry of Agriculture has been instructed on how to handle the food surplus. I did not expect to come here and talk about how the surplus should be stored. 

About the global theme, we domesticated our own and surely hon. Lukwago, if you think you have had more disasters in Kampala than we have had in the villages, then you are totally mistaken. You are certainly city phobic or city centric. Certainly, we have had more lives lost in floods and landslides in villages than we have had people die in Kampala of motor accidents. 

Hon. Dombo, for you to say that every disaster is manmade, surely; Ebola is not manmade and there are many of these you can establish, which are natural but which afflict man. 

Hon. Reagan Okumu, as far as I am concerned, I am used to these descriptions and shallow statements, but I am surprised that you could not acknowledge that some good work has been done in the resettlement of people from the IDP camps. 

Surely, that should be a commendation and I am not saying this because I want to praise myself. But certainly, something good has been done and there is a big difference. Now, anybody proposing that Government should build granaries for our farmers - even hon. Nandala, if you are producing 5,000 tonnes - sorry, did he say kilogrammes? Five tonnes? And that is supposed to be a big deal? Surely, and you cannot store five tonnes? Then there is a problem. And if somebody has to build a granary for you for five tonnes, there is something wrong. 

Mr Speaker, this question of weather control – whether Kabwegyere can be a successful weatherman or whether we have enough capacity to predict the weather successfully – the old saying is: “As changeable as the weather.” And the global climate change is real. Even the so-called developed countries have problems handling these big changes. The United States is not in control of the cyclones that come and so on. So, comparing Uganda with the United States or to say that we should have been in control of the weather and be predictive is being unfair and I do not think anybody of us here is capable of doing that.

Now, hon. Byarugaba said that Government should educate people and yet when he is in the village or when he meets his constituents, he finds that they do not know. Now, if he knows, it is the responsibility of those who know to make other people know - you do not wait for Government to help your people to know. So, you must participate in helping our people to know if you know. The more knowledge you have, the more you are supposed to deliver.

The issue of supply and demand, it is simple economics. When you produce a lot of food, the market price goes down. That is why we are talking about food processing. But food processing does not just come like tropical rain. How many of us in this House with agro-industries have invested in the processing of food? You know Government has encouraged the use of grinding mills and I think this is one way of a short-term handling of maize. At least let it be processed and stored in that form, which is better than otherwise. 

Do we have efficient disaster-preparedness committees at the grassroots? Those of you who come from the areas that have been handling disasters know that disaster committees have been in existence in Northern Uganda, and they have played a part. They have not been in every district but now, the policy insists and demands that these committees go on even up to the village level. 

Are they trained? The answer is, not yet. But they will be trained. We have a programme for training a minimum of 10,000 disaster-preparedness personnel, who in turn will go and train others. You know, this question of having capacity to handle disasters is not something that hon. Lukwago can wish it happens today. Because I am not sure that he is himself fully aware of the risks he lives with even in his own home.

Concerning the Public Private Partnership, the company you are talking about, which is handling fires, is within our programme of Public Private Partnership. We call upon anybody who has the capacity, to help us when there is an emergency. So, it is not a question of saying Government must be there all the time and so on.

I certainly would imagine and I have started imagining hon. Odonga Otto, moving a motion in February to extend the life of Parliament after noticing that we are in such an emergency that we cannot hold elections. But it can only be him, and not me. (Laughter)

As for hon. Nandala Mafabi, a doomsday-sayer, the Bakiga in Bunyoro and now the Bagisu - I do not know why we want to look for the negative side of things. It is amazing that hon. Nandala Mafabi does not know that in Kiryandongo, you already have 10,000 Bamasaba who have lived there for a very long time. Their leader, whose name I have just forgotten, has lived there for 40 years and he has produced 41 children. And I am saying this without mincing words; he said he was enjoying himself living in Kiryandongo. So, the issue of Kiryandongo and the other place where we have had Bakiga - people have lived there together! This man claimed he had had a good relationship with the Banyoro and they are integrated without any problem. So, do not exaggerate and do not create conditions for non-integration because Ugandans have grown to believe that they are Ugandans wherever they are. What else would you propose if Kiryandongo has land – and there is land – and there is no land in Sironko; do you leave them to die in Bududa? Or do you take them to where they are safe? Please, participate in being an integrationist rather than a segregationist.

Finally, I would like to thank Members for their comments and I believe that when I come here, I do it in good faith. And some of us are already used to the descriptions of “shallow” and the like. Because we are now so used, we understand the political climate of this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Before we proceed, hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Muguluka Parents’ Primary School, Buwenge, Kagoma County, Jinja District. You are welcome! (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING 

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2010

4.55
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norman Muwulize): Mr Speaker, the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on Thursday, May 13 2010 - [Members: “Where is the report”?] - I think the report is being circulated and it was even debated sometime back. 

Pursuant to Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Bill was forwarded to the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration –

THE SPEAKER: No, I thought we had passed that stage because this report was presented by one of the members of the committee only that there were still some issues to be harmonised and that is what we expect you to report on today. Isn’t that the case, hon. Minister?

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, on 20 July, the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010” was presented and debated, but a few issues were supposed to be harmonised.

The Bill was presented for the second reading and debated on 20 July 2010. But as we moved into the next level, it was deferred on two or three issues, which the chairperson of the committee is going to read to you for harmonisation. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I do agree with the position presented by the minister in regard to what happened with the debates in relation to this Bill. However, for the record, I would like to recommend that the chairperson gives us the harmonised position for capturing by the Hansard so that we can proceed because I think a lot of issues were harmonised in regard to this matter.

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Speaker, maybe let me just read the observations and recommendations of the committee.

On page 4, the committee observed as follows:

a)	The Bill does not provide for the source of funding and management of the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament as provided for in the Bill.

b)	The Bill does not specify whether the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament shall form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme.

c)	The Bill does not specify whether a person who resigns or ceases to be a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, but remains a Member of Parliament, should rejoin the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme.

d)	The Bill does not specify whether a person who becomes the Speaker or Deputy Speaker can defer his or her contribution in the scheme.

The committee recommends that:

a)	Funding be provided from the Consolidated Fund and the management of the benefits be done by the Parliamentary Commission.

b)	The retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker should not form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure since these are two different structures with different management and administration.

c)	  A person who resigns or ceases to be the Speaker or Deputy Speaker but remains a Member of Parliament should be entitled to rejoin the scheme.

d)	A person who becomes Speaker or Deputy Speaker may defer his or her contribution in the scheme.

Finally, the committee believes that if this Bill is passed into law, it will secure the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker upon ceasing to hold the Office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament, respectively.

The committee, therefore, recommends that subject to the proposed amendment, the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2010 be passed by this House. I beg to report and I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, these are the ideas that we sent to the committee. This is the agreed position, but even if that were the agreed position – of course I am sorry to mention that you are an interested party – when I say something, I request that –

THE SPEAKER: But I handle matters and affairs of Parliament judiciously.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yeah! That is why we like you, Mr Speaker. But what I want to say is that this is amendment number two; we have amendment number one –

THE SPEAKER: Which page?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, what I am saying is that this is amendment bill number two, yet there was amendment bill number one that deals with the entire Parliament. It is okay for us to pass this one, but it would be very good for us to go in order and that is why one usually comes before two. Why should we start with two before handling one?

THE SPEAKER: No, the thing is that those Members who handled two completed the work and they were ready before those who are handling the first one got ready. I think there is no problem; we are the same people who are going to handle this matter and so, you cannot bring something that has not come for the second reading and defer a matter that has been read for the second time. 

What happened was that this Bill came for the first reading – actually what this Bill is doing is the same thing that was done in the original Bill that was enacted by us long time ago. And when you look at Section 5 of that Bill, you will realise that it removed the Office of the Vice President, Prime Minister and so on. So, what we are doing today is exactly the same; but because they were removed from the scheme, there must be arrangements made – I am sorry that I am presiding over this –(Laughter)– but look, I have to explain! If you look at Section 5 of the original Bill, you will realise that it expressly says that Vice President, Prime Minister and so on, shall not be members of the scheme simply because there is another scheme for these officers. 

So, because there is now a scheme for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, they cease to be Members of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. If they do not, it would mean Government will be contributing twice to their benefits yet when they are removed, that cannot happen. Personally, I do not see any problem.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I was one of the MPs who blocked the Presidential Emolument (Amendment) Bill. The reason was about why we were segregating the leaders of the institution of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, just bear with me, but I think today is a day for schools and in our public gallery this afternoon are children and teachers of Bugiri Church of Uganda Primary School from Bukooli County North, Bugiri, represented by hon. Bakka Mugabi Stephen. You are welcome! You should stand up for recognition (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The information I was giving hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that I was one of the Members who got up on this Floor to oppose the President and Vice President Emoluments Bill and my main reason was, why are we giving priorities to those who have their hands in the coffers of Bank of Uganda? 

We threatened to oppose that law if a law that empowers the Speaker and Deputy Speaker was not brought before this institution. So, just like they say in the planes, that in case the oxygen gets low, put on an oxygen mask, but they caution you to start with yours before helping your child. What I would suggest and appeal to my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is that much as this is bill number two and we can finish with all the amendments, we need a very strong assurance when ours will come.

THE SPEAKER: Next week.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I really want to thank the minister for having conceded to bring this Bill in such a timely manner. We were suspecting you the other time, but I think this is an opportune moment to see that the leaders of the institution of Parliament should be independent once and for all. Thank you so much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was just trying to pull your legs because you recall I am the one who shot it and hon. Otto supported me. I shot the bill for the President and Vice President to include you. I am the one who did it. Since we did that, I was about to shoot you so that you include us because you are abandoning us. We are one so what we want is if we can get assurance -

THE SPEAKER: I assure you that if the committee handling the past bill you are talking about is ready next week, I will put it on the Order Paper.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you have done that then we can go ahead, but remember, I am the one who did it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking clarification from the minister and the chairperson. Page 7 of your report says that clause 1 should be amended as follows; and in number seven, “The benefits provided for under this part shall be administered and managed by the Parliamentary Commission”.

I am just seeking clarification; if we are providing for this amendment in the Bill, don’t you think it is prudent and necessary to amend the Administration of Parliament Act that creates the Parliamentary Commission because now we are giving it a responsibility in the Parliamentary Pensions Act to manage a Pensions Act and yet within the Administration of Parliament Act, which creates a Parliamentary Commission, such a provision is not there? That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: There is no fund, which is being administered. What they are saying is, if you leave it to the board of trustees, which is handling the other one, it is an expense on them, but since the Parliamentary Commission is there and it is catered for, it better handles this without asking any other money for running it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is okay, but my problem with the committee is that the difference between the percentages is too big. For the Speaker, it is 60 percent and for the Deputy it is 30 percent. This is a very big gap and it can bring a lot of tension. If you check at the back on page 12 of the report -

THE SPEAKER: What you can do is that in the committee stage, you can bring in an amendment to synchronise that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am putting the committee on notice that the gap should not be very wide and Members of Parliament should also see that. That means that the Deputy Speaker is just half of the Speaker and I don’t think –

THE SPEAKER: I think what we can do in this case is to amend the percentage with the consent of the Executive. If the minister agrees then you amend this percentage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if we believe that there will be a problem then I think we need to harmonise the rate because 60 then 30 does not auger well. I think we need to come back -

THE SPEAKER: This is exactly what I have told you, honourable. It is for us to decide now in the committee stage and amend the provision with the consent of the minister.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I support the recommendation, namely, to reduce the gap. I will accept that the gap be reduced as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. It is only fair so that Article 93 of the Constitution does not cause a problem.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with reducing the gap. I only thought that in terms of standardisation, it would be much easier to deal with a similar percentage, but in proportion to the present salary. So, instead of just speculating about a 60 and 45 percent, we could then choose 60 percent of the present salary of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker so that each one gets 60 percent of their salary as at that time. This is just like we get 30 percent in the Pensions Act as the government contribution to Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Can I put the question? So hon. Members, the motion was that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2010” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS
 COMMITEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2010

5.14
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clause 1 stand part of the Bill. Do you have an amendment on clause 1?

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norman Muwulize): Mr Chairman, I propose that immediately before clause 1, we insert the following clause and the Bill be renumbered. “20 (a) In this part unless the context otherwise requires, the currency point has the value assigned to it as in Schedule 1 of this part.”

“Retirement means ceasing to hold office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker other than under the circumstances satisfied under section 20(a), 3 (a), (b) and (c). The justification is to provide meaning to the words used in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I see two as clause 1. And maybe our chairman is not ready; do we give him two minutes to understand? Otherwise, we could have a problem, Mr Chairman, but we could amend.

MR MUWULIZE: Clause 1 should be amended as follows: Immediately after sub-clause (4) of Clause 20(a), we insert the following sub-clauses: 

“(5) A person who resigns or ceases to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker under sub-section (3)(a) and (b), but remains a Member of Parliament, is entitled to rejoin the scheme and Section 6 shall apply to him or her. 

(6) The funds for the administration and management of the benefits under sections 1 and 2 shall be paid directly from the Consolidated Fund.

(7) The benefits provided for under this part shall be administered and managed by the Parliamentary Commission.

(8) For the avoidance of doubt, the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker under this part shall not form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure.”   

The justification is: 

One, to provide for a person who ceases to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker under sub-section (3)(a) and (b), but remains a Member of Parliament to rejoin the scheme.

Two, to provide for the source of funds for the effective management and administration of the benefits under this part.

Three, to provide for who is to administer the benefits accruing to a former Speaker and Deputy Speaker.

Four, to clarify that the retirement benefits under this part shall not form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, but hon. Member, don’t you think that it is just fair that if this person rejoins the scheme, the government should not make a contribution on his membership? I think it should be put there that: “Provided Government shall not make a contribution to his membership.” The reason is, because Government will still be paying this person a pension through the Consolidated Fund. Now, if he rejoins the scheme, and Government continues to pay, this will be a double payment to this person. That is why I think that there should be a proviso to say, “Provided Government does not make a contribution.” What do you think?

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, I think without wasting much time, we concede to this one. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, Clause 20(d)(i) should be amended as follows: 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 2.

MR MUWULIZE: Sorry, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we need to help the chairperson. This Clause 20(d)(i) is not there; it is clause 1, which is supposed to amend 20(d)(i); he made an error and we need to help him.   

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, thank you very much for the help.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what would it harm -

(Proceedings interrupted by a technical problem.)

MR MUWULIZE: ... every five years. 

ii) The minister responsible for finance shall amend schedule 1 -(Interruption)- I am at page 8.

iii) Parliament may, by resolution, amend schedule 2 and 3. This is to enable Parliament review the schedules every five years.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUWULIZE: Clause 4 should be amended as follows: 

Clause 4 should be moved to immediately after clause 2 and the Bill be renumbered. Immediately after sub-clause 2, we should insert the following: 

“(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), a person who is Speaker or Deputy Speaker may leave his or her contribution in the scheme as deferred benefits until he or she ceases to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker.

(4) A person who opts to defer his or her benefits under subsection (3) shall on ceasing to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker be entitled to his or her benefits.” 

This is for better arrangement of the Bill and to enable a person who becomes Speaker or Deputy Speaker to defer their contributions in the scheme.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we are going to have a problem with the Bill because there is clause 3 which we passed and it is appearing dangerous. The moment you are a Speaker or a Deputy Speaker and you are making a contribution, you cannot withdraw. So, there is no need to say “refund”; you would be contributing to the scheme. I think this applies if somebody ceases to be a Speaker and he or she is not a Member of Parliament. 

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, the intention of the Pensions Board, in consultation with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, was that we are managing a transition. The current Speaker and Deputy Speaker are going to be the premier beneficiaries of this gratitude, but future Speakers and deputy Speakers will not have a problem. The intention was to make sure that their hard-earned savings and entitlements for the Seventh and Eighth Parliament –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, this should be stated clearly as a transition section; otherwise, if we leave it like this, it will be very dangerous in future. We should put it clearly that this is applicable to the Seventh and Eighth Parliament Speakers.

MS MBAGUTA: Mr Chairman, in Section 4, we did provide for the transitional provision relating to the current Speaker and Deputy Speaker so that the current Speakers will not make a contribution in the scheme. 

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, we are also looking forward to a time when we are going to liberalise and Members will have a choice to decide whether to belong to one or more schemes. So, having earned your money as a Speaker, you should not have any problem at that time. So, I think it is important that we allow them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not opposed to it, but even if we are liberalising the system in Uganda, anybody can decide to say, “I do not want to save with Parliament; I want to take it to Standard Chartered Bank.” However, we must protect that money wherever it goes. No one should just go and take it away because it is meant to serve as pension. So, for this to come out clearly, let us say that this is applicable to the Speakers of the Seventh and Eighth Parliament. 

MR OTTO: I think it is necessary because there are instances, if you observed the earlier amendment, where one can cease to be a Speaker. In the current law, for example, in case I do not come back to Parliament, I am entitled to get as a lumpsum because I do not qualify. So, in this scenario, we are seeing a situation where you cease to be a Speaker maybe for some other reasons, but you are a pensioner. So, we still need to leave the provision the way it is. We should not presuppose that every Speaker will leave office normally. There might be certain situations which we cannot anticipate now, so we really need to leave this provision the way it is. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, the schedule is where we want to put the other amendment. 

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, under schedule 1, a currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000. The schedule should be renumbered. The justification is to provide for the schedule of a currency point. 

Part A of schedule 1 should be amended as follows:

i) 	Item 1 should be amended as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Speaker of Parliament.” 

ii) 	Delete item 6 and replace it with the following: “An allowance equivalent to 33 currency points per month for utilities.” 

The justifications are:

i) 	To express the monthly allowance as a percentage of the monthly salary of a sitting Speaker of Parliament.

ii) 	To express the amount of utilities in currency points.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since we have put the Speaker here, we should say, “A monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Speaker of Parliament and 50 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Deputy Speaker of Parliament.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: They are different schedules. So, I put the question on the proposed amendment on schedule 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, part B of schedule 1 should be amended as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of a sitting Speaker of Parliament”. Justification is to express the monthly allowance as a percentage of the monthly salary of a sitting Speaker of Parliament. 

Part C of schedule 1 should be amended as follows: In item 5, the words, “Shs 280,000” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “fourteen currency points”. The justification is to express the amount for health insurance policy in currency points. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the proposed amendment on schedule 1. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, Part A of schedule 2 should be amended as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of a sitting Deputy Speaker.” 

Delete item 6 and replace it with the following: “An allowance equivalent to 32 currency points per month for utilities.” 

Justifications:

i) 	To express the monthly allowance as a percentage of the monthly salary of a sitting Deputy Speaker

ii) 	To express the amount for utilities in currency points.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I just want to follow the chairperson of the committee. In the amendment to the schedule which you have just passed, I think you said 33 currency points per month for utilities. That is what we passed. Could you explain 32? From 33 to 32; what is the justification? If it is a proportion of the salary of the office-bearer, why are we shifting from 33? It should be 33, but in proportion to the salary of that office. That is what I thought.

MR MUWULIZE: I concede to that one. It was the amount. The amount was stipulated here and when it is brought on board, you will find that it is equivalent to what is stated here. For the other one, we had spread the amount so we brought the amount in terms of currency points. So, it should be 33.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I think for the record it should be 33. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, Part B of Schedule 2 should be amended as follows: Item 1 should be amended as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to 33 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Deputy Speaker.” That was the concern.

The justification is to provide that the 33 percent is a percentage of the monthly salary of a sitting Deputy Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since the salary is not the same, then the percentage should be the same. That is for uniformity. So, Mr Chairman, I want to propose that the amount is equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Deputy Speaker.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: The salary is not the same because it is generally based on rank. The Speaker is different from the Deputy Speaker and also the percentages are designed to be different -(Interjections) - Yes, and I want to move that the percentages remain different. 

MR MUWULIZE: Mr Chairman, like is stated here, Part A of schedule 2 is a monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent; I think that is what we have agreed on. (Interjections) No, that is on page 10 where it says Part A of schedule 2 should be amended as follows: Item 1 should be amended as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to 60 percent of the monthly salary of the sitting Deputy Speaker.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, for the Speaker, it is 60 percent of his allowance. If the salary of the Speaker is Shs 2 million, I am sure the Deputy Speaker’s is Shs 1.5 million; now 60 percent of Shs 1.5 million is not the same as 60 percent of Shs 2 million. So, we are saying we should just leave the percentage because the salary would be the one to differentiate -(Interjections)- You know, we are calling for uniformity. Let us remain at 60 per cent. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have a contrary view –(Interjections)- which is my right. I hope you are aware I am an MP of Aruu County and my people did not send me here to appease you, hon. Minister.

Look at this scenario; we have the Deputy Speaker of Parliament chairing the House –(Interjections)- I am just thinking widely. On the Order Paper, we have “increase of salaries of the Deputy Speaker” and that person is presiding; that person can peddle influence to have the same salary. Just think hypothetically. So, the mischief we are trying to cure is that in whatever circumstances, even if the salaries vary and they become the same, at least the percentage will not just vary with the blink of an eye. So, there must be a clear-cut difference, even of one percent, between the Office of the Speaker and that of the Deputy Speaker.  

I, therefore, move at this particular point that we keep it at 50 percent. We need discipline. Do you know how many deputy Speakers will want to become Speakers? So, I would formally move that we keep it at 50 percent of the monthly salary. I will support the minister.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to oppose the proposal that has been presented by hon. Odonga-Otto, basically because we know that when it comes to salaries for public officers, it is not done in this House; there is the Parliamentary Service Commission Schedule that is used. There is also the Public Service Commission Schedule that is used. You do not just wake up and come to this House with the fear as argued by hon. Odonga-Otto. It does not arise. Therefore, I feel in his capacity as the president of the committee - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the proposal is that we put it at 60 percent. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2010” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill 2010 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) (No.2) BILL, 2010

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2010,” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS AMENDMENT ACT, 2010.”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We want to appreciate the assurance you have given the House on the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, but we would want to emphasise to the committee some issues - because your assurance can only be realised if the committee does its work. 

From the Pensions Board, we have a challenge regarding implementation of the Pensions Act as it is now. The Pensions Board under the support of the Parliamentary Commission commissioned - actually, we have proposed those amendments to help actualise implementation of the Act. If the chairperson of the committee does not move fast, the hands of the Pensions Board and indeed the implementation of the pensions scheme continues to be tied and it will be very difficult to implement the actual payments of pensions. The new scheme of the pension as proposed also needs to be embedded and addressed in this amendment; and also the questions of the agent. So, we do not need that much speculation. If it is really true that the committee considered the matter, then they urgently need to consider it and give us the opportunity to dispose it off next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I also appeal to the committee handling that Bill to expedite the process and then report to us next week so that we put this Bill on the Order Paper next week for consideration. Thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING

THE SPEAKER: The next item is this voluminous report on CHOGM. Should we start it now or tomorrow? [HON. MEMBERS: “We do not have copies.”] I have been advised that every Member has a copy. You will recall that the chairman of the committee laboured to explain the components of the report. It is up to us to start debating it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in order to avoid Members declaring that they had not yet got reports, we put them at the entrance of every reception and each Member had to sign for one. So, if anybody denies this, I will come here with the signatures to show that they got the report. If you never picked one, go and check with the reception. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have fixed tomorrow, but at the same time you have heard that the Cabinet is going to Entebbe. So, we request that you process the matters of the Cabinet meeting quickly so that you are here on time and we start the business at 3.00 p.m.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I have always tried to ensure that Cabinet takes place on non-parliamentary days except of course Wednesday, but today, we were informed that His Excellency the President would like to have a special Cabinet meeting at Entebbe. So, I cannot guarantee that it will be possible to be here on time. You know, I am always keen to ensure that we keep time, but I cannot guarantee that because it may depend upon the issues to be discussed. So, I request that we omit tomorrow and I will tell His Excellency the President that there is a problem and we would like to ensure that Parliament is not lugubrioused. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay then, can we push it to Tuesday morning or afternoon. What is the consensus? 

HON. MEMBERS: In the afternoon.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I also request that in addition to the PAC report on CHOGM, we also have the detailed minutes of the deliberations of PAC on the CHOGM investigations? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the request is that we should also have the minutes of the proceedings of the PAC investigations that culminated into producing this report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, as PAC, we have all the recordings of what took place. So, you do not need to worry; these are just delaying tactics and we are ready for them. 

THE SPEAKER: No; that is imputing improper motives -(Laughter)– So, avail the Members with the minutes if possible by tomorrow, or just table them here. So, on Tuesday afternoon, we will start dealing with this report. Hon. Members, thank you for your time and contributions. We come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.   

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 October 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)


