Tuesday, 13 October 2009

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the Independence break. I hope you found time to visit your constituencies. During that time, our colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, was involved in an accident. He suffered a fracture of the arm, some injuries to the head; he is suffering from pain in the chest but it is due to the use of the seatbelt that actually saved his life. He is presently in Kampala International Hospital and we believe that he is making good progress. 

I want to thank colleagues from both sides of the House who rallied to try and assist him, not only here in Kampala but also in Gulu. Otherwise, he is making steady progress. 

2.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Rt. Hon. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I regret to inform the House of the tragic accident in which the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, was involved and in which two lives were lost. On a happy note, however, I would like to thank the Almighty God for saving the life of our colleague, Hon. Prof. Latigo. 

The accident occurred at Nyakadot Trading Centre, Bweyale in Masindi District on Kampala-Karuma Road at around 3.15 a.m., on Sunday, 11 October 2009 and the two vehicles involved in the crash were the official Nissan car of the Leader of Opposition and a Mewa Coach, which was travelling to Kampala. 

The driver of the Leader of the Opposition’s car, Samuel Ongya and a lady known as Miss Innocent Okwir died on the stop. Some newspapers have given other names, but I got these names from Prof. Latigo. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved! Prof. Latigo was rushed to Mola Medical Centre at Bweyale Trading Centre where he was given first aid.

The government was informed through Hon. James Kakooza, Minister of State for Primary Health Care through a phone call from Hon. Betty Ocan, MP Gulu District at 4.00 a.m. The ministry immediately contacted the Regional Police Commander Gulu whom he advised to urgently inform the Medical Superintendent of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital to provide a medical ambulance to evacuate Hon. Prof. Latigo from Bweyale. 

Fortunately, by that time the RDC Gulu had learnt of the accident and had mobilised an ambulance from Gulu Independent Hospital. Hon. Prof. Latigo was taken to Gulu Independent Hospital where he was examined and managed; those are technical terms. We were informed that he was out of danger and his condition was stable. 

The Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament was in touch with the acting Minister of Health, Hon. Richard Nduhuura all the time. The acting Minister of Health, through his technical staff, directed the medical consultants in Gulu and Lacor Hospitals to assist the patient and refer him to Mulago Referral Hospital, should they find it necessary. 

When the consultants made a referral, the Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament informed the Minister of Health that she had already contacted the Army which agreed to provide a helicopter to airlift the honourable professor to Kampala on Monday morning, 12 October 2009.

Mulago Hospital prepared to receive and manage the patient. We later learnt that Hon. Prof. Latigo had medical insurance with International Air Ambulance (IAA) which airlifted him to the International Hospital Kampala were he is admitted. I visited him yesterday evening and talked to Dr Ben Khingi who assured me that the patient was out of danger. 

Hon. Prof. Latigo was in good mood. We prayed together with his wife and children. I wish him a quick recovery. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.25
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the hon. Prime Minister for the statement. On our part as the Opposition in this House want to thank the Almighty for preserving the life of the Leader of the Opposition. Looking at the pictures of that car, ordinarily, it is impossible for a human being to come out alive. So we believe this is a miracle that God had done to preserve the live of the Leader of the Opposition. 

We also send our condolences to those families that lost their dear ones in this accident. As we talk now, the burials are going on in Pader. We pray that the Almighty will comfort those families. 

Madam Speaker, on a very special note, we also want to thank the people of Bweyale who rushed to the scene of the accident; the Police in Bweyale and most importantly an individual called Bernard Tunyera a young man who picked up Prof. Latigo from that car and moved with him until he was handed over to Gulu Hospital. We are grateful to Mola Clinic for the first aid. We are also very grateful for the efforts of Gulu Independent Hospital, the Members of Parliament who rushed to Gulu and the RDC Gulu, Mr Walter Ochola.

Madam Speaker, we are also grateful to you and the Parliament of Uganda for the intervention you made both in terms of material and moral support to ensure that first of all the driver is buried in a decent way. 

Secondly that Prof. Latigo was airlifted to Kampala International Hospital were he is getting treatment. We are also grateful to the army; the UPDF indeed offered to airlift him and we thank all of you, and many other individuals. 

As the Prime Minister has said, Professor is recovering steadily and we appreciate your continued prayers. In the meantime the medical people have advised us to give him a bit of rest until probably Friday or Saturday. So when you go there, you will probably not easily see him because he needs some rest. But there is a visitor’s book which you can sign. Or you can go after Friday because they are still doing some more examinations and they want him to get some rest and stabilise even the more. 

Having said all that, I hope that this House will be reminded again about our concern for road safety in this country. You know there is a way death and accidents bring certain things vividly to our minds. Sometimes we tend to forget about road safety. We talk and then we do not implement things. The Prime Minister has just said that if Prof. Latigo had not fastened his seat belt you never know what would have happened. 

We have long forgotten the issue of enforcing the use of seatbelts; we have long forgotten the issue of big vehicles moving on the roads at night and the issue of drunken driving. I think we must pronounce ourselves again and give police all the support they require. 

The other thing that came to my mind after this accident was the interval between the accident and the time at which Prof. Latigo got attention. We still have a very big span from Bweyale to Gulu Independent Hospital. Prof. Latigo was involved in the accident – I think between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m. and beyond the first aid clinic at Mola and Bweyale; he saw the doctor at 7 a.m. in the morning. If he were to die, I think he would have died. 

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Health to do what it takes to reinforce the emergency provisions on all our highways. I know that something was done sometime back; there were some ambulances bought, but I think we still need to work on it to narrow the gap. You imagine the gap from 3 a.m. to 7 a.m. in the morning; that is quite some time for an emergency! 

Madam Speaker, I hope we continue to pray for Prof. Latigo and that this House will consciously address itself on the issues of road safety and emergency services on our roads. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Obviously, I too join everybody who has expressed sentiments about our friend hon. Latigo the Leader of the Opposition. What bothers me is that I have listened very carefully to the Prime Minister and hon. Alice Alaso. Hon. Alaso expressed appreciation to everybody but she did not say anything about the government.

In the statement of the Prime Minister, he quoted hon. Kakooza, the Deputy Speaker who made arrangements with the Ministry of Defence that was ready to evacuate – everybody in the government was concerned when they heard this news. I thought the hon. Alaso would put on record that among the bodies to pay appreciation to are the Government of Uganda and the ministers of Uganda. That is my contribution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to clear the air. It is true that the incident happened at 3.30 a.m., and I got first hand information from hon. Ocan. He called my hotline which was open at that time; around 4 a.m. But I want to say that at the time I instructed the RDC and RPC in Gulu – travelling from Gulu to Bweyale takes almost one hour. We made sure that the response rapid team of Gulu and the Medial Superintendent were ready by the time. But information was also passed to the RDC of Gulu. So that was not a long time; you can imagine from Bweyale to Gulu Hospital is quite some distance, but we had the patient in the X-ray by 7 a.m. I think we did the best we could.

So I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament – the Ministry of Health has got a hotline. If Ocan did not have my hotline, he would get stuck. He called me when he was stuck –(Interjections)– we recorded it; we passed it here hon. Speaker, and you read it. So I appeal to members that as we move, we should be ready. The ministry is there to serve you 24 hours. If Ochan hadn’t passed information on to us, we would not have known of it at that time and so we could not intervene immediately. That is what I wanted to put on record.

2.32
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join the rest in thanking the government for the timely interventions in rescuing Prof. Ogenga Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition. I also would like to extend my condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in the tragic accident.

The information I would like to provide is that when I got the message about that accident at about 3.45 a.m., I called the Masindi LC V Chairman to intervene with the hope that he would talk to the Medical Superintendent of Kiryandongo Hospital to avail the ambulance. At that time, hon. Minister, James Kakooza and hon. Betty Aol had already been in touch. 

However, the information I got from the Chairman, LC V Masindi was that Kiryandongo does not have a single ambulance. My thinking was that they could have been the best team to rescue –(Mr Nduhuura rose_)– yes, I will take it after my presentation [Mr Nduhuura: “That one cannot go unchallenged.”] Well, since I am still holding the Floor, I can now take it.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that Kiryandongo is one of those hospitals that were identified along the main highways of Uganda for allocation of ambulances. 

Indeed, sometime last year, not even a year ago, we allocated a brand new ambulance to it. However, early this afternoon I also read somewhere something that said that Kiryandongo Hospital has got two old ambulances that cannot move. I must say I doubted that information because I am aware that Kiryandongo has got a brand new ambulance unless it has been vandalised, but that is the information that I can crosscheck and later inform the House about. I thank you.

MR OYET: Thank you hon. Minister. Madam Speaker, we are not disputing the fact that government gave ambulances to the hospitals, but the question is: Are they functioning? Are they operating? I am talking from an informed position because I talked to the chairman LC V who told me that Kiryandongo Hospital does not have any ambulance. Actually by 6.15 a.m. the chairman was in his car coming to transport Prof. Latigo from Mola to Gulu. By that time Gulu Independent Referral Hospital ambulance had not arrived. They left Bweyale at about 6.45 a.m. for Gulu. So, take it from me that Kiryandongo Hospital needs serious attention it being on the highway. 

Sometime last year, we lost the parish priest of Gulu archdiocese after he was involved in an accident from that very spot, Nyakadot. He could not be rescued and spent five hours; by the time he was brought to Mulago, there was nothing the doctors could do; he unfortunately died. Let us pay close attention to some of these hospitals; we should do monitoring if we are to rescue the lives of our people. Thank you so much.

2.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I do not want any one of us, hon. members, to have the impression that we are making this debate in order to downplay whatever everybody else has done. I actually took it for granted that it was sufficient enough, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister having acknowledged everybody who played a significant part in helping on this tragic accident - who am I to repeat what the Prime Minister has already said really? But if it helps, I would like to thank everybody again – those who have been mentioned by the Prime Minister and those who have not been mentioned by anybody because you did a good job; we sincerely appreciate.

However, I would like to restate that I did say here that there are interventions on the roads, but the span between Kiryandongo and Gulu, and the road itself together with the lengthy time it took – we can do better; there is always room for improvement. And that is what I urged the ministry to do. It should try to make room for improvement so that we can reduce the amount of time for intervention in terms of emergencies. That is my appeal and I hope that he rests this case for tonight, and that we will all be united on one common thing, praying that Prof. Latigo gets better so that we can move on as a team. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming two groups of guests. In the gallery, we have Members of the Commonwealth Hansard Editors Association, Executive Committee. They have come here for a meeting to prepare for their annual general meeting. They include: Mr Hector Tshabalala, the President and he is there in the gallery; Mr "Jazzman" Jezile	from the Free State Legislature, the treasurer; Alhaji Abu Dahamani Issaka from Ghana - member; Mrs Gladys Ingoyi-Ndeda from Kenya - member; and of course our own Andrew Walube -(Applause)- the host.  

On this side, we have students from World Learning School for International Training in Kamwokya; they have also come to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause) Yes, hon. Muwuma.

2.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Since we broke off there have been so many developments in this country one of which is the confusion in the Busoga region –(Laughter)– where for the last three weeks there has been unrest with the public now getting interested in hearing from government in form of a statement.

The reason we are being put to task as leaders to explain this confusion is because the Army and the Police are getting involved in the activities of cultural institutions. 

For the last two weeks, the Obwakyabazinga has been putting its house in order. However, the way the Army got involved; the way our people were battered; the way our people were mishandled, is now becoming an issue of public concern. 

Government has to come up with a statement for the people to know the extent to which it is getting involved in cultural activities. We have so many correspondences that indicate that the Office of the RDC of Jinja has been playing an active role in as far as the Kyabazingaship is concerned.

On 5th October, the royal chiefs of Busoga agreed to have fresh elections. But as they were doing that there was heavy deployment in Jinja - our Army has been fairing very well as far professionalism is concerned; we have been seeing the evidence. However, I would like to report that the people of Busoga are questioning why they are being caned; why they are being battered - we have kept quiet. 

You will also recall that recently we lost a prominent lieutenant who died under mysterious circumstances that we are still questioning. And this is why we are interested in seeing government come out to explain its involvement – because it is being lambasted left and right that government has taken a position in as far as the Kyabazinga elections are concerned.

Madam Speaker, last weekend we were asked by the people to explain what is really happening. On behalf of the people of Busoga, it is my humble prayer and appeal that the minister in charge of RDCs comes up to explain this situation. (Laughter) We should also get an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs plus all the others who are concerned with dealing with this subject. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, you know that the beating of the Basoga is not a new thing. On 31st October last year our hereditary chiefs were beaten by the Army at Bugembe. This is not the first time – nothing has happened and it is okay. Yes, hon. Balikowa – okay, hon. Okupa.

2.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter that requires urgent response from government because we saw what happened in Kampala about three weeks ago. Now we are seeing a repeat of that in Busoga and it is extending. 

I remember about three to four months ago, we received a letter from His Majesty Papa Emorimor Osuban from Teso that some leaders had been involved in antagonising his government and wanting to unseat him. It is on the basis of this that I say that this is not limited to only Buganda or Busoga. We do not know what the next destination will be. 

So, may I ask the Prime Minister to make a statement so that the people of this country can understand all these events that are happening in this country starting from Buganda to now Busoga? There are also those things in Teso; we do not know where it is going to end. We also need to know the involvement of the RDCs in these matters. We should not just leave it at that until we hear from the Prime Minister.

2.45
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where I come from, we do not have kings but as a Ugandan, I would like to say that there is a growing concern that what is happening in Busoga should be settled. There have been allegations through the newspapers and the corridors of different kingdoms that government is siding with one of the Kyabazinga against the other. That is something that government needs to clarify to the people of this country.

What we saw on Friday when one of the kings was trying to flag off some function, but being stopped by the army and people in black T-shirts, I think did not reflect well. I think my government needs to be asked to make a statement explaining what is happening in that side of the country so that all Ugandans can be comfortable that we have a stable Busoga, which is also essential for our country. Thank you.

2.47
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Kyabazinga is not a small one. What is happening in Busoga is not healthy. On 5th October this year when the new Kyabazinga was elected as per the Constitution of Busoga, in a function that was colourful and peaceful, government agents went on to beat the Basoga who were jubilating. Many people were beaten up; the new Kyabazinga was tear-gassed. Busoga cannot keep quiet on that. 

In Busoga, we have the royal sites from where when elections are over, the new Kyabazinga is supposed to perform some rituals. To our surprise the Mpumudde Hill was heavily guarded by army men. We are really wondering whether it is the state that is now in charge of kingdoms.

Madam Speaker, I got surprised and dismayed last Thursday, when the grand Mother of Busoga who is also the Minister of Informational and National Guidance went to the Media Centre and denied, in front of the press, that the people who beat the Basoga were not from the UPDF and that they did not know anything about them. So if she cannot know where they came from then who controls these people who carry guns? On that basis, I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to give a statement such that the people of Busoga can understand what is going on. Thank you.

2.49
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. What is happening in Busoga currently is not an isolated matter as it has already been said. Of course there are traditional concerns about the Kyabazinga. But the way it is being managed is very annoying. When the same traditional differences arose in the Buganda kingdom, it was blamed on the Opposition. And the President came to this House and announced new rules of engagement. At that time it looked like the new rules of engagement were only for Buganda or the streets of Kampala. Now it looks like the new rules of engagement are also for Busoga, Teso, Karamoja and everybody. 

I want to invite this House to seriously look into how to protect the freedoms of association in this country because the moment we agree to a new rule of engagement, where people are supposed to be shot to disable; where people come with guns and beat others and you cannot find any central person to account; I am telling you as a country we are headed for very dark days. 

What is seen in Busoga, for those of us who just keep watching and are not from Busoga, see people being indiscriminately beaten and tear gassed and nobody is able to say that he or she directed the use of guns against the ordinary citizens of this country. I think this is a shame and government cannot just sit there sheepishly watching citizens being harassed by people whom they have put in authority. 

The RDCs represent the President of this country and the President of this country is the fountain of honour. What we see happening to citizens of this country does not represent honour anymore, and I think that government should call its functionaries to order and stop them from beating civilians anyhow. It is a terrible thing and it is very regrettable.

The other thing that this House pronounced itself on was the Police Statute. There was this Statute of the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs at that time barring us from freely associating and we pronounced ourselves and said that it is important that this thing is rescinded but up to now that Statute is still in operation. I think if we do not engage Government along those lines, it will be very unfortunate. We will continue to see people being killed; we will also continue to see outright abuse of office and military power. Thank you.

2.55
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I share the anguish of our brothers and sisters in Busoga over what happened during the election of the Kyabazinga. I wish to remind this House of a pastor whom we keep quoting, who used to live during the days of Nazi Germany, who once said, “When they took the Catholics, I kept quiet because I am not a Catholic. When they came for the Communists, I kept quiet because I am not a Communist. When they came for so and so, I kept quiet because I am not so and so; and when they came for me, there was nobody left to talk for me”. 

I agree with hon. Alice Alaso that the incident in Busoga must not be seen as an isolated incident. A few weeks earlier, the incidents that happened in Buganda were largely viewed as Buganda issues but they should not have been seen as Buganda issues. It was not an isolated incident. Before that there had been Mabira; there had been the return of Besigye; there had been Buliisa; there had been Bafuruki; and every time there is discontent expressed by the people of Uganda, the government comes out in a very highhanded manner to respond to the public’s discontent.

It was said that part of the reason of the polarising in Kampala was because the Kabaka refused to pick the President’s phone calls for two years. Did the Kyabazinga also refuse to pick the phone? Every time there is an excuse given for any public discontent. I think that the sum of the incidents happening all the time, so often brings the question, what really is the problem of Uganda? 

We must, as this Parliament, find time and ask ourselves what really is the problem in this country. People have offered answers – colonialism - but they have been away for 47 years; past leaders, all of them are dead; the low budget allocation to agriculture – there are so many reasons given, but this Parliament must sit down and on behalf of the people of Uganda and ask ourselves: Are we not dealing with symptoms? Are we not focusing on symptoms each time, when really the problem of Uganda is the system of governance that over centralises power and authority and everything else? That must be the problem in Uganda. 

How can the centre be the one to know which Kyabazinga should be in Busoga? And the centre is in Bunyoro; and the centre is everywhere. The problem begins at the centre and power at the centre must be devolved to the regions. You know what I am talking about. The federal system of government is the only system that can sort out Uganda’s problems. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we know who has been sending soldiers to beat the Basoga? [Hon. Members: “Yes!”] Who has been sending police to teargas the Basoga? Can we know what you are doing on Mpumwire Hill? 

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Defence will make a statement on Thursday. Currently, the Minister of Internal Affairs is out of the country as well as the Minister of State. So, the Minister of Defence will capture the sentiments and make an appropriate statement. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can you in the meantime ensure that your soldiers do not go to our ancestral hills? (Applause)

2.58
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I am at a loss. Something bad happens and then the Rt Hon. Prime Minister says, “The Minister is out of the country.” This hurts! I kindly request that you do not repeat that type of statement because we have a good number of ministers and you know what happened; let the whole country know what happened. (Applause) We cannot take this lightly. What hurts the people in Busoga hurts the people in Bukanga and other people elsewhere. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when we were being sworn in the Sixth Parliament; the Chief Justice was seated there and he told us, “Members of Parliament, try to be like Americans. An attack on one American is an attack on all Americans.” We are all Ugandans and we are affected. When you say on Thursday a statement will come, are you really serious? Let the minister get up and tell us what happened and we close this chapter. I thank you. 

2.59
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add that before the Kayunga incident, I stood here and asked Government to give a statement as to why they were beating people in Kayunga and they said that a statement would come, but it never came; and today you are telling us the same story. Can the Leader of Government Business give an explanation as to why they are beating people in Busoga? 

3.00
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are experiencing a scenario of repeated attacks on the rights of Ugandans. A scenario like this happened three weeks ago and indeed we were in this Parliament and we raised this matter. 

It is further disturbing that you, Madam Speaker, are the fourth most important person in the Government hierarchy. In fact, you are the most powerful woman in Uganda. (Laughter and applause) Incidentally, you, the fourth most important government personality and most important woman in Uganda, happens to come from Busoga and these are your brothers and sisters who are being hammered by the strong arm of the State. We wouldn’t like a situation where Ugandans misconstrue this as an attack on you, the most powerful woman in Uganda. 

In light of Government failure to come up with a substantive explanation on what actually transpired in Busoga and in view of the fact that Government is repeatedly engaging in blatant violation of the rights of the people of Uganda, it is important that this Parliament takes a firm stand by suspending this sitting until Government comes up with a statement to explain the happenings in Busoga. I thank you.

3.02
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in expressing concern about what is happening in the great kingdom in eastern Uganda. I just want to seek clarification from the Minister of Local Government. When the elections for the paramount chief were taking place in Acholi, I never saw any Government officials monitoring or witnessing the elections. I want to know why the Minister of Local Government was physically present when the Kyabazinga was being elected. And is he not the cause of the beating of the brothers and sisters from the great kingdom of eastern Uganda? He is here but he is quiet. Why can’t he explain why he was sent there; who sent him there and with what instructions? He is not even a Musoga or chief or Muluka. We want to know why he was participating in and monitoring the elections. Thank you very much.     

3.04
MR JOHN EMILY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The incident in Busoga is not an isolated one. Like my colleague, hon. Okupa, has said, even in Teso, there is a simmering conflict and as we speak now, there are two warring factions; one is fighting against the current Emorimor, and another supporting the former Emorimor. Government, especially the ministry concerned with culture, needs to move around all the cultural institutions and see how they can neutralise those conflicts because if we leave them to go on, we shall have a similar situation as in Busoga, in Teso as well. So, I request that the ministry concerned with issues of culture moves around and singles out the nature of the conflicts. 

Secondly, I presume that every cultural institution in Uganda has a constitution. Again, Government should have copies of these constitutions so that in case something arises, as in the Busoga case, the ministry concerned can then look at the constitution and note whether they followed their constitution. There is no need to send an army or anybody there.

Finally, sometimes even we, Members of Parliament, fuel these conflicts. If you look at what is happening in Busoga now, the Busoga MPs are divided. Some Members are talking in favour of the recent elections, but some are not, and this creates a lot of conflict. So, we Members of Parliament need to speak in one voice, especially when we know the constitution of our cultural institutions so that we do not divide our people along those political lines in as far as cultural institutions are concerned. But the most important thing is that, let the ministry concerned with culture move around and see what is happening in these cultural institutions so as to stop these conflicts from continuing. I thank you.

3.06
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am from an area where there is a traditional leader and where there is plenty of peace in as far as that institution is concerned. But I have also lived in Busoga for most of my life and I want to sympathise with the people of Busoga whom I hold very dearly and have worked with very well, that they have come where they are today with so much conflict and yet, Busoga has always been known to be a very peaceful region and the people very reasonable indeed. That makes me ask the question, what is it about these cultural institutions that generates so much emotions; that makes people fight so much, that makes people lose reason –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the Army –(Laughter)

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, when we were making the Constitution and making all those provisions for cultural institutions, the Constitution makers envisaged an institution that would be unifying and would make the people come together and have their identity and be happy for being either Langi, Musoga, Muganda or what have you. What I am seeing today – I am not a royalist, but I am beginning to wonder whether I, Beatrice Lagada, as a CA delegate, did not do this country a lot of disservice. I am beginning to question myself because what that institution was supposed to do to Uganda – it is actually doing the opposite! 

I want to say that the forces that are coming within the cultural institutions are making those institutions not work as they are supposed to work. When we come to this House when things have gone wrong on the ground, the poor RDC is always a scapegoat and we forget that that man sits there and is supposed to be the head of security; he is supposed to ensure that there is law and order; he is supposed to ensure that people do not kill themselves – but the forces are so much and at the end of the day, you hear that the Army is called in and then you hear –(Interruption) 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Omara Atubo who is illegally seated on the front bench and yet Article 246 of the Constitution forbids him because he is a cultural leader. (Laughter) 

Is it in order for the Hon. Betty Lagada to pretend not to know the individual or individuals who are bringing confusion among traditional institutions? Is the Hon. Betty Lagada not aware that Article 246 forbids traditional leaders from getting involved in partisan politics? Is the Hon. Betty Lagada not aware that these traditional leaders neither have armies, Police or guns? That those guns are commandeered by politicians in Government and army men are deployed on the orders of politicians? Is the honourable in order to come here and cry crocodile tears, pretending as if she is not aware that somebody who commands the Army, the Police and the tear gas is the one who brings confusion among the institutions of the traditional leaders? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her explain.

MS LAGADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, hon. Mabikke is doing my name a disservice. I have never been baptised Elizabeth so that I am called Betty. So please, if you want to address me, can you call me by the name of my baptism and do not give me a new name in this House. 

Secondly, I was saying before hon. Mabikke interrupted me that the RDC, who is the head of security, is charged with ensuring order and I was also saying that when there is confusion or threat of insecurity in any area, that man is the man on the ground and he must do his best. I am not justifying the presence of the Army in the cultural issues of Busoga because I have no idea until the minister explains why the Army was there or what they did for that matter or why they did what they did. I am not justifying, but only saying that it is wrong of us to keep on bashing some officer who is trying to do his job as per the Constitution of Uganda –(Interruption) 

MR MUWUMA: I rise on a point of order. Is Hon. Beatrice Lagada in order to begin saying that the RDCs are being used as a scapegoat when the Royal Chief of Kigulu, Izimba Gologolo, was held hostage in the RDC’s office and he did not vote that day?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lagada, I do not think you know enough about what happened – the Prime Minister has said the Minister of Defence is coming to speak about the Army. So, can we know what will be said about the RDCs because they have been involved from last year?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, I was criticised for saying the Minister of Defence will make a statement; but I am knowledgeable. When I ask a colleague to take charge of a matter, I know why. The Minister of Defence will answer that question including the issue of RDCs – no it should be the Minister for the Presidency. But to make matters easy, it would be better for the minister to make a statement after having consulted her.

The Minister of Local Government was requested by His Excellency, the President –(Interjections)- please listen – to go and monitor what was happening and I want to inform you that the President has requested the Minister of Local Government to mediate between the different competing groups. He is going to do that work as requested by His Excellency, the President. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So we expect the statement on Thursday. The next item. 

REQUEST TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 38,000,000 AND US$ 10,000,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP AND THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) FOR FINANCING THE MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the request to this august House for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Units of Account 38 million and US$ 10 million from the African Development Bank (AFDB) of the African Development Bank Group and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for financing the markets and agricultural trade improvement project.  I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: Whereas the loan agreements for Units of Accounts -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t it supposed to go to the committee – yes. Lay it on the Table.

MS NANKABIRWA: I am sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I commit the request to the Committee on National Economy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is it procedurally right for the ministers to start walking out when their fellow minister was presenting a request to borrow money for them to spend? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Finance.

3.18 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oleny): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under our Rules of Procedure, I lay on Table an annual report from Bank of Uganda titled, “Annual Report for the year 2008/09.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is committed to the committee for perusal and report back.

3.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I rise up here on something that personally touches me and it regards what appeared in The Daily Monitor of yesterday with the heading, “MPs pocket millions as inquiries stall.” It goes ahead to name the select committees that are said to have stalled because they have pocketed money. Those committees were: The Select Committee of the Police probe; the CHOGM probe; the one on the pastoralists; and the one of Local Government financing. It is the one on Local Government financing where my name is mentioned. 

Madam Speaker, you recall very well that in September 2007, during the budget process, we raised the issue regarding the allocation of funds to districts based on the formula as it is on Schedule 7 of our Constitution. We said it was unfair and it needs to be reviewed. On that day in that month of September, the honourable Speaker, Edward Ssekandi, asked the two whips to constitute a committee to deal with these matters and he went ahead to say that I head that committee. 

Three names were picked from the Opposition: I, hon. Oduman and hon. Odonga Otto. Hon. Kabakumba who was then the Government Chief Whip proposed the names on that side. Before I left, we had had preliminary meetings to draw the terms of reference and then I left for India with the Speaker and asked hon. Oduman to take charge of the committee. But it was unfortunate that when I came back, I found that hon. Kabakumba, who was the chief whip, had staged a coup and removed me from the leadership of the committee. I wrote to you, my Leader of the Opposition and in your wise ruling, you decided in the Business Committee that this committee be reconstituted and, therefore, the committee did not take place and I ceased being the chair of that Local Government Finance Committee. 

I was surprised that I and the Members who were supposed to be on that committee are named to have pocketed money yet it was sabotaged at its infant stage. I wanted to put this on record that I think the press needs to get their fact right and I wished they had called us like they did call chairpersons of other select committees other than going ahead to spoil my name which I have built over the 41 years of my existence in this country. I wanted to put this on record – I still have many years to go and I do not want them to be tarnished at this early stage –(Laughter)– you are aware about all that happened regarding this Business Committee. I thank you.

3.23
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and also thank my colleague, hon. Okupa, for raising this issue. In the same publication, my name is mentioned and quite correctly that I was chairperson of a select committee investigating the affairs of tri-star.

I want to make two statements: The first is that during our investigations, the committee never touched any single cent allocated to it for purposes of that investigation. Secondly, and most important, the gentleman who wrote that story contacted me as to why the committee had stalled. I told him - and I thought it was quite clear –frankly that the committee stalled not out of the wishes of the committee but because the Speaker ruled that the matter which was being investigated by that committee was subjudice arising from the fact that two Members of this House have lodged a suit in the High Court in respect to the same matter. This matter was raised twice in the Business Committee and is on record that I reported to the Business Committee and their minutes indicate that the matter is being handled as being subjudice. 

It is very unfortunate for a reporter to have got right information from me in respect to this matter and not mention any fact that he talked to me. He now quotes a certain individual whose name he doesn’t want to mention that it is that individual who told him that the matter is subjudice, raising doubt to the fact that I told him. I think this is very unfortunate because we have never received any money in respect to this work and two, the matter stalled because of the Rules of Procedure of this House, which do not allow us to handle subjudice matters. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.26
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to put the record right. It is true that a select committee was suggested by this House to look into the formula of local governments financing after hon. Okupa raised a complaint that some districts were getting more funds yet to him, they were less populated or maybe they had less challenges. 

When that recommendation was passed by this House, the Speaker did guide that a committee be constituted and that people who are knowledgeable on issues of local government financing like hon. Okupa be suggested to head this committee. He did not say that hon. Okupa should head this committee and that has always been the point of contention. 

Madam Speaker, several business committee meetings were held and the very last one did decide that the issue of the formula for financing of local governments be handled by the Committee of Parliament for Local Government and Public Service. So, this committee did not take off and I did not stage any coup for that matter because hon. Okupa was never the chairperson of that committee in the first place. 

I want to inform this House that under the code of conduct and under the Press and Journalist Act – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I recall that this issue of the committee which was formed to look into the financing of local governments was during the budget process of the last financial year and at that time, I was the acting Leader of the Opposition, as usual. The Speaker asked the whips to nominate and our side nominated. The other side said they were going to nominate and even the Speaker suggested that hon. Okupa should head that committee –(Interjection)- unless you deleted it. Is it in order for a whole Minister in charge of Information and National Guidance to come and misguide the House yet she is supposed to guide the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we really need to go into that background but the bottom line is that the committee never sat and it never did any work. So, there is no money that you have eaten because the committee never took off.

MS KABAKUMBA: I have the record of the Hansard, but thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. I was informing this House that according to the code of conduct, journalists are not supposed to misinform or misreport. I would like to encourage my colleagues to bring their complaint before the Media Council and we follow it up from there. Otherwise, we can only follow up the complaints when they are formally launched before the Media Council. I want to encourage Members because when I read that article, I was equally perturbed. Thank you very much.

3.31
WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. I was a Member of the select committee on the Police and we did meet many times. I just want to put it clearly that our report is ready. Even Members of Parliament who have the schedule of business will realise that that report is highlighted among the business that has been given to you for presentation. We are only looking forward to an opportunity to present this report before Parliament.

So, it is not true that the committee received money and that the report is pocketed. There is no money that Members of the committee received in order to sit on the report. The report is ready and we are only looking forward to an opportunity to present it before this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we go on record for the pastoralists and the CHOGM committees? 

3.32
STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for having noted that nobody has given us a response on the report from the committee on pastoralists. I am raising this because you are aware that it is the same enclave that was caused in Buliisa for the last two years. The committee was supposed to have reported here in 45 days and it is now two years. The pastoralists are claiming interests and loyalties in the oil wells already because Parliament did not do its part. I would like to appeal that the report is brought on the Floor so that we solve that problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But where are the members of that committee? Where is hon. Ochieng? Yes, hon. Njuba. 

3.33
MR SAMUEL NJUBA: (FDC, Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso): I am on the pastoralists committee and we have been around the country but we were besieged with two or three problems. First, soon after the appointment of this committee, our chairman had a near fatal accident and that held back the work.
 
Secondly, as soon as we commenced work, the fuel crisis came in and we were not able to move. And thirdly, many of the officials of Government have been reluctant to testify to this committee. As I speak now, we are waiting for the minister who was in charge of pastoral nomadism; I think he is the Minister of Works. (Laughter) Otherwise, the report is almost ready and will be tabled very soon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the CHOGM?

3.34
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was a member of the CHOGM committee where hon. Kakoba was our chairperson and honourable MP for Lira Municipality was the Vice-Chairperson. 

We concluded on that report, the report was presented in this House but when we saw that most of the key things were omitted in that report, we came up openly and disowned that report in this House. I remember the Speaker referred that report back so that we could include the sensitive things that we thought were omitted. Unfortunately, since then, hon. Kakoba has not called the meeting and the Auditor-General’s Office came up with a report implicating most of the key people in Government which we had earlier included in our report.

We had also identified the Shs 2.0 billion which was donated to J&M, which vote was opened in Foreign Affairs; that means the money was disbursed and expended within the ministry and there was no evidence to show that the money reached J&M.

I had also indicated that the chief engineer of works had a problem in supervision and they told me that the maturity of the works takes 90 days, but there is a bridge; even if you went today and plucked it, it is still as raw as those days. That is why we said some things were omitted. 

If it is the wish of the House, hon. Kakoba and the team could be called back, but actually, I did not see any money exchanging hands. It is very unfortunate to portray that the committee got money from the known sources. Thank you very much.

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONTRACTS BILL, 2008

3.37
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we adjourned, we had gone as far as Clause 88. Now we have to start with Clause 89.

I put the question that Clause 89 do stand part of the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that the head note of Clause 89(1) should be deleted and replaced with the following: “Bailment by person in possession of goods” and further, sub clause (1) should be deleted and the clause be renumbered accordingly. The justification is that there is no clear distinction between the definition of the word “bailee” and “bailment” in Clause 88 and Clause 89(1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 89 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to add a sub clause immediately after sub clause (3) which would be sub clause (4) and the proposed sub clause would read as follows: “Whenever practicable, the bailee shall protect his or her interests, inspect her goods upon delivery to him or her” and the justification is to protect the interest of the bailee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you need to repeat goods several times? If you read that sentence you have written goods twice.

“…interests, inspect the goods upon delivery to him or her of the goods”.
Do you want to retain that?

MR TASHOBYA: No, Madam Chairperson, it would stop at “delivery to him or her” and delete “of the goods”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 91 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not disagreeing with the chairman’s proposal, but I am at a loss. When there is a fault - in (2), they are talking about how the fault attributes, but in (1), they are not telling us to what extent the bailee is affected. They are just talking about extraordinary. Is there another clause where the part of the fault is treated on behalf of the bailee? I just want to seek inquiry on that.

If you read (2) it says, “The bailer will be responsible for any damage that may arise to the bailee directly from the fault.” 91(2) covers the portion, but 91(1) does not talk about to what extent the fault - it is just talking about extraordinary risk; it must be quantified either the damage in the item to the bailee like it has been specific in 91(2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is you problem, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, 91(1) says, “A bailer shall disclose to the bailee any fault bailed in goods of which the bailer is aware and which material interferes with the use of the goods or exposes the bailee to external risk.” After, “exposing” I think we should say, “… the fault of the goods will be the liability of the bailee.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. The goods are in the possession of the bailer. The bailer knows the fault and does not disclose it to the bailee; so how can we transfer the fault to the bailee when the bailer knows and keeps quiet? That is failure to disclose by the one who has the knowledge. It is the bailer who has the knowledge and then he fails to disclose it to the detriment of the bailee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I am saying, yes the bailee’s responsibility is to disclose the fault to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To the bailer - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: To the bailer. That shows that that is how the good is affected. The fault will definitely affect the goods so the person who will be responsible for the fault of the goods is the bailee and not the one who has taken the goods. So, it should be clearly stated like that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, can you explain bailment please?

MR RUHINDI: First of all, Madam Chairperson, it is trite knowledge in this House that when these Bills are being considered by the respective committees, Members of the House are always encouraged to go to those committees, make their proposals and raise their concerns to the respective committees. When the Bill comes to the House, particularly when the Bill is at the Committee Stage, even the debating stage is over. A Member who has got an amendment is also always encouraged to make that amendment in writing and give it to you for consideration by the House. But to re-introduce debate when we are at the Committee Stage, I find it a little bit anomalous.

Suffice to say that my understanding of this clause - and in fact you are rightly interpreting it. I have a feeling that maybe our colleague has not even looked at the definitions of who a bailer is and who a bailee is. Because if you look at who a bailer is, that is under clause 88, it is a person who delivers the goods and he is the one who is supposed to disclose to the bailee. Bailee means a person to whom goods are delivered. So the duty of disclosure really falls on the bailer because he is the one delivering the goods to the bailee. Where is the problem? I do not see where the problem arises.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think it would be wrong for us to sit here and make a law where we are not so certain. When an issue has come up to make the law better I think the minister should be taking it in good faith -(Interjections)- - I know the bailer -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are not making the law better. The law is very clear as it is stated here. The person who has the goods and knows there is a fault takes the responsibility for non-disclosure. That is what the provision is saying. Why do you want to pass it on to the person receiving? Why?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want you to understand me clearly. Let me say it in simple language. The person who has the goods should declare the fault to the person he is handing over the goods to. Are we together? The person who has handed over the goods will be responsible for the fault of the goods up to the fault. That is what I am trying to say -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what the law is saying.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But they are saying that to be exposed to the extraordinary risk and we are saying they should be responsible. Here we are talking of the risk but he should be responsible for the fault and the risk, which would have come up as a result.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what you are saying is exactly what the provision is saying. The person who has got the goods, and knows there is a fault, is responsible. You do not pass it on to the one who is receiving.

MR RUHINDI: In addition, the committee has endeavoured to make this amendment, which we have just passed that whenever practicable, the bailee, that is the one to whom the goods are delivered, shall, in order to protect his or her interests, inspect the goods upon delivery to ensure that he is protected. The bailer can only be responsible to the extent of the undisclosed information and that is a question of evidence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 91 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that clause 98 should be deleted and the justification is that it encourages bad practice.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 98 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 98, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 99

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not see clause 99. I see clause 67 in my Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you reading Bill No.2?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the stapling of my Bill was done badly. Sorry. I have seen it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ok, I put the question that clause 99 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to

Clause 106, agreed to

Clause 107, agreed to

Clause 108, agreed to

Clause 109, agreed to

Clause 110

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that clause 110 should be deleted and replaced with the following: “General lien”. And further the words “a banker, a broker, the warehouse keeper, an advocate or an insurance broker” should be deleted and replaced with the words; “Any person authorised under any law in the absence of a contract to the contrary may retain a security for general balance of account for any goods paid to him or her.”

Further, in sub-clause (ii), the word “mentioned” should be deleted and replaced with the word “referred to”. The justification is to broaden the list of persons who are to the lien.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I want to put the question to the amendment - this word “person”, would it cover all this, because if you have deleted the words banker, broker, warehouse keeper, advocate, these are professions - why are you changing them into “persons”?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the rationale for this is to make it broader because the sub-clause as it is specifies these professions but we are looking at it in a broader way. That is why we are using “any person”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about a legal person? There is a difference between a person and a legal person. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since the minister says he has no objection, we should continue like that.

MR KAWANGA: The mention of the professionals is important, I know he wants to broaden it and include other persons but if it is necessary to mention these professionals then you can say “any other person”. The generalist rule can come in to help in interpretation. I see no harm in mentioning these professionals and then adding on other people. That would broaden it sufficiently.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because the problem we now have is to produce evidence. Was he a broker? Was he an insurance agent? Was she a banker? Maybe you find the person and add it somewhere but do not eliminate this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, any other person can be an individual or a legal entity like a company. So if you are categorising them you should be specific. A person - if you look at (ii), it means a natural person or a limited company so I don’t know what you are meaning. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I get the import of your concern, I also get the import of the concern of hon. Nandala about the use of the word “person” but in drafting many laws you have seen reference to a person and in our interpretation law as you rightly put it, that is where you get the definition of person either to be natural or a company or any other corporate entity, that is under our interpretation law. 

I have it here, I can read it for you but in terms of a banker, a broker, a warehouse keeper, an advocate or an insurance broker, the proposed amendment is whoever has a lien should actually be within this ambit rather than categorising them. That was actually the import of the amendment and for as long as that amendment, if it is sustained covers a banker, a broker, a warehouse keeper, an advocate or an insurance broker, I really do not see any harm, for as long as that person falls in this category.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Minister, why do you want to send people on a wild goose chase of defining this and defining that? Where are all these categories defined under that person? Why do you want to send people to search? 

MR TASHOBYA: I think as the Attorney-General has pointed out, the purpose of the amendment is not to restrict the professions or the persons by listing them down, which may not be exhaustive because the key words are, “a person authorised under any law”, which as he has rightly pointed out covers these specific professions, which are listed under here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The import of putting that specifically must be a reason, because if we take an example of a banker; when you go to a bank to get money, you pledge your title for a loan which is covered under specific conditions in the Banking or Financial Institutions Act. Now they want to go further to specify that maybe the bank can also become a bailee on other issues maybe for some purpose. That is why specifically they must have put those persons there as professionals who mostly deal with property or assets of people. But if you feel that we should delete, we can. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is not right. 

MR KAWANGA: What harm would be in mentioning all those and then adding: “Or any person authorised under any law”? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson also agrees that we can go with hon. Kawanga’s proposal. 

MR WACHA: Madam, where do you put the new proposal by hon. John Kawanga? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: General rule of bankers, brokers, warehouse keepers, advocates and insurance brokers or any other person authorised. Okay, I put the question that clause 110 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.) 
  
Clause 110, as amended, agreed to. 
  
Clause 111

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 111 do stand as part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)
   
Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 112, agreed to. 

Clause 113, agreed to.

Clause 114, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to. 

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118, agreed to.

Clause 119, agreed to.

Clause 120, agreed to.

Clause 121, agreed to.

Clause 122, agreed to.

Clause 123, agreed to.

Clause 124, agreed to.

Clause 125, agreed to.

Clause 126, agreed to.

Clause 127, agreed to.

Clause 128, agreed to.

Clause 129, agreed to.

Clause 130, agreed to.

Clause 131, agreed to.

Clause 132, agreed to.

Clause 133, agreed to.

Clause 134, agreed to.

Clause 135, agreed to.

Clause 136

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes in clause 136(f) that the words: “or agent” should be inserted immediately after the word “principal”; and the words “or bankrupt” should be inserted after the word “insolvent”. 

The justification is to provide for termination of an agency when an agent is declared bankrupt. So (f) should read as follows: “A principal or agent is adjudicated as insolvent or bankrupt under the law.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The moment somebody is declared bankrupt, he cannot hold somebody’s goods. I do not know why you want to put it there because one of the conditions is that you cannot hold somebody’s goods once you are declared bankrupt or insolvent. So why do you want to bring more?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why are you looking for this agent? The agent is only acting on behalf of the principal.

MR WACHA: Under 121(c), which we have already passed, if you have already been disqualified for being bankrupt, you cannot have - I am sorry but these things happen. I think that proposal should be withdrawn.

MR TASHOBYA: I am rather surprised by the - but I take the apology of my colleague and concede to deletion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, he should not quarrel with hon. Ben Wacha. I am the one who raised this. It was a mistake so hon. Wacha was saying there was a small error that they should have corrected and he is accepting, so you better agree and we move on.

MR TASHOBYA: Why are you trying to create problems between me and my committee member? I am taking it in good faith and saying it is ok, we can delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 136 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 137, agreed to.

Clause 138, agreed to.

Clause 139, agreed to.

Clause 140, agreed to.

Clause 141, agreed to.

Clause 142, agreed to.

Clause 143, agreed to.

Clause 144, agreed to.

Clause 145, agreed to.

Clause 146, agreed to.

Clause 147

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 147(1), the words “at the time of the creation of the agency” should be added after the words “of the lack of skill by the agent”. 

The justification is to impose a duty on the principal to appoint agents with skill. In other words, 141(1) would read, “An agent shall act with reasonable diligence and conduct the business of the agency with as much skill as is generally possessed by a person engaged in similar business unless the principal has notice of lack of skill by the agent at the time of creation of the agency”. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I really don’t know why we should limit it only to the time of creation of the agency because lack of skill – you can lack the skill during the continuation of the agency. Why don’t we leave it the way it is and be as broad as is proposed under the original provision?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In addition to what the Attorney-General is saying, an agency can either be expressed or implied. Now if you are going to say “at the material time”, you are going to cause problems because you are now destroying the principal of implied agents. Why don’t you leave it?

MR TASHOBYA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ok. I put the question that clause 147 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 148, agreed to.

Clause 149, agreed to.

Clause 150, agreed to.

Clause 151, agreed to.

Clause 152, agreed to.

Clause 153, agreed to.

Clause 154, agreed to.

Clause 155, agreed to.

Clause 156, agreed to.

Clause 157, agreed to.

Clause 158, agreed to.

Clause 159, agreed to.

Clause 160, agreed to.

Clause 161, agreed to.

Clause 162, agreed to.

Clause 163, agreed to.

Clause 164, agreed to.

Clause 165, agreed to.

Clause 166, agreed to.

Clause 167, agreed to.

Clause 168, agreed to.

Clause 169, agreed to.

Clause 170, agreed to.

Clause 171, agreed to.

Clause 172, agreed to.

Clause 173, agreed to.

MR RUHINDI: I think clause 38 should be the first to come now. It was re-numbered 41 but maybe in future the numbering of provisions while making the necessary amendments can be tricky. It is always better to leave them as they stand, we make the amendments on them and the clerk does the re-numbering. This is because in re-numbering, there can also be cross-references in some sections and it would be very problematic to go through all the cross-references after re-numbering. So the one, which was deferred is clause 38(2) and (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the head note so that we know where we are? 

MR RIHINDI: That is in respect of joint rights. I have consulted the chairperson of the committee and proposed that clause 38(2) of 41(2) be recast to read: “Where a person to whom a joint promise is made dies, the representative of that deceased person jointly with the surviving person to whom the promise is made, are entitled to the fulfillment of the joint promise.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the owner of the Bill is the Attorney-General. He appeared before the committee, why didn’t he do the re-casting at that time? I hear the chairman of the committee alone cannot be a committee, so the clarification I am seeking is; can the chairman alone decide on behalf of the committee and why didn’t the Attorney-General recast during the committee time?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had a debate in this House on recasting this provision. We stood it over to allow for consultation of the formulation. He didn’t just wake up; we instructed him to go and review the situation.

MR TASHOBYA: I can confirm that unfortunately my brother was not around at the last sitting. It is true we met with the Attorney-General and we agreed on recasting this sub-clause the way it has been presented. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to inform my colleague Hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the whole committee of the Parliament is above that small committee, so it is not only the chairman changing but all of us here. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed – 

MR RUHINDI: Then in 38(3)-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Can hon. Byandala tell me exactly what he was talking about in better English than the issue of Luganda, which he was trying to demonstrate so that I understand very well what he was talking about? (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know hon. Byandala is a regular attendant of this House. He sits here diligently and listens.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, certainly engineer Byandala uses “engineering” English. (Laughter) I propose that clause 38(3) be recast as follows: “Where persons who make a joint promise die, their representatives shall fulfil their obligations jointly.” This is very important and I need to clarify. 

In the proposal made by the committee, there was the expression: “To the extent of their obligations in their state or in the promise.” I need to clarify and this is very important, particularly for you, the proprietors of the property. When you get a title for your property like land and you have a title designed as joint tenancy or tenancy in common, there is a fundamental difference. 

Joint tenancy means that the interest in that tenancy is indivisible. It implies survivorship. For instance, if you hold property under joint tenancy maybe with your spouse, upon the demise of one of you, then the surviving spouse takes all the interest. But under tenancy in common, the legal representative of the person who dies is the one who takes over, not the surviving spouse. Equally in this one we are talking about joint tenancy, so you cannot spell out the magnitude of the extent of the obligation in the promise. This is why we are saying we should stop where we have stopped: “Where persons make a joint promise die, their representatives shall fulfil their obligations jointly.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, under Clause 54, after consulting the Attorney General, we agreed to recast the clause. 

Clause 54(2)- “Where a party to a contract incurs expenses for the purposes of performance of the contract, which becomes void after performance, under Section 45(2), the court may if it considers it just to do so in all the circumstances- “

Now (c) would read; “…make an order that the party recovers the whole or any part of any payments, discharge or other advantages not greater in value than the expenses incurred.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the new form in full for the Hansard.

MR TASHOBYA: “Where a party to a contract incurs expenses for the purposes of performance of the contract, which becomes void after performance under Section 45(2), the court may, if it considers it just to do so in all the circumstances - (c) make an order that the party recovers the whole or any part of the pay or any payments, discharge or other advantages not greater in value than the expenses incurred.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. If the agreement becomes void and one of the parties came - of course with clean hands - and has incurred costs in the contract, why should you say “the court may”? We must be specific. If somebody loses money in a contract and it becomes void, unless it is the fault of the person who has lost money, then he “may” not get it. But if it is the fault of the other person, the other person should be compensated for his money for the cost. So you cannot say “may”. It is dangerous.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you are directing the Court.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you cannot direct the Court. It is a question of evidence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. Where this one is saying “may”, we should be categorical here. If the void contract is a result of one of the parties and the cost has been incurred by the party which was not in the wrong, the one which is in the wrong should not be compensated for the loss.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you cannot direct the Court. Suppose there is a force majeure. What will happen? Suppose the failure is by reason of force majeure, what will you do? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why I am saying we should put it in the law. We should not go to the Court now; we should say, “Where –”  Madam Chairperson, listen to me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am listening.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Where the contract becomes void, the party which is in fault, will compensate the party which is not in the wrong.” That is the best way to state it. So, it is up to the other person to confirm to the Court that he is not at fault. They cannot pay the compensation, but we should put it in the law that he should compensate. 

MR RUHINDI: I think it is a question of internalising the Bill. We have often advised Madam Chairperson that all relevant provisions on any particular subject should always be read. Why, for instance, wouldn’t hon. Mafabi read 54(1)? Do you have the Bill? Read 54(1).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not going to read it. If the case is that it is covered under 51, then there is no need to bring the other amendments, which the committee is bringing. If it is already covered, why should we go to Court for them to determine an issue which is already covered? We should determine 51, which we are talking about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The circumstances under which a contract becomes void are different; they are very many. So, you should leave it to the Court to decide based on evidence. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not denying that. What I am saying should be put specific is; where we are saying everybody can go to Court over any Article, you can go to Court because it is the Court which will interprete those Articles. 

I am trying to say that, where the contract has become void, a person responsible for - if I entered the contract with somebody; I came very clean; the contract becomes void as a result of the other person; he should compensate me for my loss. So, we are saying, where one of the persons has been affected, but not as a result of the void contract, they should be compensated. And it is the Court to determine whether it is true he should be compensated or not. That is what I am trying to put across.

MR HUSSEIN KYANJO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It has been my argument all the time that as we indulge into more details of the law, we get lost along the way. The fact is, when we are legislating, we cannot put tight locks on the courts of law, because they are going to enforce. So, the way it is put naturally means that it is the Court which is going to determine and there is no harm in that. I beg my senior colleague that we concede with the amendment and proceed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 54 as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 62; Chairperson, there were some issues. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe read the head note so that we know where we are.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with Clause 62, the head note. First of all, we are trying to delete sub-clause 1 and sub-clause 2. Sub-clause 1 says, “Where a contract is breached and a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of breach or where a contract contains any stipulation by way of penalty, the party who complains of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damages or loss is found to have been caused by the breach, to receive from the party who breaches the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount named or the penalty stipulated as the case may be.”

And Clause 2 reads, “The penalty stipulated under subsection 1 may provide for an interest on the amount of compensation to be paid.” We are saying we find this redundant because this is what the law really is – that is what the Court would do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Say that again.
 
MR TASHOBYA: We are saying this is redundant because if the parties agree as to the penalties to be paid and there is a breach in the agreement, the courts would award what is provided in the contract. We are saying, 1 and 2 in that respect would be redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, there are contracts that are partially written and partially oral. How will you handle those? 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, how would this clause save an unwritten agreement?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know. Why would you want to remove it?

MR RUHINDI: I was still convincing the chairperson of the committee and now the Members that we retain it for the simple reason. For instance, if you look at 61(1), we are talking about where there is breach and where loss and damage is proved and then the remedies. In 62, this is where parties agree on a penalty and amount, but there is no sufficient evidence to prove actual damage or loss. In other words, we are looking at technical breach – you have breached although there is no evidence to show that there is actual damage or loss, but you have breached. The court, under those circumstances would give reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount named or the penalty stipulated as the case may be. 

In other words, even the limit is provided. The purpose of this law is to codify principles of contract and to help courts to have the recourse when they are determining cases of this nature. To leave it out and expect that Court will actually be guided through other case laws and conventions, is not prudent, since we are actually codifying the main principles of contract law. I would submit that we retain the provision entirely as it is – 62.  
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Attorney General has laboured and yet I have not understood anything so far. Is it possible for him to be clearer? He should make us understand so that we support his case. I am not getting what you are saying (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Member, do you have your Bill with you? The head note is, “Compensation for breach of contract where penalty is stipulated”.

MR RUHINDI: I really have a problem because I cannot speak Lumasaba –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You cannot anticipate all the types of contracts. Chairperson, let us leave it as it is if you do not mind.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just a small clarification. I hope the Attorney General is bringing a law which he knows tomorrow he will need when he leaves that office. So, if it is in that faith, we have no problem, but if he is bringing a law to just help him right now as he is there, then it is very dangerous for him. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the Attorney General is codifying the existing law and the principles of the law of contract. I put the question that we retain clause 62 as it is.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Schedule agreed to.)

(Title agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTINAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.41 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTINAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Contracts Bill, 2008” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.42 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTINAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE CONTRACTS BILL, 2008

4.43 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTINAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Contracts Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE CONTRACTS ACT, 2008”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE ILLEGAL SALE OF PLOTS AT THE OLD TAXI PARK

4.44
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MR ANTHONY YIGA): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 1 October 2008, the Speaker directed the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to review the report of the select committee on the alleged illegal sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park. The select committee had been constituted following a petition which was presented to Parliament by Hon. Nathan Byanyima, MP Bukanga County, on behalf of the non-resident sitting tenants at the Old Taxi Park in Kampala, as a result of the allegations that Kampala City Council (KCC) had ignored laws, regulations and principles of natural justice and equity in leasing out plots at the Old Taxi Park. 

The land in question is public land controlled by KCC as a revolving lease since the colonial times. As a result of court proceedings against KCC by a one Mr Vilani, an Asian businessman, KCC hastily mobilised traders with money to come in and solve the situation by raising Shs 750 million which was paid in fulfilment of the out-of-Court settlement reached then. 

Contents of the petition

a) That the commission of inquiry set up by the Minister of Local Government chaired by Prof. Katorobo, in its report pointed out gross irregularities in the sale of plots of land by KCC at the Old Taxi Park in particular, and Kampala City at large. 

b) That His Excellency the President had directed that the report of the commission of inquiry be debated by the Eighth Parliament, but it had never been tabled and KCC had fragrantly ignored the President’s directives because it continued to purport that it sold the plots in total disregard of the established procedures. 

The petitioners prayed that:

1.	Parliament sets up a select committee to handle the issues of the alleged sale of plots in the Old Taxi Park.

2.	Parliament directs KCC to halt and revoke the sale of plots of the Old Taxi Park.

3.	Parliament directs the Ministry of Local Government to table the report of the commission of inquiry.

4.	Parliament debates the commission of inquiry report and comes out with directives on the matter. 

The select committee under the chairmanship of Hon. Saleh Kamba of Kibuku County carried out its investigations and came up with a report which was presented to Parliament. However, the petitioner, Hon. Nathan Byanyima disagreed with the conclusion. The conclusion stated that there was an agreement between the developers of the Old Taxi Park and the non-sitting tenants, which he emphasised was not the position. 

The petitioner laid on Table a letter which was purportedly written by the chairperson of the select committee to all the subleasees/purchasers of the Old Taxi Park plots instructing them to proceed and develop the land. The letter was written before the committee report was presented to the House and this was considered to be usurping the powers of the House. 

It was on the basis of the above background that the Speaker directed the Committee of Public Service and Local Government to review the matter.

Committee terms of reference

1.	To study the report of the select committee and review its conclusion and recommendations. 

2.	To study the Katorobo report, particularly the sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park in Kampala City, in light of the select committee’s recommendations and conclusions. 

The committee now wishes to present its findings, observations and recommendations.

Methodology

2.1	The committee studied the reports. Committee members considered the report of the select committee and the Katorobo commission of inquiry report. 

2.2	The committee held meetings with the following:

	Hon. Nathan Byanyima on behalf of the petitioners, hon. Saleh Kamba, the Chairperson of the select committee; the Minister of Local Government; and the Mayor and Town Clerk of Kampala, and their technical staff.  

2.3 	The committee made a fact-finding visit to Nakivubo Settlement Primary School and Nakivubo Blue Primary School. 

Findings

The committee was informed that:

1.	The Katorobo commission of 2005, which inquired into the irregular allocation of public land established that:

i) Tender regulations and procedures were not followed. Interests of sitting tenants were not considered and tendering procedures were not followed.

ii) Proper land use and protection of the environment were not considered because the proposed redevelopment was hastily done and no consultations were done.

iii) Financial ability of the allocatees was not properly assessed.
iv)	Principles of equity and fairness were not considered. Sitting tenants were not consulted and consideration of the public interest was ignored. 

The commission made several recommendations which include among others:

i)	The proposal for redevelopment of the Old Taxi Park was ill-conceived and should be rejected.

ii)	Such a complex development should be left to a few individual developers.

iii)	Plot allocations should be revoked.

iv)	The sitting tenants would be given first consideration in renting space. The rest of the facilities would be allocated through tendering. 

The committee learnt that the commission report was never presented to Parliament. 

2.	The select committee had observed and recommended as follows on the same matter:
i)	The area referred to as the carpet and claimed by KCC to have been reserved as a park, is not adequate to accommodate the public transport system at the Old Taxi Park.

ii)	In light of the fact that the subleasees finalised all their developmental obligations save for the failure of KCC procedures, KCC should immediately explore the alternatives recommended and the resolutions reached at in the arbitration process, and where possible, let developments take place amicably and orderly.

The alternatives included:

i)	KCC step-up its earlier arrangements of negotiating with Uganda Muslim Supreme Council to have transport services accommodated at the yard near the Clock Tower temporarily.

ii)	KCC plan of setting up satellite parks in the outskirts of Kampala City be studied.

iii)	Rental premises be provided by KCC elsewhere for possible relocation of the sitting tenants.

iv)	The purchasers should, on completion of the construction, give priority to the sitting tenants and other people who were operating in the area.

iii)	In its conclusion, the select committee stated that a decision to reverse/revoke the sales would lead to court battles between the subleasees and KCC, which the committee observed would be very costly for KCC.

iv)	A decision to give the developments a go-ahead without KCC implementing the suggested alternatives to the affected categories of people, would lead to outright eviction and human rights abuse.

v)	KCC should immediately implement suggested alternatives prior to the start of the constructions.

3.	The Minister for Local Government; the then Minister, Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, informed the committee that some of the Katorobo commission report’s recommendations were no longer applicable because they had been overtaken by time and events.

4.	Hon. Saleh Kamba informed the committee that he was not the author of the letter that was read on the floor of the House by Hon. Nathan Byanyima.

5.	KCC sold plots in the Old Taxi Park to developers with no clear plan to relocate the taxi park to a new site.

6.	There was a proposal of relocating the Old Taxi Park to where Nakivubo Settlement Primary School is located. The committee learnt that the proposal was arrived at because the school was not fully utilised. It had very few pupils and it occupied a vast piece of land.

	The committee was further informed that the pupils of Nakivubo Settlement Primary School would be transferred to the adjacent primary school called Nakivubo Blue Primary School.

	The committee was also informed that plans were underway to upgrade Navikubo Blue Primary School by renovating the classrooms and building more classrooms in order to accommodate more pupils.

7.	This issue had been handled by all the three arms of Government; the Executive, the Judiciary and Parliament.

8.	 Plans were underway for the creation of a Metropolitan Planning Authority for Kampala City and its surrounding areas to enable all the planning processes to be integrated.

	The committee further learnt that there was too much political interference in the management of KCC.

9.	 The Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament was handling the Auditor General’s report on the sale of land by KCC, the Old Taxi Park being one of them.

4.0 Observations from the field visit

The committee followed up the decision that had been taken by KCC with support of the Ministry of Local Government, to relocate the Old Taxi Park to Nakivubo Settlement Primary School, and thereby allow the redevelopment of the taxi park by 13 developers.

The committee visited Nakivubo Blue Primary School and Nakivubo Settlement Primary School.

The following observations were made:

4.1 Nakivubo Settlement Primary school

1.	Nakivubo Settlement Primary School which was formerly called Muzzanganda is under the Universal Primary Education programme. The school initially had a big chunk of land, but due to neglect, mismanagement and corruption, half of the land had been encroached on and put to use other than primary education. The school had 197 pupils at the time of the committee’s visit. The committee was informed that on average, the school has less than 100 pupils attending per day.

2.	It was evident that the school was neglected and in a very poor state; the roofs were old and one block was roofed using asbestos and these, the committee observed, were rotten which is a health hazard to the pupils.

3.	The School Management Committee sub-lets part of the school land for various income-generating projects which included:

a)	Two car washing bays which claimed much of the schools playground;
b)	A carpentry workshop;
c)	A public toilet which was under construction;
d)	A nursery school;
e)	A secondary school called City Centre Academy, in a very poor state;
f)	Temporary structures rented out to residents and some used as lodges and brothels;
g)	An adult education school;
h)	Kiosks;
i)	A prayer place for born-again Christians in the evenings; and
j)	A resting place for idlers, drug addicts and drunkards.

4.	 The committee noted that almost a quarter of the school playground was used as a car washing bay and the space left was not enough for co-curricular activities.

5.	 If the park was to relocate to Nakivubo Settlement School area, the noise and rowdiness would interrupt studies at the adjacent Nakivubo Blue Primary School; and the pupils would be at risk.

6.	 The committee noted that the proposed site for the relocation of the taxi park is not viable because it has one entrance/exit route. The school is surrounded by St. Balikuddembe Market with a perimeter wall which will make it impossible to have different inlets and exits from the park. In addition, this would worsen the traffic congestion around the area.

4.2 Nakivubo Blue Primary School

The committee visited Nakivubo Blue Primary School and made the following observations:

1.	The school has several wooden buildings roofed with asbestos.
2. 	It has a conducive learning environment.
 
3. 	It has 1,010 pupils with 80 teachers.

5.0 Recommendations

The committee, therefore, recommends that:

1.	 There is need for proper planning of the city. Architectural designs need to be reconciled with the landscape profile, topography, existing structures and environmental concerns.

2.	 Nakivubo Settlement Primary School land is not suitable for development of a taxi park. It should be preserved as a primary school. The Ministry of Education and KCC should plan to make it a viable school and the Sessional Committee on Social Services should follow up this matter.

3.	 In light of the trend of events as regards the Old Taxi Park, the desire by the sitting non-resident tenants that they be given opportunity to carry out developments, may not be met unless the Government takes up the matter to compensate all those who bought the plots.


The committee, however, finds the proposal in the Katorobo report that, “such a complex development should be left to a few individual developers identified through a public tender process”, plausible.

4.	 The Standing Committee of Parliament on Local Government Accounts should continue handling the Auditor General’s report relating to the sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park.

5.	 The Ministry of Local Government should make a progress report to Parliament on the Old Taxi Park and streamlining of public transport in the city on a quarterly basis.

6.	 The proposal to develop the Old Taxi Park should be stayed until KCC and Government have identified a suitable site for a new taxi park and streamlined public transport in the city.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the chair and his committee for the work done. However, this report touches a commission of inquiry report. It touches the select committee, and it touches the findings of our committee. I think I want to give Members time to internalise them and then we can debate it tomorrow. So, can I request that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister for Agriculture are here in the morning? We adjourn to 10 O’clock so that we give you time to read it and prepare for the debate tomorrow.

There is an announcement from hon. Kigyagi who has lost his father-in-law. He was called Mzee Emmanuel Ngarama. He died this morning. Burial will take place at Kabuyanda in Isingiro District, tomorrow.

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, where is this Katorobo report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, do you have copies of the Katorobo report?

MR YIGA: Yes, Madam Speaker. It was tabled on the floor of Parliament. Even the Kamba report was given to the Members. I have my copies.

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That Katorobo report is a very comprehensive report but by the time you directed that the sessional committee on Public Service and Local Government handle this matter, they were supposed to have picked the report on the Taxi Park so that you could get a copy for each Member here to read; because that is what will guide us in this debate. It is very elaborate and will help us reach an amicable solution to this problem. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can I ask the Clerk to lift out that portion related to the Old Taxi Park? The others I think are not our business for now.

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, given the fact that we do not have the Katorobo and Kamba reports and yet they are very important, I think 10 O’clock will not be ideal for us. We need to really understand these reports so that we are able to debate them from an informed point of view, and so that we can get a lasting solution to this Old Taxi Park issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you saying that tomorrow is too early?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. It can be in the afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we will deal with the report on famine in Teso in the morning. You will receive it in the morning. (Interjections) It is also ready. Can we deal with that report in the morning? The Clerk will distribute the documents you have requested for and we will give you time to read and then we can debate.

Thank you very much, honourable members. House adjourned to 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 October 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)
