Tuesday 10th October, 2000

Parliament met at 2.39p.m.at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the chair

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a slight amendment to the Order Paper. I would like you to add Personal Explanation by hon. Isaac Musumba immediately after item 2 to be item 3 and then there will follow consequential amendments on the Order Paper. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

MR.ISAAC MUSUMBA  (Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, in accordance with our rules, I wish to give a personal explanation on the recent publications in the media, both print and electronic, on statements attributed to me on MTN.  

On Thursday, 21st September 2000 on the Kiriza oba gana programme and on WBS TV on Wednesday, 4th October 2000 on Question Time Programme, I was interviewed on the state of the economy. In the course of explaining questions and aspects like Government Policy formulation, poverty, foreign exchange rates, liberalisation of the economy, etc, I gave various examples and MTN was one of them.  

Since that interview, there has been a lot of attack on me in the media. I have also received a letter from Mr. Mike Black Burn, Acting Executive of MTN, copied to everybody; Prime Minister, all Ministers, Members of Parliament, the press, intimating that I was wrong and this was an unwarranted attack on MTN.  

I now wish to give this personal explanation as follows: (a) I believe that the effect of my submission was as follows:
    1.  That MTN making a lot of money from their MTN activity.
    2. That MTN is a player in the foreign exchange market and with these huge amounts of local cover collected from the economy, they can and indeed do buy large amounts from the market; hence being players on the market.

I wish to categorically state that none of those two elements above are illegal in this country. There is nothing illegal in this country for an investor including MTN to make a lot of money legitimately. Neither is there anything illegal with an investor to buy as much foreign exchange as they can afford from the foreign exchange market. Indeed, these two are the principle elements of this Government’s liberalisation policy and I salute MTN for recognising this and seizing the opportunity. I also respect MTN as an investor who has revolutionalised our telecommunication sector and they must be supported at all times.  

The thrust of my submission, however, was supposed to be directed to the policy makers to ensure that the policies made must be properly thought through with room for periodic review and possibility of improvement. I was only using the case of MTN to illustrate the economic problems that this country can have if the liberalisation policies are not properly sequenced and managed. Here below is an illustration of what I meant. 

Once a company like MTN has stated that it has 130,000 connections. Each of these pays a monthly service fee of Shs.18,000; this gives a monthly total of Shs.2.34 billion. The same company sells airtime with some people using about Shs.2,000 per day, but other people use up to Shs.40,000 per day. I took an average of only Shs.5,000 of air time usage per day per telephone. This yields Shs.19.5 billion a month. When you add the monthly total of the air time sale and the collections from the service fee, you get a total of Shs.21.84 billion a month. I was comparing this to about Shs.60 billion, which URA raises a month. This is about a third of the URA monthly collection. 

I estimated that the monthly recurrent cost of a company like MTN would be about Shs.1.8 billion. So, even if they used Shs.1.8 billion a month from the Shs.21.8 billion, there would be about Shs.20 billion left in their hands. It would be up to MTN either to re-invest so that they grow wider or to externalise to service their obligations abroad. Externalise either to pay their loans abroad or to buy more equipment whichever purpose for which this money should be used would still amount to acquisition of foreign exchange for purposes of procuring those goods or servicing their loan obligations.  

These figures may not be necessarily actual, but at least they are meant to show that if Government had properly sequenced the liberalisation of the telephone sector by allowing several operators to operate freely without restriction on the International Gateway licence, and with a proper determination of the amounts to invest, by now the amount payable by the ordinary man and woman who uses MTN would be lower because then there would be effective competition in the market. 

As it is now, MTN is the only bull in the kraal in the telecommunication sector and so they are free to set whatever price they want, and whatever charges they want to make. There is nothing illegal about it, so they go ahead and do it. 

I am making this personal statement to the hon. Members so that the hon. Members are aware that we in the Committee on the National Economy have identified this as a problem, which we believe must be tackled. And since this is supposed to be for the good of all Ugandans, as a Parliament, we must stand together.  

Lately, there has been news of some Backbenchers saying “Musumba, why are you saying this?” Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, this is the struggle to make the sector charge fairly. It is not a struggle against anybody in particular, neither is it to benefit any single person; it is for all of us.  

I wish to reiterate that I, Musumba, support investment in this country. I support foreign investors and I encourage MTN to continue the good work they have done. I only wish that we should ensure that we have in place a formula for an equitable benefit for all parties involved. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2000

DR.LYOMOKI SAM (Workers Representative): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2000" be read for the First Time.

BILLS
SECOND READING

the Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000

THE SPEAKER: Let me remind you hon. Members, when we adjourned last time there was one contributor, we had just finished and that was the hon. Okumu Ringa. If I do not see any contributors, I will ask the Minister to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Joash Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.  Hon. Okumu Ringa supported the motion, the bringing into Parliament of this Bill. So I shall only comment on two things. 

First, he said in order to avoid Bills - you know, having been passed by Parliament but the Clerk to Parliament instead takes long to submit them for assent to the President; we should put in this Bill specific time. We could for example say “a Clerk must do so within so many days.”  

I think that although in principle there might be some advantages of doing this, there are institutional constraints to make him do so. For instance, a Minister who is imperative in the Bill, having gone through Parliament to make sure that this is done in time. And again where the Constituent Assembly actually made away with this Constitution, the time was critical. For example in the case of Article 91(2), they provided that “the Speaker must do so – the Legal Counsel must do so in so many days.” 

So, When you say that for the operationalisation of laws by sectoral Ministers, not by me, but by sectoral Ministers, the Minister of Justice should be constantly monitoring. Well, yes and no. I really think that Ministers were sectoral Ministers, they themselves bring here their own Bills for their policy requirements. Now, once Parliament has passed them, I do not know whether it is the Ministry of Justice chasing along everybody in the Government to ensure that these Bills are followed. I think they themselves should be able to do this.  Otherwise, Mr. Speaker I support generally what else he said. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, do you have anything to say?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Okumu Ringa for his contribution and for raising those two issues, which the Minister has ably handled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will now put the question that The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000 be read a Second Time.

MR.ONGOM: Point of order. Is it in order Mr. Speaker, for us to take a Vote without a quorum?

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right. Can you advise me please?

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I have a procedural issue here.

THE SPEAKER: Just hold on, let us deal with this point.

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, in dealing with my point of procedure actually –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He has raised a point of order, which we must deal with, then we come to you. What do you think?  Within the next few minutes we shall be with you.

Hon. Ongom the point is well taken and we have not managed to realise a quorum, I will then suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 2.57p.m due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption  at 3.16p.m_).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unfortunately we have not realised a quorum in which case we cannot proceed to pronounce ourselves on the business we have just been considering. If there are no objections, I will allow us to proceed to the next item, which will attract general debate and not taking of decision. What do you say?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION AMENDMENT BILL, 1999

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is again subject to the Mover being ready and if he is, I call upon him to proceed. Is he not ready?

MR.ONAPITO EKOMOLOIT (Amuria County, Katakwi): Mr. Speaker, we are more than ready even though the Front Bench is empty. I would like to note with disappointment that this is a very serious issue but we shall proceed, Mr. Speaker.

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 1999" be read for the Second Time.

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister, I recognise you.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Thank you. I am sorry, Sir. I am very grateful to hon. Onapito and obviously the hon. Prime Minister and everybody knows that. But just for the record the Cabinet is sitting now and actually we had to come away for the Bill.  So that is why you see most of the Ministers are not here.

MR.ONAPITO EKOMOLOIT: Mr. Speaker, ten months ago, this House overwhelmingly supported a motion allowing me to introduce this Bill. Subsequently, I laid the Bill on the Table for the First Reading and it was again massively supported. I am happy to report that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to which the Bill was referred to has not only given it thumbs up but also polished it. Today, I therefore, bring the Bill for the final seal of approval by the hon. Members and I have no doubt they will do it the way they have done it before.

This Bill is aimed at promoting the doctrine of separation of powers as enshrined in our Constitution.  The Bill is also brought in the belief that the legislature in a young democracy like ours must not only be pre-occupied with over-seeing the day-to-day business of Government but it must work to strengthen the pillars of democracy, especially separation of powers.  

As many Members are well aware, this separation powers we are aiming for through this amendment is mainly between the Executive and Legislative arms of Government. We believe these arms must not only be separate but they must also be seen to be separate.  

The Movers of this Bill are saying, ‘let the Legislature make the laws as freely as it should, let the Executive implement the laws without fear or favour and let the Judiciary interpret the laws as impartially as possible’.  We are not arguing for these checks and balances for its sake. We believe the greater value is to increase Government efficiency and effectiveness. We believe that by being limited to specialised functions, the different arms or branches of Government will develop, both in expertise and a sense of pride in their roles.  This will not happen if they are joined together or overlapped to a substantial degree as we feel is the situation in our Constitution as it stands today. 

Of course by introducing this amendment, we are opening an old wound of the Constituent Assembly (CA) debate.  Indeed for some Members who were in the C.A. this Bill may seem like flogging a dead horse because in their view the debate then was conclusive and Delegates agreed to keep Ministers in Parliament.

The Movers of this Bill, however, seek to show that the arguments used in the C.A to justify having Ministers as part of the Legislature were nothing but selfish. As those who were in the C.A know, the issue of whether Ministers should remain Members of Parliament was debated when Delegates were dealing with the Draft of Article 116 which was presented by Committee number two. The current Supreme Court Judge, Joseph Mulenga, who was then a C.A Delegate, chaired the Committee. 

It is interesting to note that actually the Committee in the C.A, which handled this issue, had recommended precisely what we are advocating for today. The Committee had said in Clause (2) that all Cabinet Ministers shall be ex-officio Members of Parliament but shall not have the right to vote on any issue requiring a vote in Parliament. And in Clause (3), the Committee recommended that MPs appointed Ministers had to vacate their seats.  

Indeed, if the Committee’s recommendation then had been accepted, 99 per cent of our wish would have been granted. I say 99 per cent because that C.A. recommendation would have ensured that Ministers remain ex-officio; for us, we are saying they should not be ex-officio. 

But those who were in the C.A. will note that this recommendation was shot down when the hon. Member of that Committee moved a minority report, which successfully blocked the recommendation. But it was not a straight way blocking. Those who were in the C.A. will recall that the matter was so deadlocked that we could have actually gone into a referendum. But unfortunately, politics prevailed and we did not achieve what we should have achieved. It is necessary for us to revisit the debate in the CA because most of the arguments, which might be cited today, were raised then. 

One of the arguments used to defeat this good recommendation of having Ministers not hold seats in Parliament, was that our system was not a Presidential System. In fact, it was called a hybrid system. While we cannot unlock the DNA of this system of ours to prove whether it is hybrid, we have a strong reason to believe that it is a Presidential System. In our system, the Executive, namely Cabinet, is largely or primarily to be determined by the President. And we do not need to look beyond this House to realise that this is a Presidential System whereby the Leader of Government Business in this House is a Presidential appointee and it clearly shows that we need to balance the powers of the President positively.  

Another argument, which may be brought about to try and undermine the principle we are advocating for is that there will be so many costs in terms of by-elections. We said this argument does not hold because even as the Constitution stands today, it allows the President to appoint all Ministers, if he wishes, from outside Parliament, and it gives room for by-elections. We recognise that there will, indeed, be costs in by-elections but we think this can be avoided if this amendment is allowed because we believe that the President does not appoint Ministers after a dream in the middle of the night. We believe that he studies them and in case of those appointed at the formation of a post-election Cabinet, he identifies competent allies during presidential campaigns. 

So, if the President knew that MPs who are appointed Ministers have to quit their seats, he would advise some of those whom he intends to appoint as Ministers not to bother running for Parliamentary seats. So, we would not see any need for by-elections because the President knows these people are going to be removed. But today people gamble because they are not sure whether they will be appointed or not.  

The other argument is that if we allow our amendment, the House will be too amorphous because assuming the President removes sixty Ministers from Parliament, then you would require other people to replace them and the House would perhaps go beyond three hundred members. But we say if the amendment is effected, that means they will be no ex-officio members who are Ministers. It means they will not be congesting the House. So their replacements assuming the President choose only MPs and we need to replace them, their replacements will come and find empty seats, which were vacated by those appointed Ministers.

The other argument that I want to allay from members is that if we deny Ministers to keep their seats, we would be denying the country or the Constituencies their first choices. We say this is wrong. Not only do we want Ministers out of Parliament because it strengthens separation of powers but we believe a Constituency would gain a lot by having their first choice transferred to Cabinet and then he serves the country without divided loyalty. Sometimes they may have their first choice in Cabinet but he is so over stretched that they do not realise the benefit they hoped for. We think the Minister who leaves a Constituency can still serve his Constituency even if he was their first choice, we would return delivering national services and that is what the people need.  

But the strongest argument, which has been raised to say we should not allow this amendment, is the fear of losing jobs. Let us talk; this is it. The argument goes, and it is very sound argument, that if one is sacked as a Minister they have nothing to fall back to. The Movers of this Bill recognise that this fear is genuine since ministerial sackings in the third world are often as sudden and as mysterious as the appointment yet none of us would like to lose a job without a plan. 

But we also believe that the fear for our personal skins should not stand in the way of the search for true and lasting democracy. The solution to this fear is to instil discipline in all the principal actors. And these actors are the MPs, the Ministers, and the President. We would, first of all, realise a situation where MPs have to choose whether they really need to become Ministers. Since someone fears to loose a job, so they have to choose.  We were saying you should weigh the options and the choice is yours, either to stay in your Constituency or to become a Minister if you so wish. 

But at the same time, those who become Ministers will realise that you have to do your job. I believe that people do not lose their jobs anyhow. They will have to avoid making mistakes knowing there is no fallback position. And of course, you also believe the President would – we should not just look at the President of the day. We believe in all future Presidents. They will perhaps stop using Cabinet appointments for some political chess, if I may call it that. 

We believe that in stable democracies, Ministers should stay as long as the President. Of course, they have the option of resigning. We do not want to encourage a situation where people are so uncertain when they hold Ministerial posts. There must be a sense of confidence and actually we are trying to encourage job security in the Cabinet. This can only happen if the President knows that his Ministers have no where else to go. If they make mistakes, he will be forced to sit down with them to discuss the options.  

We also want to allay the fear that it is only by having people who are Ministers to keep Parliamentary seats that we can gauge people’s ability to run the politics of the country and perhaps to promote them to higher offices.  We recognise that, indeed, Members of Parliament are the cream of the country politically. That is why we also do not seek to remove the choice of the appointing authority in selecting Ministers from among MPs. We still believe if the President feels that the best people who will be Ministers are in Parliament, he should get them. But we believe strongly that they should resign their seats.  That is all. We are not stopping any MP from becoming a Minister. 

There are those who like to argue that if you say MPs should not become Ministers, then they will not be seen as the best people. But we also believe that you would not have to be an MP to be an effective Minister. This House or the present Government abounds with rich examples. Three Ministers: hon. Syda Bbumba, Prof. Edward Rugumayo, Omony Ojok, and of course, not forgetting the Leader of Government business, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, are all Ministers who do not hold constituency seats. I am sure nobody is questioning their ability.  They were not seen first as MPs, and the fact that the non-elected Minister is leading Cabinet also answers the lame argument that being a Minister carries a risk of losing one’s seat in Cabinet and therefore, denies the Country the best brains.

I had to flash back to these arguments which were being raised in the CA because I do not want anybody to hold these illusions that this thing was defeated in the CA fairly; it was not. We just postponed a problem and we should solve it now. We believe it is the duty of this House to solve that problem.

But let me turn to the practical situation in the Sixth Parliament. As we have observed, before we decided to seek this amendment a lot of water has flowed under the proverbial bridge since the 1995 Constitution came into force. At last, we have witnessed a reality of having Ministers stay on as Members of Parliament. This reality, needless to say, has shown that the presence of Ministers in this House is greatly undermining the principle of separation of powers and democracy as a whole.

First of all, I would like to address the question of individual merit. This Parliament, like all its predecessors under the Movement, is grounded on the principle of individual merit. We therefore, come here to speak for our constituencies, the country, in ways we individually perceive as appropriate.

The Movers of this Bill would like to argue that this is beautiful because it allows talent and plurality of opinion to blossom. Indeed, Members will agree with me that this Parliament has witnessed unprecedented legislative brilliance and wit. Unfortunately, on many occasions, this brilliance occasioned by individual opinions, stops at debating level. When it comes to critical stages of voting and fine-tuning legislation, a great interference comes in to undermine the individual merit. The monster is called the principle of collective responsibility that governs the operations of Cabinet.  

Since the majority of critical legislation is originated by Cabinet, the collective responsibility often forbids Ministers from opening up to new ideas that are injected into a piece of legislation by other MPs. This premeditated ganging up by Ministers, plus their sheer numbers has clearly proved a stumbling block to liberal legislation in this House. Moreover, it is no secret that some Ministers have sometimes privately grumbled in disapproval of a collective position, but they are bound by oath not to openly disagree with the Cabinet position on the Floor of the House. I believe in Cabinet they actually speak their mind, and let them do so there. Let those who can replace them come here and speak their minds.

The other problem is why this House has no opposition.  As a result of collective responsibility and the desire to have the Executive position first as agreed in Cabinet, Cabinet has ended up becoming a shadow opposition in this Parliament. It is very strange! It has perennially pulled ropes with the Backbench and in the process bogged down legislative work. The Movers of this Bill content that this rope pulling partly explains the much-dreaded application of Article 118 of the Constitution. Censures are essentially part of the Backbenchers efforts to curtail the power of the Executive in the Legislature because it obscures free flow of debate.

We believe that if the law is changed as par our proposed amendment, Parliament will no longer be diverted by side issues such as censures, which are occasioned by a defensive Executive in the House, but will move first forward with concrete legislation.

We also would like to note that there is an erroneous feeling that if this amendment is allowed, then we will be breeding tyranny of Parliaments. This is based on the notion that it is only the Executive, which stands for the same goals with the President, and we think this is not true. This House can do very well without Ministers and still maintain perfect harmony with the President or the Executive.

Recent events have clearly shown that the Backbench has sided with the Executive or the President when the need arises and there is no need to fear. In fact, it is wrong for anybody to arrogate the role that Ministers are the ones to defend the President. I believe it should be that when Parliament sees what the President argues for is right, it should rise to the occasion.

We do not believe fighting parliamentary tyranny is a role of the Executive or Cabinet, but it should be the role of the Judiciary. And this has recently been shown when the Judiciary may be erroneously felt we were becoming tyrannical, they tried to move, to check our power, but we also moved otherwise.

There is also a problem of torn allegiance alluded to earlier when I talked about effectiveness and efficiency if we separate the Legislature from the Executive. There are torn allegiances whereby Members of Parliament who are also Ministers are really torn between national duty and constituency obligations. Unfortunately, for the country, they inevitably gravitate more towards their constituencies at the expense of the nation and no one can blame them; I would do the same.

The temptation on the Ministers to misallocate or reallocate national resources as to satisfy pressing demands we all face in constituencies is often noted.  So, you really need to save the Minister from the burden.  I am sure if the Ministers who are not MPs could testify, they do not have these pressures. Any of us who is on the Backbench, if we were parachuted to the Cabinet tomorrow, we would face the same pressures so long as we hold our constituencies.

The other thing is, why not Ministers? Why not MPs who become Ministers in terms of leaving the Legislature?  The Movers of this Bill would like to argue that removing Ministers from their seats would not be unprecedented departure of Legislators who get full time Executive engagements. We are all familiar with the situation where two Members of the Sixth Parliament who were appointed by the President to Executive positions relinquished their parliamentary seats. I am talking here about former MP for Matheniko, Moroto, hon. David Pulkol and Joan Rwabyomere, Woman MP, Kabarole, who are to quit their seats to become Director General for External Security Organisation.  

Obviously, defenders of Ministers keeping their seats will say, these two had to go because it was a constitutional requirement. We agree! But what could have been the logic of the constitutional framers in requiring the heads of Security Organisations to be out of Parliament? I can only imagine that there were two main reason – they are accountable to Parliament and so keeping them in the House would tantamount to making them responsible to themselves.  

The second reason must have been that the CA recognised that they are simply too busy to have enough time for the business of Legislation.

Perhaps the more interesting situation is one in respect to the present Army Commander, Maj. Gen. Jeje Odongo, who without a constitutional obligation still quit as MP for the great Amuria in Katakwi of Teso for the simple reason that he found it unwise to juggle the two jobs. I am the beneficiary. Hon. Members, this is the spirit with which we should approach the business of the nation. The Movers of this Bill asked, if MPs appointed to security positions have to quit their seats even when the Constitution has not required like the case of Maj. Gen. Jeje. Odongo, why not Ministers whose jobs are equally demanding? It must surely have been a mistake in the Constitution framing and we must correct it.

I am sure I am just setting the ball rolling; a lot of hon. Members will have better arguments for this amendment than me. I would like to conclude by saying I am no constitutional, let alone, Legislative expert. But what better encouragement would I need in thinking that I am making a valid argument than the position on this issue of the Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda, hon. Bart Katurebe, who is also MP for Bunyarugulu in Bushenyi as quoted in the press.

In an interview with the Sunday Monitor number 213 1st August 1999, the Attorney General was asked whether he thought Ministers should also be Members of Parliament?  And this is what he said; "I think we should look at the possibility of changing the situation, either keep the Ministers out, or if you elect them directly, then you should have to look at other functions of what would be the Presidents' powers vis-à-vis Parliament". 

Well, the Attorney General whom we all know well is the Government's point man when it comes to legal opinion spoke and the Executive should just take heed and let this well-intentioned amendment pass.

Finally, we urge the hon. Members to support this Bill perhaps to personal detriment but for the good of posterity. The hon. Members should take solace in the fact that we propose the new law to take effect starting with the Seventh Parliament. So we all have time to plan.  

I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Parliamentary and Legislative Counsel, the Clerk's office for the assistance and of course, the Executive for its co-operation.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move (Applause.).

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The Constitutional amendment Bill, 1999 was examined by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs as required by rule 143 of the rules of procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

Objective:  
The Bill proposes that Members of Parliament should not double as Ministers. According to the Movers, the Bill in effect seeks to enhance the democratic principle of separation of powers and enhance checks and balances in the relationship between the Executive and Legislative arms of Government. 

At present, there is a danger of the Legislature and Executive becoming fused. The Executive, which formulates policies, should not vote or be part of the final decision on its own policy. Currently, in circumstances where issues being debated do not favour the interests of the Executive, the Parliamentarian to become a Minister is inclined to side with the Executive even if doing so does not promote institutionalisation of democratic practice in this country. 

The Committee was informed that the Bill would also reduce the patronising influence of the Chief Executive.  

Procedure:  
The Committee held discussions with the following; 
    • Hon. Onapito, 
    • Hon. Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu, 
    • The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, 
    • The Attorney General, 
    • The First Parliamentary Counsel, 
    • The Uganda Law Society, 
    • The Movement Secretariat, 
    • The National Political Commissar, 
    • The Law Development Centre, and 
    • The Department of Political Science and Public Administration, Makerere University.  

Observations: 
1. It was observed that the Constitution is not static. It evolves and there is need to promote constitutional reform. 

2. Being a Member of Parliament involves enormous responsibilities which when added to the duties of the Minister make it difficult for the person to objectively fulfil his functions. The Bill when passed will lead to increased efficiency in the Executive. The current situation is that Ministers are required to attend to their constituencies, which requires a lot of time. In the process, national programmes suffer as Ministers concentrate on their constituencies at the expense of the country.  

3. The Bill does not create an extra cost since the Constitution envisages Ministers who may not be Members of Parliament. Even where a great expenditure is envisaged under the separation of powers, the increased efficiency will lead to higher savings since leakages will be minimised.  

4. The Bill will minimise politics of intrigue and opportunism (Applause.). Currently, Members of Parliament are compromised by the desire to become Ministers. Ministers should be appointed on their ability and readiness to serve other than a situation where they are appointed to please their constituencies.  

5. The current situation encourages Ministers to use their positions to influence and direct the allocation of Government programmes and projects to their constituencies and/or districts. Besides encouraging corruption and misappropriation of public resources, it also enhances ethnic feelings especially, from regions or districts that think that they are not benefiting because their representatives are not Ministers (Applause.). 

The Committee is of the opinion that the Movers of the Bill were not accorded any assistance as required by Article 94(c) and (d) of the Constitution. Article 94(4)(c) provides that “the Member moving the Private Member’s Bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the Department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the Bill; and 
(d) the office of the Attorney General shall afford the Member moving the private Member's Bill professional assistance in drafting of the Bill.”  

Consequently, the Movers of the Bill did not take into consideration other Articles of the Constitution that should be consequentially amended in pursuance of the their proposed amendments. These include:
 
    1. Article 78 1(d) which reads "Parliament shall consist of the Vice President and the Ministers, who, if not already elected Members of Parliament, shall be ex-officio members of Parliament without the right to vote on any issue requiring a vote in Parliament". This will have to be deleted consequentially.  

    2. Article 83(1), which provides for the tenure of office of Members of Parliament. It would need to be amended provided that a Member of Parliament would vacate his or her office if he or she were appointed a Minister.  

    3. Article 116(b)(ii), which provides that “the office of a Minister shall become vacant if the holder becomes disqualified to be a Member of Parliament”. This provision would also have to be deleted. 

The Committee recommends that the debate on the Bill should take into consideration those Articles of the Constitution which I have referred to, and proposed amendments should encompass those other amendments. 

The Committee supports the Bill and subject to amendment, recommends that it be enacted into law. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.
 
THE SPEAKER: Seconded?  Yes, hon. Obiga Kania.

MR.OBIGA KANIA (Terego County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just a moment, what is the problem? (Interruptions) It was seconded. The motion was seconded.  Can you proceed? It is now open for debate.

MR.OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Movers of this amendment to the Constitution and I also thank the Committee for the report. My comments will be basically to seek a number of clarifications on the Committee’s report and the Members can help me to articulate this amendment more clearly.  

On the report, first of all, the Committee said on page 1 of the procedure that they discussed it with about ten people or groups of people. Then on page 2, they put five observations, which are all for the Bill that the Bill is very good and it remains all those five. I wish to know from the chairperson whether, at any stage, when they talked to the ten people or groups people, there were any difference of opinion to the observations, so that this House can also benefit from the other side of the views.  

It also says those are observations of the Committee not necessarily their recommendations, I would expect that they would have observed any contrary views which were expressed on this Bill but I do not see any in the Committee report. 

Having said that, my own personal views on this Bill and report are as follows: 
1. On the objectives, it says according to the Movers, the Bill in fact seeks to enhance the democratic principles of separation of powers and checks and balances in the relationship between the Executive and the Legislative arms of Government. My own feeling is that this Bill does not seek to enhance any relationship between the Executive and the Legislature. On the contrary, it seeks to remove any relationship so that each one works absolutely independently. So, in the end, in my view, there is nothing to check and balance.  

2. The report, under observations No.2 said the Bill, when passed, will lead to increased efficiency in the Executive. That assumes correctly that whoever is in the Executive will be able to devote all the time to the functions performed in the Executive. But I want one clarification from the chairperson of the Committee or the Movers, and this relates to the second observation, which is mentioned in No.4 relating to intrigue and opportunism. When a person is appointed or elected for a job, the first objective of that person is to keep that job. If you are elected as a Member of Parliament, your duty is to keep that job. It also means that if you were appointed a Minister, you would like to keep that job. In the process of wanting to keep that job at all costs, without a fall back position, are you likely to be more of a sycophant when you have no fallback position or when you have a fallback position? I am talking of a Member of Cabinet who has been appointed, has been removed from the Parliamentary position; he is now solely a Minister and he must keep that job at all costs. Is he likely to render a better service to the head of the Executive from that position than if he is from the other position?  

Another clarification I would like to seek from the Committee is, assuming you get a President who is fairly clever and also an intriguing one; he has - (Interruptions)- Mr. Speaker, definitely I have not made any comments related to those who are heckling me that - I hate something like that; that is not my word.

I was saying, suppose you have a President who thinks that hon. “X” is giving him a lot of headache in Parliament and he would like to remove that person from Parliament. He or she would do so by, first of all, nominating this person under the best possible terms of friendly terms and takes him away from Parliament -(Interruptions.). Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you protect me so that I can make my comments?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, give him time; you will have your own opportunity and I am sure when it comes, you will not want the hon. Member to heckle you. Can you proceed? You are protected.

MR.OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This honourable gentleman is appointed, becomes a member of the Cabinet and after three or four months the person who appointed him removes him.  Will he therefore, not have destroyed a vibrant Member of Parliament and created dormancy in Parliament? This, in my view, is something, which is likely to happen. It is not just hypothetical; it is real.  

Finally, I wish to comment on the issue of co-ordination of Government business in Parliament. According to the proposals made in the amendment Bill and the subsequent proposals made by the Committee, if they were to be adopted, you would have no person in the name of the Cabinet Minister or a Leader of Government Business to lead the business of Government in Parliament. This is because Parliament will be absolutely independent and operating on its own. 

I would like to know who would articulate the interest of the Executive in Parliament in relation to the various Bills including the Finance Bills, which must be moved in accordance with our Constitution by the Executive. This is likely to be an important issue because the principle of separation of powers should not be seen in terms of creation of conflicting bodies. It should be one where two or three bodies are able to work in harmony. Therefore, the need for some rudimentary or supplementary relationship is extremely essential and I suggest that it should be held in this amendment Bill. With those views, until I get the clarifications, I oppose this motion.

MR.KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me an opportunity to express my views on this constitutional amendment proposal. I had the honour and privilege to represent my constituency in the CA. In addition, I had the opportunity to serve on the Committee two, which was chaired by Justice Mulenga, which dealt with the aspect now being debated in this honourable House. I shared the views that have been referred to as coming from that Committee to the Constituent Assembly. Obviously, when it came to the CA, the matter was amended to reflect the present position. 

I suggest that when we are debating this particular aspect of the Constitution, we should endeavour to ensure that we are putting in place legislation for institutions and not for individuals. 

I have the greatest respect for His Excellency the President, who is leading this country at the moment. But I would feel a bit uncomfortable if our debate in this House at any stage tends to have individuals in mind when we are debating matters of this nature. This country has been led by several Presidents and Heads of State and I think it will be in the interest of all of us to see that when we legislate in this House, we put a complete blank on the faces of the people to lead us. That is why I feel very strongly that whatever we decide here should strengthen the Executive, the Judiciary and the Parliament. If we fail to do that, we will not be serving our country well.  

It is true that the President should have the ability and the opportunity to choose Ministers from wherever he wishes depending on those whom he thinks will guide his leadership as head of the Executive. But it has been pointed out that when Ministers come from this House, there is certainly a problem in identifying the roles they have got to play in this House. There is a division of loyalty, so to speak, and this has definitely dented some of our performance in this House. I am not saying it has always done so, but it has dented some of our performance because you have got to look at both sides; that is, the Executive and Parliament.  

Of course, it is true that if this amendment is passed, the person who is dropped as a Minister will not have a fall back position. But my view is this; any Minister appointed is supposed to give his advice to the President without fear or favour. If you are going to say that you must advise carefully so that you are not dropped, I think the President is not being served well. I would rather have a Minister who will stand up and say, ‘Mr. President, this is wrong’ and lose his job than to say, please, you better use these words so that you can retain your position. I think that kind of Minister to the President is not worth his position. The Minister should be able to advise correctly and stand by what he advises.  

We have, in this House, Ministers who have been dropped who are still as influential as ever before because they know they have advised correctly and they want to stand by it.  You do not have to be a Minister on the Front Bench for you to be honest with your President. 

It has been pointed out on this Floor that some Ministers have tended, maybe intentionally or inadvertently, to act as regional, tribal or otherwise. Some of us have been in these positions time and time again. Personally, when I was dropped at the instigation of some people, some people thought that my position as Minister for the Presidency belonged to Busoga. They were shocked when they found that the position was “lost” and was never replaced as Minister. We must strengthen the powers of the President to be able to make decisions. We have no regional or tribal Ministers to be taken care of because we do not have enough positions to dish out. Otherwise, every Member of Parliament should be a Minister or Minister of State or so be it. 

In conclusion, my position is that the loyalty of the Ministers should first be to the appointing authority, the Head of the Executive and not to Parliament because the role of Parliament is to check the Executive or work in partnership with the Executive and Judiciary. It is not, in my view, going to work well if we start trying to serve two masters at the same time. 

I would like to appeal to those who may feel that this is taking away powers from the Head of the Executive to rethink. We are actually strengthening the position of the President with the people he leads in this country. This is the way I look at this amendment. It is strengthening his position, not weakening it. If we are going to have Ministers here as listening posts in order only to listen and check the excessive nature of the Members of Parliament, I do not think that is the best way of running this country. We should have Ministers who are loyally serving the President and Members of Parliament who are able to advise on various issues of the State. 

With regard to the point made about Ministers being dropped and losing their constituencies, the choice is theirs.

I think the minimum age for Members of Parliament is eighteen at present. If you cannot make a choice between being a Minister and a Member of Parliament, you can argue your case with the President that, ‘Mr. President, you want to make me a Minister but how long am I going to be a Minister?’ If you cannot argue, you can wait for the radio. If you want to wait for the radio to announce your name and start celebrating even before you have performed, then I think you need to be dropped as soon as possible -(Laughter)- and go where you belong. 

I do not think any head of State worth his name can pick an opposition Member of Parliament, announce his name on the radio that 'you are a Minister for such and such', then that opposition Member starts celebrating and then he is dropped four months later and he says he is a leader of this country. Such a Member of Parliament is not worth to be a leader of this country, and thank God if he appoints some of those people so that they can get out of this House quickly. Mr. Speaker, I beg to support this amendment wholeheartedly. Thank you very much.

CAPT.MUKULA MICHAEL (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that I have to oppose this motion being presented by my colleague, hon. Onapito and Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. I would like to approach it from the SWOT and PEST analyses and I would like my colleagues to examine it that way. There are many variables here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what is funny about contributions on this amendment? Why do you not, as usual, allow your colleague or whoever is on the Floor to make his point and then when your turn comes you will make your own contribution? Can you proceed? (Interruptions)

CAPT.MUKULA: I just want to tackle the subject by getting to understand the SWOT and the PEST, which is simply the Strength, the Weaknesses, the Opportunities and the Threats of this amendment. And then the PEST is based on the Political, Economic, Social and the Technological analysis of this thing.  

First of all, in trying to understand this position, I want us to be a little cautious when dealing with the Constitution. Constitutional instability in this country, the ability for this House to keep on throttling, playing with the Constitution whenever the need arises is going to cause problems to this country.  

I am saying when the need arises because I know what I am talking about. When you are trying to put anything, you must have a core concept; and any strategy, as we are approaching it now, must have a core concept. You must be able to plan for an issue like this. In whatever we do in this country, look at the cost implication of any amendment or any decision we take in this House. Let me just tackle the issue of cost. 

Assuming we have 62 members of the Executive appointed as this Bill so wants to read. 62 Members of Parliament because they are going to be ex-officios. They are not going to vote but they will be Members of Parliament of this House. Now, let us examine the cost because that is the gist of the matter. Having 62 Ministers in this House or in the Executive means the following: Since they are not going to work for nothing, 62 Ministers being paid an average of Shs.3 million each per month means that government has spend approximately 1.8 billion per month.  The total projection per year is close to Shs.22 billion.  Furthermore, the 62 Members of the Executive would require vehicles, for example, the cost of which would be on the average of about Shs.6.2 billion, taking an average cost of a vehicle at about Shs.100 million; and housing and so on and so forth. 

Mr. Speaker, I want us to be very careful. When you are talking about housing and so on and so forth, these are cost implications to the poor Ugandan in this country.  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha and your corner there, can you allow your colleague to make his contribution? You will have your – no, you did not ask for that. You are heckling from the seat. Can you allow him to -(Interruption)

CAPT.MUKULA: I thank you Mr. Speaker for the protection - Yes, go ahead.

MR MWANDHA: First of all, the hon. Member seems to be saying that Government does not house the Ministers in this House. He is also implying that the vehicles they use do not belong to Government. That when you get these extra Ministers they will have to be housed by Government as if the current Ministers are not being housed by Government. That they will have to be given transport as if current Ministers are not given transport. So, I wanted to give him information that in fact whether or not they are in this House, the cost of housing and transport will be the same.  

MRS.ZZIWA: I want also to inform the hon. Member that it is this very House, which accepted to increase the number of Ministers from 23 to 64, when it knew the financial implication.

CAPT.MUKULA: I thank my colleagues for the ideas and the information that has been put across, but listen to my explanation so that you get the gist of the matter. The current Ministers, who are Members of Parliament, are not housed because they do not get housing allowances. (Interruptions) No, wait a minute, they are not provided houses paid for by the State. But under the arrangement, if you are to employ a Chief Executive at the level of a Minister, he has to be given the equivalent in terms of remuneration when he becomes a Minister. 

Now, the point I would also like to develop is that when we have dealt with the cost of this decision, let us look at the practicability. We are currently 276 Members of Parliament provided for by this Constitution. Assuming that we are using the same scenario because this is a hypothetical position but it is practical now because we have 62 Members of the Executive as Ministers. Assume you have 62 Members who will sit here to defend the Government position, sitting in this place because we cannot afford the cost of building another Parliament; let us be realistic we cannot afford it. The point is having another 62 here will make this place, apart from being unhygienic –(Interruption)

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor regarding the figures he gave. He made a calculation on the basis of 62 Ministers assuming that they will be paid Shs.3 million per month and he ended up with a figure of Shs.22 billion a year. If you calculate you will find that actually in a month they will be getting Shs.186 million and in a year they will be getting Shs.2.2 billion or Shs.2,232,000,000. So, the magnitude of Shs.22 billion could cause some fright in the House when actually the figure is not correct. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.LYOMOKI SAM: Mr. Speaker, I also would like to inform my colleague that this country can afford to build another Parliament House; it is a question of priority. We are building State house at an unbelievable amount.

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, in actual fact with Shs.22 billion you can pay 620 Ministers at a rate of Shs.3 million.  

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I thank my colleagues for the information, but I think let us go back to the calculation because we are trying to arrive at a figure which is practical. Now that the information has come, I would like us to be guided in approach. The cost of the current four-wheel drives is on average about Shs.100 million. When you add Shs.6.2 billion multiply that by 100 taking hypothetical figure you get 6.2 billion. I do not think we would have an argument with that. Maintenance of an Executive president is costing this country billions of shillings. We should be more careful when we are looking at cost increase in maintenance of Executive Ministers. The cost has got major implications –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I am still addressing the hon. Member. Can you try and make your concluding remarks? Otherwise, you are running out of time.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, it is because I was accepting points of clarification and information, but I think we will hold that as I enlighten the House on my observations. This country has gone through political instability. If we are to look at political systems, right now we have individual merit.  But assuming you have a number of parties, because the Constitution provides for multiparty political system - I am looking ahead – assume that you have a multiparty political system, will these applications be practical?  That is why I would like to move further; the Executive and Parliament have a symbiotic relationship. Symbiotic in that there is cross sharing of responsibility. The extension of a higher civil service by bringing in other executive political civil servants is not going to create efficiency in this country. Creating efficiency in this country is building structures that are inherent on the ground. 

I am in the private sector. It is not the chief executive who is important; it is those who are functional that are important. I would like us to look at it this way. I would rather the options of appointment of Members of the Executive be left to the President in form of guidance to say, ‘yes, if you want efficiency, it is more practical for you to appoint Ministers in core Ministries who are not from Parliament. What you are trying to say here, and I would like us to understand it is that there are a number of Parliamentarians, who in spite of being Members of Parliament still find it very difficult to create efficiency at home. But there are those Members who are in the Executive who are efficient both as Ministers and also in their constituencies and able to discharge their duties to their people. The point of application may be on individual merit but the question is that individuals do not have equal capacities. 

I would like us to look beyond the President in planning the stability of this country. Let us look at the short term, medium term, and long term when we are legislating for the good of this country. I thank you.

MR.WANJUSI WASIEBA (Bubulo West, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Mover of this motion and the Chairman for having brought it on the Floor. 

This motion came up during the Constituent Assembly, where I was privileged to be, and I was very supportive, but because of numbers we lost. When they raised the argument that when you are a Minister you cannot concentrate in your constituency, I did not agree. I was once a Minister and very effective in my Constituency. When I was dropped from Cabinet, my voters told me that ‘we never voted you as a Minister but as a Member of Parliament; and therefore, we like you where you are’. The President of course, has the prerogative, but when you are dropped from Cabinet and at the same you are a Member of Parliament, your voters tend to think that it is because the President has lost confidence in you. I went through this and I am telling you from experience -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, this is the third time I am cautioning you; and I do know how I will deal with the situation when it persists.

MR.WANJUSI WASIEBA: Mr. Speaker, recently when there was an impeding rumour of Cabinet reshuffle, I happened to speak to one of the Ministers. He was so worried that if he were dropped now, it would mean that he would not manage to go through the next elections because his constituents would think that the President has lost trust in him. I am trying to give you points, which could help you -(Interruption)

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The hon. Member holding the Floor has made a very serious allegation that there is a Cabinet Minister whom he spoke to when there was some kind of impeding reshuffle. And this Minister confided in him that if he were dropped, he would not find money to go through the next elections.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR.KUTESA: That he would not make it in the next election.  The implication of this is that unless you are a Minister, you have no assurance of making it next time. Can the hon. Member holding the Floor substantiate and tell us who this Minister is? Because if he does not do so, we do not know what happens to the other Ministers, they will be vulnerable.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kutesa, first of all, I get the impression that you misunderstood the contributor.  Secondly, I doubt whether you will really be fair to press for substantiation by naming the Minister. That was a discussion between him and the Minister and it does not really affect issues in this House to warrant disclosure. If it were to affect the debate here, maybe you would have a point, but the first important point is that you at first misunderstood him. So, I think the hon. Member is in order. 

MR.KUTESA: I apologise, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR.WANJUSI WASIEBA: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Mr. Speaker. In this country we have got a high rate of unemployment, and for me, I am looking at trying to solve that problem of employment. If you had about 280 Members -(Interruption)- of Parliament -(An hon Member rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Member has declined, that is my understanding.

MR.WANJUSI WASIEBA: And you added on another 62 Ministers, I think you would go a long way to solving that problem. As a Member of Parliament for Bubulo West, if somebody were appointed from my constituency as a Minister, we would fair very well in the development of that constituency.  To me, it would be good if we passed this motion. 

If a Member of Parliament was appointed a Minister, it would be good for him to ask the President before he accepts the appointment whether he would be kept in Cabinet for the period he was elected to Parliament so that he decides whether to take the Ministerial post or not. I think this could guarantee those who opt for ministerial posts not to be reshuffled or dropped anyhow. It also augurs well with the constitutional provision of separation of powers. For instance, the three arms of government; the Legislature, Judiciary and Executive. I feel that when somebody is given the two appointments, as a Member of Parliament and at the same time appointed on the Executive, it would be contradicting this Article of the Constitution. Mr. Speaker, I do support this motion. Thank you.

MR.SAM KUTESA (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this motion by hon. Onapito and seconded by hon. Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. I welcome it particularly so that it comes and we debated it because it has been hanging around for a while and many ideas have been mooted, many views have been expressed. So, I welcome the opportunity that it has arrived and we are debating it now.  

While introducing this motion, the hon. Onapito made one fundamental statement. He said the major reason for moving this motion - and he did mention a few secondary ones - was that this goes further to ensure separation of powers. I think that is the cardinal reason why this motion is being moved.  

The concept of separation of powers is not new. This is a concept that was formulated by Daisy in the 12th century. It is not new, and it has been practised in other countries and other jurisdictions. So, we are re-inventing the wheel, let us look at it dispassionately. 

First, there are extremists who think about separation of powers in a physical sense. The example of this was South Africa under apartheid. In fact, separation of powers was physical; the Executive was located in Pretoria, the Legislature located in Cape Town and I think the Judiciary in Johannesburg. It never made apartheid any better; it never made the system any more democratic. The Executive sits physically in Pretoria, unfortunately even now. The legislature sits in Cape Town and I think the High Courts and Courts of Judicature sit in Johannesburg. That is the extreme. Simply separating them physically does not make it any better. As we speak now, that is what happens in Pretoria. 

Under Apartheid, there was physical separation. Ministers would sit in Pretoria with their Chief Apartheid Leader, the Apartheid Parliament sat in Cape Town and the Judicial Apartheid sat in Johannesburg. The system remains pathetic, undemocratic, and unfair. So, separation in terms of physical alone is, with respect, in my opinion, useless. But that is the other extreme. 

There are other areas like the United States. It is true Congress and Senate are separate from the Executive, but that is because they have a purely presidential system and hon. Onapito referred to it. We do, in fact, have a hybrid, let us not run away from the reality of our Constitution. We have both a Parliamentary and Presidential system. America has a purely Presidential system, Britain has a purely Parliamentary system. In our case, if you have opted for the hybrid, I think it is better to be consistent and have a hybrid even in Parliament and the Executive because that is the spirit of our Constitution. 

Everybody is talking about separation of powers. What happened in Britain? Britain is called the mother of all the Parliaments, the mother of democracies. This America we are talking about is only 200 years old. But Britain has functioned perfectly well with Ministers being Members of Parliament. What is wrong with that? For me, I want to say that there is one more important thing, why we need to have Ministers as Members of Parliament or certainly as politicians. It is important that the Government or people operating Government are sensitive to the feelings of the ordinary people; and you become sensitive if these people elect you. You become sensitive if you fear not being returned next time. But if you are going to owe your allegiance to one man, the President, who has made you a Minister, you do not have to be sensitive about the 20 million people. You do not have to be because they are not going to do anything to you. You should be sensitive in formulating policy, you should be sensitive in implementing policy; you should be sensitive because you know you are accountable to the people.

MR.WACHA BEN: Mr. Speaker, we have a Prime Minister who is not elected. I want hon. Kutesa to tell me whether in formulating some of the policies that he brings to this House as a Leader of Government Business, he is not sensitive to the feelings of the country.

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I will not tread on dangerous grounds but let me say this – (Laughter)– I will be very wrong to add to the number of Prof. Nsibambi by 61 other people; very wrong. I would be the first person to oppose and I am doing so. To have four Nsibambis is enough in terms of sensitivity. Can you imagine if all we had in Cabinet was hon. Nsibambi, hon. Rugumayo, hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Omwony Ojok whose allegiance is only to President Museveni and have no sensitivity about the rest? Yes, I think it is important that in formulating, and we are very lucky that in these four – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Can you allow the hon. Member to make his contribution? Your turn will come.

MR.KUTESA: We are very lucky that in these four we have not seen failure to understand, but there are examples. My argument is – and I think it is a compelling argument.  What would be the difference in elevating Permanent Secretaries to making them just Ministers? Why do you not make a Permanent Secretary a Minister? Amin tried it and I hope it worked very well; Amin tried it, elevate Permanent Secretaries. What other sensibility would these other people you bring here have? But if a Member of Cabinet is elected, he has responsibility, not only to this constituency, but I think he knows the feelings of people, he cares about them. But if the President appoints me, I have only one man to please and if that President is the one – and then, you are talking about separation of powers. You know, really, because, if we are not going to have policies, - (Interruption) 

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: I would like to be clarified by hon. Kutesa on the question of sensitivity. What is sensitivity, and what creates that sensitivity? If I understood him correctly, it seems he is saying that unless you are elected, you cannot be sensitive. I have operated in an organisation where nobody gets elected.  In fact, before 1986, most people chose to go and not just to represent politically, but to go and even possibly die. Now, is that not sensitivity? If it is sensitivity, then how do you link being elected to sensitivity and when you are not elected, therefore, you are not sensitive? How do you link that whole situation?   Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I will draw a distinction between patriotism, altruism and accountability. This is why I think there is an element of altruism in this motion. There is a great part of patriotism on the part of people sacrificed without being sensitive. But the whole reason Governments are subjected to regular elections is so that they remain sensitive to the population, because if they are not, they will not be returned. This is what I mean by sensitivity; that is what I call accountability. I am not talking about altruism, I am not even talking about patriotism; I am talking about the need for Governments to be accountable. Governments become accountable, why?  Because every after five years they have to go and show their books to the ordinary people. 

This lack of sensitivity - in fact, I can give you an example of America, Robert McNamara, who was Secretary for Defence, was hired from Rockfeller by Kennedy, not elected at all. He is one of the people who were escalating the Vietnam war until the liberal writer Galsbraith jotted down figures for him. Robert McNamara was talking about how many Vietnamese they had killed, not talking about how many Americans were dying. And every radio broadcast, Galsbraith used to jot it. After a year and a half, Galsbraith went to McNamara and said, ‘Mr. Secretary for Defence, why are you ordering more bombings? I knew the population of Vietnam when we started the war. From the announcements, the population is depleted. So, why are you ordering more bombings?’ And he was not even talking about the death of Americans. This was a hired man, not an elected man, at the centre of the United States Forces and we all know how Vietnam became a fiasco for United States. 

I am arguing that Ministers who do not have a background with the population, who cannot feel sensitive, can as well be Permanent Secretaries, they can as well be expatriates. We import them and they have them run our Government for us, but I would urge that Ministers should remain Members of Parliament.

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: I would like to thank hon. Kutesa for the information he has given about the US and about that period of the Vietnam war and he singled out the Secretary for Defence. Now, the clarification I would like to have, were the rest of the Secretaries or the Ministers in America elected?

MR.KUTESA: Precisely, the United States does not have elected Secretaries and they are insensitive, by and large, yes. So, my argument, Mr. Speaker I am – (Interruption) 

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I have to intervene. But I am getting intrigued by hon. Sam Kutesa’s argument. Article 117 says that “Ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their Ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by Cabinet.” I do not see anywhere here where Ministers are supposed to be accountable to the public; they are accountable to the President. Now, where does this insensitivity come from?  

MR.KUTESA: I thought that my good friend knows the rules of interpretation, “what is not excluded is not bad” (Laughter) Those are the rules of interpretation of our laws. They are not being excluded to be accountable to the population. But the fact of the matter is - I think it also goes for common sense - that Ministers, while they are for the administration of their Departments, are responsible to the President, they are also responsible to the public.  They are accountable to the public and if they are not, they get removed. That is what you did to me recently in your opinion (Laughter.). 

I also want to conclude by one point. Apart from altruism, I think for hon. Members of Parliament, particularly new ones; a politician’s ambition is to finally cap his career with the highest post in the land. I do not know whether I am being unrealistic. Ask yourselves? Who goes into politics and does not want to cap his career having occupied one of the biggest positions in the land? Why do you want to stop that? Why do you want to truncate the ambitions of these young men and ladies? Mr. Speaker, I oppose this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we go back to this side. I will give opportunity to hon. D’ujanga.

MR.D’UJANGA SIMON (Okoro County, Nebbi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do not agree that when a Minister has no fall back position, he would work harder and be more frank to the President. On the contrary, if he had a fall back position in Parliament, he would be more frank to the President knowing that even if he is sacked, he can come back here as some of our colleagues.

If the President is to appoint Ministers, he has two possible sources; he can appoint technocrats or politicians, with either of those sets of people having a disadvantage. As my colleague hon. Kutesa has cited, with technocrats sometimes you do not get things going the way they should go because of the nature in which they work. 

If the President appoints politicians, then the other issue of ‘how many bulls should we have in a kraal’ will start in every constituency. That is, if a Member is elected to Parliament and he is appointed a Minister, then we must get a replacement from his constituency to Parliament. There is bound to be the question of ‘how many bulls should we have in a kraal in that constituency’. 

But perhaps the most crucial point is on page 3.  We have a caution there from the Committee in their recommendations. “The Committee recommends that debate on the Bill should take into consideration all the other three articles enumerated above.” 

Here we are talking about Article 78(1)(d), which reads ”Parliament shall consist of the Vice President and Ministers.” The composition of Parliament was made like that by those who were in the Constituent Assembly maybe for some reason. So, when we are debating this Bill, we should not lose sight of Article 78. I have no problem with Articles 83 and 116 (b)(2) being deleted. But perhaps I should seek clarification from one of my colleagues, who were in the Constituent Assembly on Article 78. It must have been put there for a reason. 

My appeal to Members is that when we are discussing this proposed amendment Bill which looks very, very nice, we should not lose sight of other Articles as the Committee cautioned us on page 3. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have one more on this side. We shall get – hon. Ongom I thought you had given up? But since your neighbour came up first, let us hear him.

MR.TOSKIN BARTILLE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I also want to welcome the motion the way it has been moved and I want to add that Uganda is still a young country. Uganda is still a developing country we got our independence only 38 years ago –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, surely it is rude to interrupt.

MR.TOSKIN: Politically, we are still organisationally far.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just a moment, I am trying to organise an appropriate environment for you to make your contribution. I am telling your colleagues that it is rude to interrupt you in the manner that some of them are doing. Let them allow you to make your contribution, they will have their opportunity either to support you or oppose you in this matter.

MR.TOSKIN: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to call on colleagues that this is a very important motion moved at a very important moment of our political history. The outcome of this Bill will have a lot of impact on our politics. We should not be emotional about it; let us look at every issue as it comes.  

As I had already stated, Uganda is still a young country, it is a developing country politically, economically and even socially. This is a country, which is just moving on support of donor funds. I think Members know this.  This is a country - without donor funds Uganda cannot even operate for a half a year. This is correct. We have just passed a Budget and you know what percentage of that budget is going to be raised domestically by the people of Uganda. That is why every step we take should be taken with a lot of caution. 

It is true that sometimes the way we have been operating in this Parliament has brought in a lot of concern. The way our Ministers have been operating vis-à-vis their attendance in Parliament. It is true that the way their responsibilities are scheduled sometimes makes them look as if they are inefficient because in most cases they have got to be at the districts; in their own constituencies and at the same time they have got to play their national role as Ministers. But this does not really take us to the extent of having Ministers who are not Members of Parliament. 

In my view, Members of Parliament have ambitions when we go into politics. We want to come to Parliament and rise to the highest level, and this is what has been motivating some Members to work hard. I cannot imagine a situation where an elected Member of Parliament knows he will be nothing but just a Member of Parliament and will remain strong politically. What would be our highest point of achievement in politics? (Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Toskin to tell this House that a hon. Member of Parliament is inferior to a Minister?

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear him say so. Proceed.

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, thank you for that very wise ruling.  Mr. Speaker, even the Member who has just raised the point of order knows it very well. How was he when he was a Minister of State for Defence and what is he now? We know these things have happened. I know very well that hon. Omara Atubo has ever since he was dropped from the ministerial post continued to be a very useful Member of Parliament. What would it have been if he did not have the opportunity of coming back to Parliament? We would have lost such a good person. We would have lost so many others here.  

We also know a former Minister of State – It would appear that when Ministers are dropped, the President has lost interest or trust in them. But that Minister did not tell us the reasons why he thinks he was dropped. It is true if the President has the liberty to pick on Members of Parliament to promote and drop others. This makes good politics. Where would he get the manpower? Members need to know that we form the top layer of manpower of this country. We are not so many. It is out of the people who have been tested from the ground that the President can have confidence of their ability to perform.

I also want to add here that it would be so absurd for us to debate here and raise issues about our constituencies, raise questions about what is happening and what is not happening in the constituencies and there is no Minister who can answer immediately. We have tried to “roast” our colleagues here but they have stood up and explained to us here. We have not had to wait for another time when somebody, who is a Minister seated somewhere, could be called to come and explain to Parliament. This is what we have enjoyed all this time.  

I appeal to Members to give our country time to evolve and mature. Do not look at America and think Uganda can become America immediately. How? We cannot become America today. America is made of 52 states with a lot of manpower, with very high technology and resources. These beggars of Uganda, we are still a begging country and we want to copy, it would be absurd! I respect the hon. Members who came up with this motion, but let us give ourselves time. There will come a time when we shall mature enough to adopt the type of political system, which we are calling for now. Otherwise, I thank Members for listening to me and pray that we take caution on this. I thank you Mr. Speaker.    

MAJ.KAZOORA JOHN (Kashari County, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I would like to start by echoing what hon. Kyemba said. When we are legislating we should not look at individuals. May I also say that when we are making laws, we should not make them depending on where we are seated at the moment and what we expect to be, but to make an objective law.

When we started this Sitting, hon. Onapito said he was concerned to be moving such an important motion when the entire Front Bench was almost empty. When hon. Mayanja Nkangi stood up and said the Ministers were in Cabinet, there was a chorus answer that ‘let them stay there’. This showed that Ministers have got special roles which they do at specific times and therefore, should not hamper the working of the rest of the Members of Parliament as it was witnessed afternoon.

I do not entirely agree with the hon. Kutesa that when we talk of separation of powers, we are talking of physical separation, not at all. We are talking of roles, not mingling the roles. Look at this; we talk of the three arms of Government. Cabinet goes and sits, we do not know what they discuss. They will come here and tell us what they want us to know. The Speaker is number three in the country, he should know what is happening. Why should he not enjoy sitting in Cabinet so that he is not briefed but knows what goes on to be able to direct how the country’s policies should be made. I am waiting for the day when we shall have here a Minister acting as a Judge so that we also know what is happening in courts so that we are not separate.  Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)            

CAPT.MUKULA: I am seeking clarification Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Member for Kashari, Maj. Kazoora for giving way. I am just seeking clarification so that my colleagues and I are guided. Apart from the United States of America, which has got 52 States, which other country in the world has got Ministers, who are appointed and who are not Members of Parliament? I just want to seek that clarification (Laughter.).

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Proceed hon. Kazoora

MR.KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Information.

THE SPEAKER: I said hon. Kazoora should proceed then you can put your information. You do not put your information too.

MAJ.KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR.KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Information (Laughter). Thank you hon. Kazoora for giving way. I just want to give this information to clarify on hon. Mukula’s question that which country actually operates this type of Government being suggested by this motion. I can also say that there is no country in the whole world that is practising the Movement type of politics. (Laughter and Applause.).

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker I would like hon. Kazoora to clarify whether there is no country on this continent that has ever fought a war inside its borders without any common border with any other country and succeeded other than here in Uganda (Laughter.). Thank you.

MAJ.KAZOORA: In short Mr. Speaker, hon. Mukula is being informed that we can have our own experiences and our own strategies. 

I was saying we are not talking of physical separation, we are talking of roles and when the hon. Sam Kutesa was talking of the hybrid type of arrangement here, this hybrid should not only be in Parliament. If it is to be hybrid, let it be in Cabinet, let it be in the district and everywhere. I get saddened when I hear some of our hon. Members sitting in this House, who have been here for four and half years, who have seen what has been happening in this House, to oppose this motion. That they want Parliament shredded when they have this experience.  Shredded until it is naked. It is sad! It is sad when a Member of Parliament stands up and says, ‘you do not come here to remain a mere Member of Parliament but you must climb up to become a Minister’, and he is proud! I wish his constituents could listen to that. Who can look down on me in Kashari? Ask these Ministers who have been there. I am confident, I know what I am doing, I know what to get whether I am a Minister or not and my people respect me. How can you call me a mere Member of Parliament? It is very bad. 

I get surprised with some Members of Parliament, including the hon. Member for Soroti Municipality, who have stood here at one time or another and said the problems is because we have Constituency Ministers. How many times has it been said on the Floor of the House? And we are saying we are trying to cure this disease of Constituency Ministers! Be a Minister for the country and they will respect you, (Applause) and the choice is yours. We are saying we are going to start this with the 7th Parliament. Come knowing that I am going to be a Member of Parliament or a Minister. What is wrong with that? This is sensitive. Sensitivity depends on whether I want to be very sensitive to the people who brought me here in the first place, or if I want to put that sensitivity elsewhere. The choice, still, is on the Member.  

Still on the Constituency Minister, members who border Constituencies that have Ministers know what we are talking about. The other day over 100 Members went to Buhweju in the constituency of the hon. Bantariza Francis. They passed through Sheema North, which borders Buhweju. The moment you leave the border and enter Buhweju, you know you have left Sheema North and you are in Buhweju. Same district but that was the time. 

The other day I visited the hon. Nkuuhe’s Constituency, he borders the hon. Kategaya’s Constituency. You leave Rwampara, you know you have entered Isingiro South. Very clear signs and same district. You wonder what magic this neighbour of yours – I do not want to go into other details but I am sure those who neighbour them know what I am talking about.  

The other day when there was drought in Western Uganda, there were few seeds and some food given to districts. The policy was that they must go to the district and should be distributed by the Local district authorities. But there was a special consignment for a certain constituency! The district authorities were wondering what do we do, but the answer was on the wall.  

There is a Member who said that we must protect the sanctity of the Constitution. That member was a serious mobiliser when we were amending the Constitution and even moved that we suspend the rules. We did (Laughter.). How people forget so soon! Why can we not be consistent, Mr. Speaker?

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a clarification and I thank my colleague for giving way. When I moved a motion to suspend the rules, it was based on rule (8) suspending rule 73 in order for the Speaker to evoke rule 77. The purpose of that was based on the Constitutional Court ruling, and submission and the summons drawn by hon. Twinomujuni, who was in the lead submission. He made it very clear that in the rules of procedure, nothing showed of physical counting by determining those who are for the motion, those against and those abstaining; and the records determine because in its ruling, rule 76 was null and void. And the House carried that motion, and that was in order.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member for Soroti Municipality in order to try and convince this House that in secret ballot there is no number? Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, I did not understand him to say so.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the wise ruling. My clarification is loud and clear and I am very sure that it has been understood. I thank you.

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I am glad that hon. Mukula knows that there are in-built mechanisms and procedures that allow the change of the Constitution, and that if it can be good yesterday, it can as well be good today.  

Coming to my conclusion, I have said this a number of times. Where Members have performed when they are on the Backbench - I do not want to mention names, but people who are really fire-bland - the moment they move from here to there, they inevitably follow the rules of the game; they cannot do much. You will end up –(Laughter).

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr. Kweronda Ruhemba): Mr. Speaker, I trust that the Member holding the Floor could be referring to me. The information I would like to give is that some of the discussions that take place here, Members of the Front Bench have discussed them elsewhere exhaustively such that when we come here we do not have to repeat ourselves. So, Members of Parliament who do not sit in that other forum should have a chance to discuss those issues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you allow hon. Kazoora to make his concluding remarks.

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I am sure hon. Members know and do remember very active contributions of hon. Kweronda Ruhemba, when he used to sit there. I do not know if he is not making his maiden speech now on that Front Bench. And also, for heaven’s sake, he is exactly enriching my argument that the people of Kajara in Ntungamo district elected hon. Ruhemba Kweronda to speak for them and that they want to hear him speak, not in secrecy. How do I know in Rwashameire that you have said something in Cabinet? This is why I am saying, fine, tell the people of Kajara that ‘the President has appointed you a Minister, they will not hear you speak’, and go and speak in Cabinet, I will not ask you. But the moment you are still an MP for Kajara, hon. Ruhemba, the people of Kajara demand that they hear you. That one is very clear.

In short, I am saying that there is bending of principles the moment we have this amalgamation. With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to say them.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start off by thanking the movers of this motion because I think it is a good motion. But I wanted start from the perspective of history of this motion. What we are debating today, we have debated before, and those who were in the Constituent Assembly debated this motion without any prejudice and they considered several models. 

I agree entirely with hon. Kazoora that when you are debating this motion, you should debate models that are going to help this Country and move it forward. Since he has been debating a model, I just wanted to very quickly give you an insight of what happened in the CA.

In the CA we had people who wanted exactly what we are debating today and we had other people who wanted the British system of Government; and these models were considered. These models gave us two particular important points that I want to raise today:

One is that of the two Cabinets, the Parliamentary System, which is the British Westminster System of Government. Their Cabinet is strong and forms the team of Government; it, actually, is the Government.

Two, the American model. The Cabinet advises the President, and therefore, it is an advisory Cabinet. The difference is that with the British model, they sit in Parliament and therefore, form a strong backbone of Cabinet; a Cabinet that can tell the leader of the country what they should do.   

I have heard insinuations of weaknesses of certain individuals being advanced as the basis of debate. We should not be debating individuals; we should be debating models. And in the CA we considered about four of them; the American, the British, the Swedish and the Swiss, and the one we had had here at the time, the NRC. We also had the South African with the broad-based Government. We decided to take two extremes – the British, having a very strong Cabinet, the American with an advisory Cabinet and we took on the middle course, which was our home ground fashion. Why? Because it gave the Executive President a wider perspective of choosing a team he should work with, and that team, we thought would give the President a chance to choose within and without Parliament. To us, this was broader at the time, and I still think it is broader. Because, if arguments of Ministers not being in their Constituencies is sound, then I will move that some of the Ministers have been to Constituencies of some Members of Parliament and have done a fantastic job. 

When we are debating we should give credit where it is due. Some Ministers, and the majority of them, have done a fantastic job. When I went to Buzibwera in Kashari, I spoke to the teachers and they were convinced that ‘this was the right Minister', and the Member of Parliament told me so. 

I want also to say that we must be careful when we are considering these models. Let us not choose two managers in a Ministry. Technical Managers follow rules; leaders consider all options. The people in this House are leaders. They have been sieved out of millions of people. We have 20 million people in Uganda; these are the best leaders we have in Uganda. And in my opinion, had the people of Isingiro not chosen certain Members of Parliament, I would never have known them. In fact, one time we had a small talk with hon. Nathan Byanyima and I said, ‘hon. Nathan Byanyima, you are a brilliant Member of Parliament, but had the people of Bukanga not chosen you I would never have known your leadership qualities’. 

Hon. Nathan Byanyima, in my opinion, has all the qualities of a good Minister and as far as I am concerned every Member of this House has qualities of being a Minister. So, when we are debating you can imagine if hon. Gumisiriza could be a Minister; he is a tall man, smart and a good debater. 

I wanted to bring out a point that Ministers have collective responsibilities - yes they do. Because when they are in Cabinet, not only do they debate, they actually change a lot of the things that you eventually receive here. The debates, because of the oath we take, cannot be put in newspapers. But the Members you have on Cabinet are very good debaters and they have done a good job. 

I have been in several Ministries; please, do not introduce two Permanent Secretaries to run a Ministry.  Let us have a manager who is a Permanent Secretary, and let us have leaders chosen by the people to make sure the programme and manifesto of a Government is implemented.  There is a difference, for those who have done management, between a leader and a manager; and here we are talking about leaders; and which better place to get leaders than the Parliament of Uganda! They have already been tested and they have proved beyond reasonable doubt that they are leaders (Interruption.). I will take the clarification.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you for allowing me to ask for this clarification. The Bill says the President has a whole Country to choose including those in Parliament. Now, the argument by the hon. Member on the Floor is that we have the best leaders here and that they should be the ones to be appointed. Has he understood that actually this Bill does not bar the President from choosing from the very leaders he is talking about and in fact choosing people who will actually forward and promote this manifesto from the very Members?

CAPT.BUBU: I would like to thank hon. Ongom for his contribution. Hon. Ongom, I had not finished. I was still debating and I was going to conclude. If you were patient, I was going to come to that point. My argument had not even reached the separation of powers, which is the next point on my programme. 

There is a belief that we have separation of power and that there is no such a thing as horizontal linkages. I disagree. I think even the model, which is supposedly being quoted here in America, the president of the Senate is the Vice President of the United States. There is therefore a linkage, the Supreme Court; the judges are chosen by the administration in power at the time whenever the place falls due. There is therefore, a linkage. In fact, during impeachment, it is the Chief Justice who sits in that chair in the Senate. I find it rather weak that we should sit here and misunderstand - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon Babu, I am protecting you. Do not worry; just address us - (Laughter)

CAPT.BABU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is therefore, important that whilst we are talking about the separation power, we must emphasise more the balancing of powers.  It is much more balancing of powers than the separation of powers. And if you find that interesting, you will find that actually each of these arms of Government is interconnected. The trinity is one and that forms the Government and for those who think that the trinity must be separated so that we have three of them at a go, that is not true; they are all inter-linked. It is the trinity of - (Interruption) - Yes please.

MR.OWINY DOLLO: Mr. Speaker, I thought at this juncture I should inform the House and I thank the hon. Babu for giving way on this issue of trinity. In all the democracies that I can think of, the President, who is Chief Executive, is also the final man in the legislature. It is his signature that converts a Bill into Law. The President, who is a Chief Executive, is actually the last Court of Appeal because after all the courts in the Country have condemned you to death, it is only the President, through the prerogative of mercy, who can actually save your life. I thank you.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Member and I would like to assure you that point does hammer the separation of powers and the balancing of powers in place. 

Now, for people who might be weak in working those should be treated individually. But you should not use that a basis for deciding a model for this Country. I will oppose Members of Parliament leaving this House when they are appointed as Ministers because I think they enrich this Parliament. And not only that, we have a specific model that is different from all. Other people probably should now copy our model; we should not be changing it.  This model we decided has only worked for five years and it has not failed. If individuals have failed, then the individuals should be pointed out. But we should not kill the model which we think is home grown, is a good model, and hon. Members will not want our Cabinet weakened. 

Our Cabinet should be strong; it should help the present who are in this country. And not only that, in a democracy like ours, this House is a training ground not only for Members of Parliament but even for future Presidents and even Ministers. This is the best we have so far.  

I would like to end by saying that, whilst the motion is good as an academic exercise, in my opinion, and sincerely too, after we finish debating this motion, we should look at all these models very carefully. We should consider a model that takes our environment in view, and that model is the one we have in the Constitution. Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I oppose the motion.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been listening to Members from the beginning of the debate and I have come to realise that unless we become more responsible in debating matters of national concern and of modernising governance objectively, we are not going to move this country further. 

I have seen and listened to members of Parliament talking, for example, about personal ambitions or growth in the politics of this country. We look at growth as something that is possible only through being elected to Parliament, then through Parliament you get promoted to a Cabinet level and perhaps you end there. It is very, very unfortunate if leaders promise the people that they are going to Parliament to make good laws and to ensure that the Executive is accountable to the people of Uganda, yet within themselves, hidden from the people who elected them, they come and look for Cabinet posts. It is unfortunate! We had this kind of thing during campaigns, which led to misinformation to the electorate that ‘the role of Members of Parliament is a,b,c,d. I am so close to the President, if you elect me, I will become a Minister and perhaps build for you a road’. This is misleading and I think we should desist from some of these things. 

Personally, my concern and understanding is that I was elected as a Member of Parliament to come and perform my role in Parliament. I am elected not to become confrontational to the Executive arm of Government but to work with them in harmony in order to foster good understand. But the perception from hon. Francis Babu is that they would like to have a strong Executive by having representation in Parliament. In other words, by being Members of Parliament, you can have a strong Executive. But I think let us not even argue about models because people who argue about them do not even understand these kinds of models. 

Models evolve from practice. You may be able to theorise what you have seen into a system. A model is not rigid, a model can be transformed; a model can change. We have talked about American and British models, and that kind of thing. We also have our own models in Uganda and I think we are entitled to changing them to suit the environment. We have seen it in practice, at least for the last four years and some few months that I have been in this House, I have been extremely disappointed with the performance of some of the Ministers who are elected Members of Parliament. At least, I appreciate the performance of the Ministers who were appointed outside Parliament. For example, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he has performed exceptionally well. When he was Minister of Education, he performed very well. As a Minister of Public Service and now as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, I think he is doing extremely well. 

I think the Minister of Energy is doing very well, and we have seen a lot of changes. She has always consulted us in this House and she has very good working relations with the elected Members of Parliament in this House. I do not want to name Ministers, but I think the elected Members of Parliament who are Ministers have been constrained because of a number of things among which is the heavy responsibility of Cabinet. They do not have time to go out and consult their electorates on all the Bills that come into this House. 

The Ministers have problems with what I have always heard as “collective responsibility” such that sometimes the views of the people of Uganda are actually different from Government position. But when these Ministers come here, they prefer to keep quiet so as not to contradict themselves. This is unfortunate because you are doing a disservice to the people who elected you into this House.  They want to hear you talk freely against Government position. And if you stand up to talk against Government position, you are not against the Government; you are not attacking the Government. You are merely playing your role in Parliament, to check the Executive and make them perform.  

The expectation of the public about the Parliament of Uganda is great, but we have had problems of quorum in this House. The problem of lack of quorum has sometimes arisen partly because the Front bench is empty. And when we talk about the Executive, we mean those in the directorate of Government Departments because they constitute part of the Executive. We have heard many of them vying for promotions from Director perhaps to National Political Commissars, and I think if they concentrated on mobilisation in the countryside without wasting time in Parliament, such a promotion would definitely come.  

Hon. Sam Kutesa was talking about the President being directly elected. I think hon. Sam Kutesa knows very well that he is now more useful to his people than when he was on the Front Bench. Hon. Sam Kutesa has performed extremely well since he joined us on the Backbench and I am being informed that he was very rare in the House when he was in Cabinet. But today, hon. Sam Kutesa is contributing to reducing the quorum problem in this House.  

The President of this country is directly elected by the people of Uganda. He has his powers as somebody directly elected by the population in this country. Therefore, we must also give him the opportunity to choose outside Parliament the people, who should pursue his manifesto, promote and implement it. He is a directly elected President and he is directly accountable to the people of Uganda. The role of this Parliament is to make sure that he performs well.

MR. KANIA: Thank you hon. Reagan for giving the way.  If it is true that the President is directly elected by the people of Uganda, and they have given him executive powers to choose a team to lead this country; why do you want to deny him one particular organ from which he can choose leaders with whom to lead this country?

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and I would like to thank hon. Reagan Okumu for giving way.  What is in the Constitution is what he has just stated, that the President is elected and has powers under the constitution to choose from anywhere, anybody to implement his manifesto. The question therefore is, if that is already in the Constitution, what are you seeking to amend?

MR. WACHA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Reagan Okumu for giving way. I want to inform hon. Okumu Reagan that the position as seen by the Bill gives the President wider areas to choose from. What the Bill is talking about is that once the President has chosen you, hon. Reagan Okumu, from Parliament to be in his Cabinet, you give way and concentrate on your duties as a Cabinet Minister (Applause.).

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, is hon. Ben Wacha in order to mislead this House by stating that the object of this amendment is to give the President wider space when in fact the amendment does not allow any wider space for the President, other than to say that if he chooses one from Parliament, he must get out of Parliament? That is not wider. It is only to remove you from Parliament. It does not increase the scope.

THE SPEAKER: I look at it this way. The moment you put conditionalities in the area, which the President can fish from, then you are actually narrowing the scope. Because some people are saying that the moment the President chooses someone, there must be an undertaking that will he serve the full length without the President either dismissing or re-arranging his Government. So, that may give the impression that it is more restrictive. I think what hon. Ben Wacha was trying to argue was comparing this scenario of restrictiveness to the one that is provided in the Constitution for a wider consultation; and therefore he is not out of order.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN: Mr. Speaker, my last point is actually to clarify what hon. Obiga Kania wanted me to re-echo. The President is directly elected by the people of Uganda and he also knows that the President is elected with specific responsibilities and the executive power is vested in him. He also knows that the Members of Parliament are elected with specific responsibilities, to come in this House and perform their roles. Therefore, it would be a contradiction for a Member of Parliament, having been elected by his people, to reach here and cross the Floor to perform the role of the Executive. He will be doing disservice to the people who elected him.  

I support this motion and I think the people of goodwill in this country represented by Members in this House should support it so that we fulfil our responsibilities in as far as separation of powers is concerned. I do not see a situation where, in future Members of Parliament – because according to the argument being advanced by some hon. Members –(interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I gave you an opportunity to conclude. You are now opening up.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN: I am concluding Mr. Speaker. I was wondering whether Members of Parliament would also advocate for being judges. Because the argument being advanced by some Members tantamount to the same. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to start by making observations about the report of the Committee. I was very enthusiastic when I saw the Committee list many important institutions, which they consulted. I thought we would benefit from a summary of the positions taken by these institutions, like the Law Development Centre, the Attorney General, and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Unfortunately, a summary of the contributions of these very important institutions has not been given in the report. I think that one was an omission.  

Secondly, I have read this report and I find some of the statements more of presumption than statements, which can be backed by hard evidence. For example, on page two, the committee says under number three that “the Bill does not create an extra cost since the Constitution envisages Ministers who may not be Members of Parliament”. I think this is not accurate because when I read through the Bill, it does not maintain the status quo now. Under the current law, when you are appointed a Minister from outside Parliament, you become an ex-officio Member. But in this Bill, there is no mention about maintaining this principle. 

Furthermore, from the Committee’s report, it is very clear that there is desire to de-link completely. That means in addition to the 280 Members of Parliament, you will have 60 or whatever number of Cabinet the President decides to appoint. Definitely, that will be extra cost regardless of how much it is. So, this should not be used to circumvent our legal provisions where for example under the Constitution a Bill with financial implications should come from Cabinet. I think it should be addressed.  Is it proper for this Bill, which is initiated by a Private Member, which is going to have substantial financial implications, to be addressed and debated without it being resolved whether it is within our powers under the Constitution to entertain the Bill?  

The Committee further says on the same page, that currently Members of Parliament are compromised by the desire to become Ministers. I do not know, on empirical evidence, how many Members are aspiring to become Ministers. I wonder how many have been aspiring. I do not know whether you can really make this statement with a lot of confidence, that performance of MPs has been hampered by the desire to become Ministers. I do not know. There is no basis on which this statement can stand, as far as I am concerned.

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: I would like to get clarification from hon. Baku where he has been living for the last five years? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.BAKU: Mr. Speaker, I have been living in this Parliament and I have witnessed Members of Parliament debating here very frankly, very vibrantly. We have even passed censor motions where Ministers are involved. We have even forced some Ministers who were threatened with censor to resign on their own volition. I think that indicates the strength and power of Parliament regardless of whether Ministers have been sitting here or not.  Parliament has been able to achieve its intended programmes.  

Now, the other area, which I would like to dwell on, is the issue of separation of powers. I think separation of powers has been presented here as the central point.  Separation of powers should not really be seen in the context of exclusion, physical or otherwise, but as division of functions. We should think more of functional separation of powers, not physical separation.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure. The import of this Bill, as hon. Baku has stated, has implications on the Budget. Under Article 93 of the Constitution and I would like to read it, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government- 	
    (a) proceed upon a Bill including an amendment Bill that makes a provision for any of the following-  
    i) the imposition of taxation or alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; or 
    ii) the imposition of a charge on a Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of such a charge other than by reduction;” - That one as a catch on this Bill.
I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I take it that that is one of the points you are debating. So, let us proceed with the debate and -(Interruption)

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, the Constitution under Article 93 says very clearly that we should not proceed.

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for a Member to raise this so-called Constitutional issue when we are not in fact debating about increment of expenses and so forth? We are not debating the budget. We are not debating anything that is going to increase this Budget for this year. The Bill says very clearly that if the motion is passed, this thing will take effect next financial year, in which case the Executive will have time to include whatever cost that is to be involved in the Budget. So, is he in order to mislead the House?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that is a rather technical point, which the hon. Member is raising. I think he is free to raise it to be considered but I would rather that he perhaps uses it as a point of argument.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I am just saying that procedurally under Article 93, this motion or this Bill is a stillbirth because of the constitutional provision. I think that Parliament, under Article 79 will make rules for the good governance of this country but we must also ensure that we are cautious of some of the provisions and some of the Articles that are encased for the good governance of this country.  

This Bill has got a lacking position in terms of the charge and that is why I am saying that it has got a direct bearing under Article 93 sub section (2) on a charge on the Consolidated -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural point there.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, my understanding of what hon. Mukula is trying to drive at and what he is trying to saying is that if we pass this motion we are automatically increasing the Wage Bill on Government. And since Parliament is not allowed to do that, therefore, we should not discuss this motion. But the purpose of this debate, among other amendments which will come, is that for instance Dick Nyai is going to move that since we have separation of powers, the size of the Cabinet should be as in the Constitution, Article 113(2), which says , “Cabinet shall be of 21 members and no more.”  So, can he please allow us and allow hon. Baku develop his argument then we shall come to –(Interruption)

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I sympathise with my colleague, the hon. Member for Soroti Municipality, Capt. Mike Mukula. The procedure we have in this House is that Private Members’ Bills end up in Cabinet before they come to this House. I believe hon. Mukula does not sit in Cabinet and nobody on the front bench has raised the procedural issue that he is raising. And in any case, who told him that this Bill is going to levy a charge on the Consolidated Fund? It depends on his interpretation.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we need your guidance because the point the hon. Member is labouring does not in fact have any effect on the Consolidated Fund.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you should take the question of the applicability of Article 93 in the context of the current Government Budget because you are talking of surcharge, you are talking of increment and so on and so forth. But if I understood the background or the intention of the Bill, they are saying that if this law is passed, it should take effect some other time.  That is my understanding. I do not know whether this really transgresses Article 93 of the Constitution.

MR.KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Speaker, I am sure Members of Parliament are aware that we operate a Budget framework which lasts three years and the ceilings for three years are already determined. If this Bill passes, and even if the President chooses to always appoint Ministers outside Parliament, this will shake the Budget ceiling. In other words, even if he appoints 21 Ministers outside Parliament this is an extra cost to Government as far as the Budget framework is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but that is Budget framework you are working on. You will reach a stage and you take into account what Parliament has decided. We are not talking about the current Budget, you have passed the Budget, you have put the ceiling and if the import of the Bill were to increase what you have passed, then I would understand.  

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, there has been a precedent already on this matter. This issue was raised when we were debating The Administration of Parliament Act. Then it was an argument that The Administration of Parliament Act did create a charge on the Consolidated Fund and the matter was sorted out. This Bill is not the one creating a charge. When you pass it and it becomes a law, the charge on the Consolidated Fund will come through the Finance Bill and the Budget. As you have pointed out, it is not this Bill.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I do respect the views of my colleague, but I would like Parliament to be very cautious about this.  We are all very responsible Members of Parliament, but I think if you look at Article 93, it is very clear that Parliament shall, not unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government. 

Two, the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or alteration of any such a charge otherwise done by reduction is a constitutional matter which needs to be made very clear. Short of that we are going against the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you, it is a constitutional matter, but at what point do you levy a charge on the Consolidated Fund?

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukula, I thought you have read my mind on this matter. Now what am I supposed to say? To say you are out of order, you know it is impolite. I treat hon. Members with respect; I do not want to be too blunt.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I am most obliged.

MR.BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleague, hon. Mukula, for putting more details by quoting from the Constitution. The reason why I raised the issue is because I have not seen any mention about it in the report. So, I was not sure whether it has been deliberate upon and addressed. 

I would like to draw the attention of both the Chairman and the Minister responsible for this sector to address his mind to it so that by the time they reply, they give us some satisfactory answer that that matter was addressed and we are not acting unconstitutionally.  

My political reason for opposing the Bill is the following. I think our democracy is still young. We are implementing a Movement Political System, which is unique, which has not been replicated; anywhere we cannot compare it with American system. In America, they have federal System; they have a presidential system, which distinguishes it from our system here. 

In Uganda, because of our level of economic development and because of the Movement philosophy, our emphasis is on creating linkages among the political class. We want to have a political class, which works in harmony with each other. We do not intend to create a political class, which is antagonistic to each other.  

The other day when we had problem with the courts, some people even made a proposal that we should have an informal meeting with the Chief Justices and the others so that you can see that you are moving in harmony in order to protect the public interest. I think the role of Parliament and the role of Cabinet is to serve the people of Uganda. The people’s interest can be ascertained and defended and protected even better when Cabinet and Parliament to sit together and interact and deliberate together as we have been doing. 

The need for linkages and interactions has been even more realised on very many occasions when Committees of Parliament on their own initiative sought meetings with the Chief Executive. And the Chief Executive has on several occasions sought meetings with Members of Parliament on a regional or Committee basis because of that need, so that we are able to look at things from a common perspective and be able to address our national issues as a class of political leaders not as separate groups of Cabinet and Parliament.

There is also need for balancing. I think the most important area where we can assist the head of State is in giving him some indication of what we think is the proper level of balances. Right now the Constitution gives him the leeway to appoint as Ministers both Members of Parliament and from outside. So, now if politically we think he needs to balance say maybe, 70 per cent should be Members of Parliament and 20 per cent from outside. This could be through continuous political discussion with whoever is in the office other than through legislation. I think we are running into a danger of over legislation. We must leave some areas for the political judgement of the person in office so that he takes political responsibility when he does not balance the political forces well, so that he can also take political credibility when he balances the political forces well.  

So, I think this is an area where we really do not need legislation. I think the CA did a very good job when they said you are free to pick either from outside or from Parliament. And if you pick from Parliament, the person whom you pick is going to serve the mandate he gets from his people together with your mandate, and in any case which mandate we get that is separate and different from the mandate which a President gets. 

If you, as a Member of Parliament, are assisting the head of State in implementing a programme, which he has successfully sold to the population, will that not also be your programme? Will you have a different programme from that of the President who has appointed you in Cabinet? 

So, I think there is no serious reason that has been articulated since this debate started to give physical separation as a form of separation of powers. I think powers are defined in the Constitution. Let Cabinet exercise its powers as by Constitution and when Members of Cabinet sit in Parliament they exercise their powers as legislators as per the Constitution. I think it is possible and it has been done. I think we can continue with the system.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is a convenient moment for us to have a break. But I urge you that tomorrow when we convene, we should be able to realise the correct number so that we can take a decision on the Bill which we are about to get into Committee Stage.  Because we could not pronounce ourselves on that for lack of quorum, we had to skip it. I would like to urge you to come on time so that we can dispose of that matter and proceed with this debate. Thank you. The House is adjourned until 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.24p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11th October 2000 at 2.00p.m.)

