Thursday 15, October 2009

Parliament met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and apologise for the delay in starting. Too many things have been happening this morning but I hope we shall be able to catch up. 

I shall adjust the Order Paper briefly to permit the Parliamentarian’s Forum on the Millennium Development Goals to make a statement. 

I also want to urge the committee dealing with the issue of the Buganda Road Flats tenants’ problem to please save me from continuous visits by these tenants because they brought their petition here two years ago and I do not know why it has not been completed. My work was to receive and transmit to the committee, which I did although, I have not heard from the committee and I do not know what is happening and these people are continuously in my office. Please, help me complete that matter so that I can do my work. 

I would like to inform you that there will be a grand reunion of the Makerere University alumni on 27th and 28th of November 2009 where the chief guest will be His Excellency Emeritus Benjamin Mkapa, former President of Tanzania and of course an alumnus of Makerere University. There are also going to be several activities including exhibitions, beautifying of Makerere, the grand match of the alumni, discussions on the role of the alumni in institutional governance and development, and discussions on the future of Makerere. This will be crowned by a grand dinner, which I am sure the Members will enjoy. There will also be community service activities with students cleaning Wandegeya. Some Members of this House are coordinators of that activity like hon. Elly Tumwine and hon. Dombo. I know that among the staff we have the alumni of Makerere and I would like the staff to choose among themselves some coordinators so that we can have a grand reunion. It is intended that this will be an annual event and I therefore urge members of the alumni to respond [Mr Reagan Okumu: “It should be based on halls.”] based on halls? No. I think let us start with the general one for everybody. But if you are able to organise in your halls of residence, then maybe that is even better. 

11.16
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you for the communication. I would like to thank you for raising such an important item on the agenda in your communication on the Buganda Road Flats and tenants. This was raised in a petition through you, Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Finance and Planning to resolve the issue of the liability that the National Housing and Construction Corporation has with the sitting tenants of Buganda Road. However, as you have rightly pointed out, it is two years since that petition was brought to the committee and to date, the report has not yet come out and the committee has never given a valid reason for their delay in expediting an issue affecting the citizens of this country who are on tension and are everyday fearing eviction and whose livelihood and work are suffering. Most of these people are civil servants, teachers, doctors who are serving this nation and are residents of hitherto government provided pool houses. But now they are getting threatening letters and there are new communications every day from the National Housing and Construction Corporation as if the matter is not before Parliament or as if the committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her finish. 

MRS SEMPALA: When things like that take two years, so many issues are raised behind doors. Now rumours are rife that the deal has been sealed and the committee has been compromised – those are the rumours that are going through the members who are saying their report is not coming out. The committee should come out to allay the fears of the members –(Interruption)

MR OLENY: This is important because of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We shall receive it. Let her finish and we shall receive your information.  

MRS SEMPALA: These people are no longer working and the recent development is that they raised their rent by 100 percent. That means they are being evicted through other means. I ask the chair of the committee to come and explain to this House why he and his committee are sitting on this report of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the committee? 

MR OKUMU: The additional information I want to give is about the residents of Bugolobi Flats who have also brought their complaints before this House. The matter was raised on the Floor of this Parliament but as we speak now, the National Housing and Construction Corporation has also increased what they should have been paying by 100 percent, which is very unfair especially for the Bugolobi Flats because by the time they wanted to pay, the National Housing and Construction Corporation alleged that the land titles were not available and the other flats were sold and people bought them at different rates. A year after, the National Housing and Construction Corporation comes and says that the titles are now available but at twice the rates the other colleagues bought. I thought that since we are now handling this flats issue, we should also be able to accommodate the Bugolobi Flats because it is an issue that is before this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the other question we should be asking the minister of works is, “Where is the condominium law?” You know we made that law and passed it but what has happened to it?

11.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you. I would like to inform my colleagues that the condominium law is actually working. It was passed and it is in operation but the most important thing we are considering here today is the status of the National Housing and Construction Corporation flats - that is the Bugolobi flats and the Buganda Road flats. 

Bugolobi is actually about the sale of the remaining blocks – block 31 and 32 - where some of our colleagues reside. That has been handled and as I speak, the Prime Minister’s Office resolved that issue and it is going to be communicated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from one of the tenants. 

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. This morning, when I got here, I found a letter in my pigeon hole written to us as members of the committee that is steering the sale of blocks 31 and 32 of National Housing and Construction Corporation. It is written by the Senior Private Secretary to the Prime Minister. Actually, this letter does not state anything conclusive. I just received it this morning. 

We contested the sale because they raised the price from Shs 47 million for the people who paid in February this year like hon. Bahati, to Shs 90 million. I am a tenant and hon. Migereko is a tenant on the same block where I live but they doubled the price and as if that were not enough, honourable minister, you are aware that last month alone, they wrote to us a letter raising rent by 200 percent - actually three times what we have been paying so that they delay the sale and they recover the money from the increased rent, which we shall pay. Right now I have a letter here, which does not show the way forward at all. The rent is due next month and it is just two weeks to next month such that we start paying thrice what we have been paying. We do not see any condominium agreement with them and the whole thing has been put to a halt. 

Last week, I met Keith Muhakanizi here at Parliament and he said he has resigned as Chairman of National Housing and Construction Corporation. The whole thing has turned into a circus. People do not have peace of mind and we cannot work; we are running around like headless chicken to have this matter resolved so that we can have a roof over our heads. We need this matter to be concluded. 

Madam Speaker, I want to raise another issue that members must note. There were two blocks of the Bukoto Brown flats which were sold much later. This can be investigated. Also, the titles for the two blocks had got lost. It is the same story as it is for us in Bugolobi. When these titles were later found after about three or four years, there wasn’t even a cent added on to what others had paid. So, our worry is, why should we pay double the price of what other people paid just this year in February and yet the same National Housing and Construction Corporation who owns the Bukoto Brown flats where titles of another two blocks had gone missing paid the same rate as everybody else when they were found? Why are we being treated differently?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And honourable minister, before you come in, I just want to tell you how difficult the situation is that I am in. These tenants brought their children to me in big numbers so that the children can tell me the stress they are going through. I cannot work. That is one of the reasons I was late this morning; trying to keep them out of my office. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let the minister, hon. Werikhe, not tell you lies -(Interjections)– no, wait, I am going to guide you. The issue –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, parliamentary language is something we respect when carrying on debate on the Floor of the House. Is it in order for hon. Byanyima to say that a distinguished minister is telling lies to the House when he knows the minister is telling nothing but the truth? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has a good record but I do not know what the honourable member is trying to say. The minister is a good man. (Laughter)

MR BYANYIMA: I sincerely apologise. The issue is that all of us who are here took time to have the Condominium Act in place because we were looking especially at the flats but as soon as we did it, the National Housing and Construction Corporation went in for privatisation which moved from the Ministry of Works to Ministry of Finance. So, when writing to the Prime Minister, the big people to see are the Minister of Finance. This Kamuntu who is standing here today should be the person to come out and say, “Why do you give chance to one group to buy the flat and deny the other the chance?” I stayed in the flats and I know that people are paying rent almost to the tune of what would have been the cost of the flat because they have been denied the right. As we speak, the people of Buganda Road flats are in a desperate state because of one or two people - Keith Muhakanizi and another group under privatisation. The issue is no longer with the Ministry of Works; the issue is with the Minister of Finance. Let Kamuntu and Syda Bbumba come here, not Werikhe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we can hear from Werikhe. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I am happy that my colleague has apologised because hon. Byanyima knows my track record very well and it is impeccable because I have never appeared anywhere as not doing my work very well. [Hon. Members: “What about Buikwe?”] For Buikwe, that was a different story and of course that was a pack of lies because there was no way one could have actually set up his own polling station.

It is true that under the PERD Statute under privatisation, the National Housing and Construction Corporation moved from Ministry of Works and Housing then, to the Ministry of Finance. However, the policy issues still remained with the ministry responsible for housing and, therefore, we are not irrelevant to this issue. Even the Condominium Act is still housed under the ministry responsible for housing. So, when the issue came to the Speaker, the petition was also directed at our ministry. We have been handling this issue between the Ministry of Finance and the ministry responsible for housing. That is why I happen to be privy to what took place in the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Concerning the issue of Bugolobi flats, I think the communication is not exhaustive. The issue was resolved and I expected that communication to be conveyed to the relevant residents. I am surprised that there is a letter that is not saying anything. However, that can be put right because everything was discussed and even proposals as to the price were made and that communication was expected to be conveyed. That is something that can be done and the Minister of Finance was tasked to actually do that. Since we have the honourable Minister of Finance here, he can now tell us the exact position that came from the Prime Minister’s office.

Similarly, concerning the issue of Buganda Road flats, which is at hand now, the Ministry of Finance in collaboration with the Prime Minister’s Office is expected to come here and give a position. However, I would also like to pray that we let our members of parliament and the committee handling this issue come up to explain because the report has stayed long and I do not know what has happened. This is because we thought we would work together with the committee to resolve this issue.

11.31
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oleny): Thank you very much. First of all, I will speak on Buganda Road flats, a matter that the Committee on Finance is handling. I want to inform the House that the report is ready. The reason there has been delayed presentation to the House is that some time back in April, the committee duly submitted this report to the Office of the Clerk. You remember very well that in one of the Business Committee meetings that you chaired, we did mention to you that the report was ready. 

We went right ahead and submitted a signed report to the Office of the Clerk. Unfortunately, when we followed it up, they said it had been misplaced. So as we speak, I directed the committee clerk to reproduce another report, which the Members are signing. This report is ready now and anytime we should be available to present it.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am a little bit perturbed about the procedure of committee reports getting into Parliament. I thought that the right procedure would be to bring any committee report that is ready and lay it on the Table but not to channel it to the Office of the Clerk quietly. I thought that the procedure is quite clear that once laid on the Table, it is known by all Members that the report is ready and then it will be the duty of the Office of the Clerk to schedule when such a report should be debated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I am surprised that the report was given to the clerk. Chairpersons should bring one set to the Speaker’s Office and the other one to the Clerk’s Office but I do not remember seeing that report.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. What is the time frame for committees to sit and discuss a matter, carry out due diligence on the process and come to the Chamber to produce the report? This is because we are talking about two or three years now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have to address that to the Rules Committee.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the Minister of Housing, I am just wondering whether we can find a position in between the presentation of the report by the committee and the ongoing issues at Buganda Road flats where action is going on, rent is being increased and threats to evict are going on. Is it possible for the minister to first of all ask National Housing to stay further action until we dispose of this business maybe in a week or two? Can they hold fire as we finish up the report, address the underlying issues and recommend to government what we think the way forward is? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I also ask the members of the Finance Committee to sign that report during lunch time today? If it is ready, sign it and we put in on the Order Paper. We will do our part but, Minister of Finance, you are the one who is in charge of the rent. Can you tell us what you are going to do?

MR OLENY: Madam Speaker, the additional information I want to provide now is that the proposal or suggestion from hon. Alice Alaso is indeed what the committee undertook sometime back. We wrote a letter and this was after an agreement between the committee and the board chairman who is Mr Keith Muhakanizi. We directed that no further action be taken on the tenants while the committee handles the matter. Unfortunately, yesterday the members who were affected came to my office and reported that they have now received a notice to double their rent. I ask the Finance Committee members to sign the report and make it ready for presentation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that report will be discussed on Tuesday next week, without fail.

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I have a different view. When hon. Oleny comes up and confirms that the report got lost and this Parliament accepts that, it is terribly unfortunate! It is not a member of the committee and not even the chairperson of the committee to come and tell this House that the report got lost. It is the Clerk to say that the report got lost. He is not the Clerk. We are being driven into a different direction so that next week, when you are ordering this House to have the report, they will come and tell you the same story because the accurate mandate is not the one stating that the report got lost. I beg that you dismiss the statement from hon. Oleny and you instruct the clerk to bring that very statement that the report got lost from his own office. That would be the correct procedure - but you can guide, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Instead of finding fault, let us produce the report and discuss it next week and help these Ugandans.

MR KYANJO: But that could be a totally different report. The experience of this House is that when a report gets lost - you heard what happened with the Ministry of Defence.                                                                                                                                       

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait until the report comes?

MR KYANJO: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, can you stay action? Tell us what you are going to do, hon. Kamuntu.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for your guidance. Just for purposes of clarity, I want the House to know that the Ministry of Finance and indeed the government is keenly interested in resolving this matter once and for all. There are two things which need to be appreciated. Madam Speaker, I can see you are shaking your head, but this is the truth. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, these people come to my office every month. I have written to the Prime Minister and spoken to him. So when you tell me that the government is keen - because I have made so many calls to the Prime Minister, that minister and hon. Omara Atubo on this matter. Anyway, let him tell us.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I just want to restate what I know. I know you speak to the highest authority but the truth is that National Housing and Construction Corporation which is dealing with these matters is now jointly owned by two governments. Within the agreement of this arrangement, there is a provision that none of the members will do things unilaterally. Consequently, when there are delays in taking decisions, I want members to know that it is not because government is deliberately - it is because government has to consult the partners in the arrangement.

That is why this matter is being handled in the Prime Minister’s Office as Leader of Government Business. Otherwise, it would have been handled in the Ministry of Finance -(Interjections)- I thought I was helping.

MRS SEMPALA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to stand on the Floor of the House, well knowing the plight of the tenants, and say that government is interested and is following keenly? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you know the condominium law was made in the Sixth Parliament. These people are supposed to have benefited since. The government went ahead, oblivious to the interests of the people and got into what you called the so-called joint venture. You cannot say that you are very keen.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I stand here as the Shadow Minister for Housing and Urban Development. When hon. Muhanga brought this issue to the House, we took it up with the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister wrote a letter to the Ministry of Finance asking them to stay the action of throwing the tenants out of the flats. I have been a member of the Finance Committee and indeed we told the Ministry of Finance to assure the tenants that no action would be taken until the report has been discussed here in Parliament. So when the Ministry of Finance says that because National Housing also has interests in the Buganda Road flats, it brings us to a point where we ask, how did the National Housing and Construction Corporation go to the Libyan company? Because we have also to find out how it went to them. It went to them under dubious circumstances and this House must find out why Ugandans are being thrown out.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I think it is not true that the company went to the Libyan government under dubious circumstances -(Interjections)- I mean Libyan company under dubious circumstances. We have all the transactions on record. We are -(Interjections)- the shareholding is 49:51. We own 51 and the Libyans own 49. All these details can be availed since we are going to debate the report. The most important thing here is: can we now find a solution to the current problem to stay the action of rental increment until we debate that report and then we take final decisions as to what the rent should be? That one is going to be conveyed by the Minister of Finance and then the rest can be handled after the debate of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, tell us about the stay.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I was building a case to pronounce myself on this matter -(Laughter)- but Members are so impatient and I do not understand. I wanted to give this information so that it is understood why some decisions are delayed and also to confirm - frankly how can a democratically elected government not respond to the demands of the very people who voted it? And you are asking me whether it is in order? You cannot expect a democratically elected government not to want to respond to the very people who voted it.

And let me say it emphatically. Because this matter involves foreign governments, it has to be handled by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and matters have been discussed. That is why even letters being received by hon. Muhanga are coming from the Prime Minister’s Office. Otherwise, they would have been coming from Ministry of Finance -(Interjections)- why not?

I agree that we stay execution until the report of the committee has been tabled and on the basis of the debate, we make final decisions. If that can ease the anxiety -(Interjections)- yes, I am saying we stay action as requested until -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you communicate?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I address -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you communicate to National Housing to stay action? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will invite the minister in charge of housing to do so -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I speak through you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, National Housing is in your docket. It is within your power to say, “I am staying execution.”

PROF. KAMUNTU: In your own words, I am staying execution -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And communicate to the National Housing Corporation in writing. You must write today.

PROF. KAMUNTU: You have directed and I have concurred but tomorrow, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is this House directing you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I have stayed execution of increment on the rent until the report of the committee has been debated in this House and subsequent decisions will be based on the outcome of this discussion. 

MR BYANYIMA: We were in a committee of budget when we said we shall not vote for money for the Road Fund when we do not have an accounting officer. The committee directed the PS Kassami to write a letter appointing an accounting officer and within 15 minutes he had done it. Let this gentleman, (Kamuntu), go and write a letter, bring it here and lay it on the Table -(Applause)- because this business of dilly-dallying should not continue. The history is like this, before any other company came into a joint venture, members who were staying in those flats had already been give allocation letters. Here we voted money for the purpose of surveying, but because we did not have enough surveyors to have separate surveys, we voted money so that they could employ private people to beef up the people in the Ministry of Lands to get titles; whether Libya came, they came too late - the rights are for Ugandans. 

Kamuntu should bring a letter today. These gentlemen are always telling lies, I am sorry to say, let me repeat it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: We do respect the honesty and integrity of Members of Parliament. We do not lie; we may not see eye to eye with the truth but we never lie. Is it in order for the Member to continue saying that we are lying when we are telling the honest truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he has used un-parliamentary language but please, bring the letter and table it here in the afternoon. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I oblige, Madam Speaker.

MR WACHA: I am happy that we are moving towards resolving this matter, but I do not want us to discuss the report on Tuesday and then refer the issue again to the Office of the Prime Minister. I would suggest that just as hon. Kamuntu is going to bring a letter in the afternoon stopping other matters from proceeding in respect to rent, we also get all details of what has transpired so far in respect to Buganda Road Flats in the office of the Prime Minister so that by the time we discuss the issue on Tuesday, we are comparing issues as to what the committee has decided and what the Prime Minister has done so far so that we do not have to refer the issue back to his office. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): First of all, I would like to inform the House that we have no problem in releasing Prof. Kamuntu from Parliament so that he can work on that letter. (Applause)

Two, as Office of the Prime Minister, we shall work with the line ministries to make sure that all relevant information on this matter is made available so that we can be in a position to sustainably resolve this problem. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: We conduct our business through your chair, Madam Speaker. In your communication from the Chair you made a comment about Makerere University and before I leave, I want to commend your remarks about Makerere. Makerere is the mother of all universities in the country today; it has produced outstanding citizens across the borders of this country including President Mwai Kibaki, the late Mwalimu Nyerere, Mkapa and indeed myself as well. I am very serious. Makerere has been a source of glory and a seat of intellectualism across the continent. Consequently, for Makerere to set the pace for the rest of the universities to follow is commendable and I want to thank you very much for your announcement in the House so that we can give full support to the events at Makerere University. Thank you very much and I go to write a letter.

MR WACHA: I want to add to what the Government Chief Whip has stated on the issue of availing information about what you have done before Tuesday so that by the time we come to discuss the report of the committee, we also have with us information from the Office of the Prime Minister as to what they have done so far, before Tuesday.

MR MIGEREKO: You know hon. Ben Wacha, that the Prime Minister’s Office has never had any problem in handling matters of this nature in a very transparent way. We shall be able to provide all the information. I will communicate this to the Prime Minister who has been chairing these meetings. But I thought the critical thing is finding a sustainable solution and we shall all work towards that.

STATEMENT BY THE PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

11.53
MS REBECCA LUKWAGO (Independent, Woman Representative Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allotting the MDGs forum space to read this statement as we stand up and take action this week joining the rest of the world in the activity. 

The MDGs are a set of quantified and set goals for dramatically improving the human conditions by 2015. The Parliamentary Forum on MDGs networking with the Parliament of Uganda was also formed in 2007 by Members of this Parliament.

Allow me to give a background about the stand up activities which the MDGs Forum is taking on this week to join the rest of the world. The stand up against poverty is a global mobilisation call for action against poverty and for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Last year, more than 116 million people around the world participated in the event by standing up and pledging their solidarity with the world’s poorest people. The campaign was widely covered globally by major media networks and is still the largest single coordinated movement of people in the history of the Guinness World Records. 

Allow me to give the progress of the Millennium Development Goals as per our country, Uganda. Since very few countries have taken significant progress in measuring their performance in relation to MDGs, the UNDP compiled a progress report that weighed individual countries’ performance in the same regard. Therefore, this is our stand as per MDG 2007/UNDP scale:

Goal No. 1 - Reduction of Extreme Poverty and Hunger by 50 Percent

This, I would say, is probably achievable since the state has been supportive. The current status is 26 percent of the total population of Uganda lives in chronic poverty. Northern Uganda remains the poorest region with poverty levels at 68 percent. Up to 68 percent of Ugandans are food insecure amidst increasing food commodity prices.

Goal No. 2 - Achieving Universal Primary Education

This is probably achievable, and the state is being supportive and the environment is also supportive. Primary school enrolment has tripled from 2.3 million to 7.6 million in 2005/2006 with an estimated net enrolment ratio of 84 percent although only 20 percent are able to complete school. 

Goal No. 3 - Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women

Significant efforts have also been made towards this MDG. This is demonstrated by policies relating to education of girls at school and at higher learning institutions, and women empowerment, especially through functional adult literacy programmes. 

Goal No. 4 - Reduction of Child Mortality by Two Thirds

This is unlikely to be achieved but the state is supportive. The status is that although Uganda’s immunisation rate has climbed from 72 percent in 2003 to 89 percent in 2005, its infant mortality rate is 88.4 per 1,000 live births, and the under-five mortality rate of 154 per 1,000 births is still very high. The national development target is 68 per 1,000 births. It is unlikely that Uganda will achieve the MDG target of 31 per 1,000 live births by 2015. To address this, the Ministry of Health is implementing the Uganda National Minimum Healthcare Package consisting of four clusters which include: maternal and child health; control of communicable diseases; control of non-communicable diseases and health promotion; and diseases prevention. 

Goal No. 5 - Reduce Maternal Mortality Rate 

This is also unlikely to be achieved although the state is being supportive. Uganda is among the eight countries with the highest maternal mortality rates in the world. Uganda’s maternal mortality rate is 505 per 100,000. The MDG target provides the single highest contribution, of 20.4 percent, to the total of Uganda’s burden to ill health and unavoidable death.

Goal No. 6 - Reduce HIV and Malaria by 50 Percent

The target has already been reached for AIDS and for Malaria it has been potentially reached. The state is also being supportive. Today there are high infections among married couples making the fight against HIV/AIDS more challenging. For instance, the latest report released by the Uganda Aids Commission revealed that Uganda loses about 700,000 people to HIV/AIDS and gets over 130,000 new HIV infections annually and many of these are married people. 

Malaria remains the leading cause of mortality and it is endemic in 95 percent of the country, forming 30 to 50 percent of the outpatient department attendance and 20 percent of the inpatient admissions, while 9 to 14 percent of the deaths are admitted cases.

Goal No. 7 - Ensure Environmental Sustainability 

This is potentially achievable and the state is supportive. The country is bound to face variations relating to environment due to persistent natural resource degradation, which has implications on other fresh water resources. 

Weakness in mitigating the degradation also has implications on efforts of adoption to climatic change, food production and poverty reduction. 

Goal No. 8 - Develop a Global Partnership for Development 

The country has no specific targets for this goal. Although there seems to be a lot of efforts in this direction, Uganda’s visibility is suspect. However, government can step up its effort in regional integration in order to benefit from the immediate impact on the economy. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to urge my colleagues as Members of Parliament to stand up, take action and end poverty now as one of the activities taken by every country all over the world. Thank you so much for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, this was basically information for the House but you may want to study it and we allocate time for debating it because it is quite involving. So, I will appoint a time for discussing it. 

12.03
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are thankful to the honourable member for bringing this report but there is one strange thing. Except for goal No. 7 where the honourable member has indicated the problem, on all the others we have been marked down and the question “why?” has not been answered. I would propose that by the time we discuss this issue, the member comes with the answers as to why this has not been possible. Thank you

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe I should also ask the Minister of Health to take it up. I think he will have to answer some issues here when the debate comes. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you. We have been very passionate about maternal health and it is one of the things the chairperson of the MDG Forum has raised. Now you are asking the Ministry of Health to take it up. The last time we did ask the Minister of Health to come here and demonstrate to this House the funding mechanism and arrangements for the maternal health roadmap; we do not want the minister to come here again and tell us there is a roadmap. The roadmap needs money, so is it possible, as you ask him, that he comes here and shows us where he is planning to get the money because we want money to fund that roadmap?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, this House has taken serious note of the shortage of funding for maternal health, so I hope when the minister comes to answer he will be able to advise us on this issue. I will appoint a day when we can discuss this. The Clerk will ensure that the members receive copies and then we can debate it. Thank you for reminding us about our responsibilities.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are not here. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, the minister who was supposed to submit on the Special African Union Summit on Refugees and Returnees is currently deployed elsewhere but I think he will be here in the afternoon. He was probably not aware that he would be on the Order Paper this morning but he will be available in the afternoon.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON ILLEGAL SALE OF PLOTS AT THE OLD TAXI PARK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this report was presented. We had asked that members be given time to review the reports, which were presented some time back and that we debate them today. So, let us start.

12.07
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report has — (Interruption)

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. I just wanted to inform this House that the hon. Minister for Defence will be available in the afternoon to make this statement on the Kyabazinga issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, thank you. So, both those statements will come in the afternoon. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank this particular committee for coming out with a good report about the Old Taxi Park. This report dates back from the petition I presented here two years ago, and you can imagine the people of the Old Taxi Park and the type of life they have been living. They are even in the gallery here. They are all here waiting for their fate.

My case was that there was irregularity in the sale of the taxi park. The case came up and the honourable minister put up a commission of inquiry, which did a job within a record time of two months. The report was laid on the Table and we were supposed to have discussed it. 

As a petitioner, I am extremely happy that we have had about four ministers - hon.Kabwegyere, hon. Otafiire, hon. Mwesigye and even hon. Mwesige. I wish to thank Adolf Mwesige for taking action. The issue was displacing 30,000 people by ten developers. The commission of inquiry came out with a report. These three parties that own that particular place - UTODA, Kampala Disabled Traders Association and Old Taxi Park Non-resident Tenants Association - have come together to form an association and legal entities that produced a plan to develop the park. This has happened in Kisekka Market, it has happened everywhere. My prayer to this House is that as the minister has directed, we allow the people of the taxi park to develop the place of their own, not the developers.

The minister and government should ensure that we have a win-win situation whereby the developers who were picked on phone to come and buy plots be given back their money. I am sure the minister could convene a meeting, discuss with them, let them get their money back but the development be left to the sitting tenants who are UTODA, who have actually managed to sustain our transport sector in this country. I feel that the system of Kampala transport –(Interruption)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. My honourable colleague is misleading this House when he says that the developers were just picked and rung on phone to come and purchase the plots. The honourable member should know the procedure that local councils use when they are allocating land. Is he in order to say that developers were just phoned to come and purchase the plots from Kampala City Council? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter has been around for some time and I do not think you are not aware that our local councils are not exactly places of God. If he has got evidence, let him give you that information.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, when I brought this petition here, the select committee was given a task. I also personally took part in the hearings. It was very clear in this report, which you should have access to. You were a personal assistant to the Mayor by then, Ssebaana Kizito. Ssebaana Kizito accepted that he never followed the regulations transparently in allocating or tendering. It is in this report and the minister has it. The Katorobo Report is here and it says that the plots were given out irregularly, not transparently, on phone, I repeat.

The issue we would want out of this is, let us forget the past. A mess has been made. Kampala used to be known as evergreen, a garden city. Now, even the traffic islands are no longer there. As you go to Arua Park, there was a good traffic island but it has been given out. 

If this could be reported entirely, you would find that Kampala was messed up, even my colleague who is bringing the point of order knows it. I feel our people who are in the taxi park should be protected by the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, so that he supervises the tenants and UTODA takes the responsibility of developing the place as long as their development plan synchronises with the Kampala transport master plan. This should be done, rather than giving the plots to a few individuals who will put up different buildings in that particular congested place.

It has happened everywhere. I think we discussed Buganda Road flats where we are looking at sitting tenants; it is like a rule of thumb that we have in this country. I beg that we give a chance to the sitting tenants as long as they can follow regulations that the minister and ministry has set up. I beg to request this House. Thank you.

12.13
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for having brought this report to Parliament finally. I also thank hon. Nathan Byanyima who was the petitioner for this report to the committee. I want to also thank the committee through hon. Saleh Kamba who made due diligence and we went to the Old Taxi Park to find out what the issues were on the ground.

The committee did not just sit here in Parliament; it went on the ground to actually look at the measurements and look at the plots. Previously, they talked about having left some portion for UTODA and the taxi operations, but when we went on the ground we found out that there was no space. The whole park had been demarcated and parcelled out to private developers. Right now, what we want to do is to have all the recommendations, but not vague recommendations, because what I have seen is different recommendations but nothing specific.

I think as a Parliament, we run the danger of just debating issues here and the problems remain on the ground. What I have seen is that UTODA is there, so KCC should revoke the titles. I think we have a problem of revoking titles. Revoking titles involves Ministry of Lands, and that is why this report should be debated actually with the Minister of Lands here to seek concrete commitment from all the relevant sectors. 

The Minister of Local Government at least is here. He should come out and say what the ministry is going to do to disentangle the mess as it is right now because we actually see some developers have already started putting mabaati around some plots. We do not know exactly what the demarcations are because I do not see demarcations. I do not see the plots being named because the plots already have titles. I would want to see titles here and see that, “This title is here and so is this space”, so that even the people who are investors know that their title is almost nil.

I have already gone through this report and I see that the report was vague on concrete recommendations. I want at least somebody to come out and comment on the vagueness of the commitments. Thank you.

12.16
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are faced with a serious crisis in the management of public facilities in the city and probably in the country. This issue is just the tip of the iceberg. We should not gloss over it otherwise we shall be making a terrible mistake as Parliament.

My worry now as we debate this issue is that we are just doing a post-mortem on a matter which is fait accompli. As we talk now, I understand there is a directive from the President that the Old Taxi Park should be granted to UTODA. I stand to be clarified; it is good the honourable minister is here. So, if there is already an executive directive from the President, what are we discussing here now? I hope that is not the position and that we are going to look at this issue in its proper context.

When I look at paragraph 6 on the recommendations, No. 1 says government should expedite the process of enacting a comprehensive law to address all the land allocation procedural aspects in the city as well as any other aspects to avoid confusion and disharmony. Have we complied with this? It says that we should enact a comprehensive law to address all the land allocation procedural aspects in the city. This is a recommendation. 

Hon. Nathan Byanyima seems to be pleading for the sitting tenants but with due respect, you are not honest. There are vested interests in all these matters we are talking about. There are communications, which have been sent around even from members of the committee here -(Interjections)- yes, it is on record. Hon. Saleh Kamba at one moment even wrote a letter to the developers to go ahead and develop before this report was even debated here -(Interjections)- yes, this is what I am saying.

He is talking about UTODA being the sitting tenants and they are mobilised, they are all here. When we come to these issues, and I am saying this to help the situation, and I will say it without blinking an eye, UTODA is an agent of Kampala City Council to collect revenue from the taxi park; what development does UTODA have in the taxi park to qualify as the sitting tenant? They are revenue collectors. They are agents of Kampala City Council. Now we have to establish the true sitting tenants. I am one of the people who advocate for the rights of sitting tenants and I know it is a policy which should be followed, but who is the sitting tenant in the taxi park? 

Secondly, if we are to develop their sitting, should we privatise each and every walkway in the city - greenbelt and everything else? What shall remain for the nationals? I do not own a taxi in the park and I do not sit there. Honestly speaking, what is going to remain in the hands of Ugandans if everything is going to be privatised? 

I agree with the suggestion that the transactions were tainted with fraud and glaring illegalities. That is true. I sit on the Local Government Public Accounts Committee and we are going to come up with a report - it is coming soon - to unearth more dirt in these respective transactions. I will not pre-empt my chairman who is going to table the report. My point is, if the original transactions were tainted with illegalities, should we also acquiesce in the new illegalities but hide under the cloak of sitting tenants? We should have this country at heart. We must own public facilities as a country. We should not give away each and everything. I suggest that if there is any way possible, we retain the taxi parks as national assets and they can be developed as our assets so that UTODA –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Lukwago. Hon. Lukwago has been talking about hiding behind the sitting tenants; can hon. Lukwago clarify to us who the rightful sitting tenants are? Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: As we talk now, there are shops around the taxi park owned by Kampala City Council. There are tenants occupying those premises. In the reports we received from Kampala City Council, those people are not paying rent and they are saying, “You sold off this land”. They have also failed to pay the ground rent and premium. They have only paid part of the premium but they have not paid it fully. There is that confusion. 

So, the sitting tenants should be established on the ground. If they are not there, this property should remain a national asset. However, UTODA, a company limited by guarantee, which is owned by a few individuals, cannot be a sitting tenant within the meaning of the law. This is because UTODA applied for a tender from Kampala City Council to manage the taxi business and to collect revenue. It is more or less like Uganda Revenue Authority. Uganda Revenue Authority cannot be a sitting tenant on government land. I challenge whoever is saying that UTODA is a sitting tenant to show us a single structure they have constructed there.

MR BYANYIMA: The reason we petitioned on behalf of those people was that there was a move to steal the plots by Kampala City Council. Those people had already applied to buy plots in the taxi park but they were denied. Like you have been arguing for Nakasero Market, they are the people operating from there and the person operating from there has the liberty to make a request to buy it, and that is what we are doing. (Applause)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform this House that since January 2004 when Kampala City Council intended to develop that area, the tenants in those shops were given free stay in those shops; they were not paying any rent. I challenge hon. Byanyima to bring a copy of an application that was made by a tenant in those shops to buy a plot there. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I think there was a problem of the rampant sale of pieces of land in Kampala. There was a general outcry in Kampala so the government, through the Minister of Local Government, Prof. Kabwegyere, instituted a commission of inquiry which all of you can have access to. The recommendations are here. They almost tally with my petition. I have no interest in this matter. The problem is that some of you were part of Kampala City Council when it illegally sold the plots. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I should make this very clear. I am not here to vouch for those who claimed to have bought. My position is very clear; those who claim to have bought did it illegally, the so-called developers. The transactions were tainted with illegalities and in some cases with fraud. However, that is not to say that we again use that as an excuse to grab this land. This is our land; it is a national asset. 

My view is that the proposal in recommendation No. 6 that government should expedite the process of enacting a comprehensive law to address all the land allocation procedural aspects, is taken up. The laws we have right now are scattered here and there. You go to the PPDA of 2003, there are regulations which were made in 2006 to guide land allocation by Kampala City Council and local governments. They are 2006 regulations but they are all –(Interruption) 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, we received a report by the select committee and I, as a petitioner, contested it. I said that when you read the report, the findings do not rhyme with the recommendations. You, the Deputy Speaker, directed the Sessional Committee of Local Government and Public Service to go back to this report so that they can get an extract of what they recommended about the Old Taxi Park and we have a report, which was read the other day. Hon. Lukwago now comes up and he is talking about a different report. Look at the report we read recently, the updated report, and do not bring confusion here.

12.28
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know a bit about this and right from the start, let me tell you that as a tested municipal engineer, the proposed developments will create more chaos than anything else in the area. This is because when they submitted the plans, those who got allocations had no provision for parking. They were thinking of putting lifts in the parking area, which is impossible. I think for the good of this city, we should suspend the proposed developments of the small plots where you cannot have underground parking.

Look, this Mabikke does not know what he is talking about. (Laughter) These are people who –(Laughter) 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order. Hon. Eng. Byandala was the city engineer of Kampala City Council. The developers submitted plans and he approved those plans before they were allocated the plots. Is he in order to stand in the House now and say that those plans do not have parking? Why did he approve them when he was the city engineer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has become wiser. (Applause)

MR BYANDALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. In any case, hon. Nsubuga should know that I was the city engineer not a planner, and development control was not in city engineering. Approval of plans was in development control in the department of the chief town planner. Some of us had seen this problem earlier and we thought it was wiser to develop this as one entity. We had even got to the tendering whereby we were going to have access to the park via Burton Street and exit via Ben Kiwanuka Street to ease traffic movement. At the bottom, we were having those who were leaving the park to go upcountry or wherever. There were floors where we were going to even accommodate street traders so that we get them off the streets. We were going to have people arriving via Burton Street. That is where they would park. We would even have more space for street parking. But this sub-division of plots came later - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you allow one another to speak? You are going to get time.

MR KYANJO: I do not intend to make a long speech. I want to follow. You know, some of us were slow learners in class so you will bear with us.

I appreciate the explanation being given by hon. Byandala regarding that decent plan that is being talked about. The clarification I am seeking from him is that we heard similar beautiful stories about the Constitutional Square but it did not happen. We had a similar story and we saw drawings of a new bus terminal at the former Katimba; it did not happen. Now I want hon. Byandala to follow this with a clear assurance so that Parliament does not become a football pitch whereby we come here and only count the goals but things do not happen afterwards. 

I strongly appeal to honourable members to look at recommendation No. 1 so that we solve this problem once and for all. This one looks like an honest report. When we concentrate on recommendation No. 1 and we use the technical people, we will find a lot of good. This is because when you read through all these recommendations and you go to recommendation No. 7, regarding the sitting tenants, it is also tricky. Even if you agreed that they are the ones who are going to develop, the report continues to say that this is dependent on the capacity of the sitting tenants to co-finance the developments. So - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which report are you reading? 

MR KYANJO: This is the report that was laid on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, was that the report presented on Tuesday? 

MR KYANJO: You know that this is Parliament of Uganda. This report is right there at the desk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a subsequent report, which was laid on the Table on Tuesday.

MR KYANJO: But that one, Madam Speaker, would substantially defeat that one. Who dropped the report at the desk? This is the procedure for picking reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was only for background information; the report is the one of Tuesday. 

MR KYANJO: Most obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My advice is that let us develop this area as one entity with different stakeholders. We can have Kampala City Council; they can continue earning from the parking but with the provision of two layers of parking. We can have UTODA as a stakeholder. We can have the sitting tenants in the city council shops as tenants. This was our idea. 

We had many people, these street vendors, and they had an association and we were trying to put a layer for them so that we can pull them off the streets. They could also be part of this consortium to see that we develop this place adequately and try to see that the traffic movement is slightly improved compared to what will happen if these people develop as they have been allocated these plots.

In this Katorobo Report there is one thing which worried me; they said there was proper land use. You see, Kampala City Council at that time, and even now, had a structural plan, and one of the components of a structural plan is land use. For this report to claim that they did not take into consideration land use, is false and it is something that should not be taken seriously. As long as you have a structural plan, land use is a consideration which is taken when you are looking at these things.  

Let me also talk about the sale of plots as it has been highlighted in this report. The report pointed out that procedures were not followed, but let us also note that there is no district where it is followed and neither is it followed at the Uganda Lands Commission. Let the minister put his foot down in all districts where land is being allocated so that we see advertisements. Even the Uganda Lands Commission should put up an advertisement of all the land that is being given out. It was very good for the Katarobo group to point this out, but I think the minister should pick it up so that things go on well. 

However, as we allow for the development of this place, we have to go into what I call development obligations. This is a new concept I introduced in the Council when they were trying to develop the Constitutional Square. We do not want to allocate land and people hoard it and we have things that cannot work. 

What I mean by development obligations is that, we allocate you land on condition you must show that you have funds to do the development. We do not stop there; you must also provide a backup or insurance so that in case you fail, they come in. These should be the conditions for whoever will be given the opportunity to develop this land. 

When they allocated these plots, I tried to put in a mild development obligation. I sat with all the people who were given these plots and we agreed that they had been given an initial lease which could be cancelled at any one time if they defaulted on the agreed development stages. We agreed that by year one, they must have submitted the plans; and in year two, they must have reached a certain stage of development, so that somebody does not get a plot –(Interruption)

MS NABILAH NAGAYI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Byandala on developments as a whole in Kampala where leases have been given out by KCC, whether through the right procedure or not, and the issue of sitting tenants. My clarification is, when Members stand up to talk about the issue, not wanting to treat the Old Taxi Park as other cases have been treated, makes us run the risk of Parliament giving preferential treatment to some people like Nakasero and Kisekka, and after a while, we give differential treatment to the Old Taxi Park. So, I want hon. Byandala to speak in light of the fact that there are other issues that have arisen concerning sitting tenants and development and how they have been resolved through Parliamentary reports. I thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I was just trying to bring the attention of the minister to this issue that whenever we talk about plots, the issue of advertisement comes up, but I know that there are honourable members here who have bought land in districts and they have never responded to advertisements. So, I was just trying to tell the minister this so that it stops. We should advertise, whether in Kampala, Kamuli, or Luwero; we should advertise everywhere. 

As I conclude, I want to appeal to Government to develop this place as one entity so that we have a win-win situation. These people who were allocated plots can be incorporated into this one-unit development. I am sure we can sit and discuss and find a way out. I thank you.

12.41
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, but particularly, for the recommendations made. I would like to find out from Government whether there is a master plan for Kampala City. 

For us to start talking about issues on an ad hoc basis is causing problems for our children. I would like to appeal to this Parliament not to take a decision on this matter until Government has given us a master plan for Kampala city. Because it is not a short-term decision; it is a long-term plan, which has got long-term implications. Therefore, we cannot just act on an ad hoc basis.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I did not want to disrupt my colleague, but what is this master plan she is talking about? Kampala has a structural plan; so what other plan is this that she is talking about?    

MS MUGERWA: Thank you very much. I will give you the clarification. I am here as Sauda Namaggwa Mugerwa representing Masaka District. I want to be on record and I want to account for my decisions now and in the future. I, therefore, do not want to take action for which I will not be accountable in future. 

Madam Speaker, for us to say that Kampala City can be planned for in an ad hoc basis is a very big mistake and I want to appeal to Parliament to ensure that we have a master plan for Kampala, which should tell us that such a place is meant to be a taxi park and so on, and that we act on that basis, but not for someone to come and just say that this and this should happen and we go by that. We are making a big mistake in doing that and we are embarrassing Government and even taking risks. I, therefore, request the government to give us this master plan. 

This place is very important to us and I have been crying in this House – actually you can deliver a child in the taxi park – you spend two hours trying to enter the park in a taxi and getting out of the taxi park is also a tug of war. These people are suffering very much because of the absence of a master plan. I, therefore, feel ashamed when hon. Eng. Byandala asks me about the master plan that I am talking about and yet he is an engineer. And you have even confessed that you are not a planner and, therefore, you can take any decision because you are just an engineer. (Laughter) You cannot base your decision on a planner’s plan without you being sure that it is safe. 

I, therefore, would like to make a request on behalf of the people who are not in this House that whatever we are doing is not for a short-term basis, but for the long-term. We are going to commit a lot of money - I am a Member of the Committee on Trade and Industry, and I can tell you that many industrialists are crying because their businesses have been closed. After they have put up their industries, they are told to close. This is because whatever we do is on ad hoc and personal basis. Madam Speaker. Thank you.


12.45
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem we have in Kampala comes from the lack of land. I am saying this because in Kampala, land is only about 25 percent of the total land. So, the fight is about how to share the little land that there is. The rest is mailo land; that is where the problem arises from. 

Whereas people are fighting to secure plots in Kampala, majority of them are not developers. What they are looking for is to secure land on lease and immediately sell it. The Development Covenant that hon. Byandala is talking about has been there for years. Initially, a person would be given only two years to develop. But as Ugandans got poorer and poorer, this period was extended to five years. However, even with this extension, they could not fulfill it. So, later it was reduced to three years because there was high demand for the few plots.

Actually, we now have three reports. There is the Katorobo report; the previous Parliamentary report; and this recent Parliamentary committee report. What are we doing? We cannot keep instituting commissions to talk about the same matters everyday.

To me, the recommendations of the committee were very good. For example, in one of their recommendations, they said that this matter be shelved, and that Government and Kampala City Council jointly come up with a plan and recommendations on how that area can be developed. But not to leave it to individuals who are fighting to get land for sale and go away. Why don’t we adopt that report? Why do we keep on instituting committee after committee to do a job that was already done by a highly regarded commission?

I think whatever the outcome will be, we should stick to the original recommendations. I am convinced that they gave a very good –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, just to give you the background, I think the people who had interest were not seeing any activities out of the Katorobo report. That is why they petitioned Parliament. So, our first report was a response to the petition while the second one was to clarify issues that had not been well-handled in the first report.

MR WACHA: Sorry, Madam Speaker, but I think there is a perspective to this matter, which seems to be dragging us.

Hon. Byanyima presented a petition on behalf of some people, which is perfectly okay under our Rules of Procedure. However, I notice that hon. Byanyima is now acting as if he is an advocate for these petitioners. His role should have been to present the petition and leave it at that. 

The next committee, which was instituted to look into this matter, arose because hon. Byanyima said that he was not satisfied with the report of the Kamba Committee. That is perfectly unacceptable, according to our rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that was not the reason. The reason was that hon. Kamba usurped the powers of this House by issuing a letter and giving directives before the report was debated here.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. This actually enhances my argument that we drop the first parliamentary reports and get back to the commission’s report.

After reading this report - and I noticed that what these people are talking about is revolving leases; but there is nothing like a revolving lease.  A lease is like life. You give it out and once it is gone, you cannot revolve it.

The report talks about non-resident sitting tenants, which I think does not make sense. Once you are a sitting tenant, you are already a resident there. You cannot be a sitting tenant and not a resident tenant at the same time. That is not possible. Either we call all these people sitting tenants or absentee users of the place, which means they may not qualify if they are not sitting tenants.

Madam Speaker, as we consider giving out a plot in the city, we cannot restrict ourselves to sitting tenants. There are so many Ugandans who could even develop it better. We must come out to do the planning, advertise and put minimum conditions for one to apply. For example, for the Bugolobi bungalows, it was a site and service scheme. 

The plots were well-planned and the services were put out before advertisements. And whenever a person was allocated a plot, they would pay a premium to get back some of the money used to put the services in place. We do not have to rush and restrict ourselves to a small group of people. Let us advertise and open it to the entire world, not only Uganda.


12.52
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (INDEPENDENT, Makindye East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, things have been going wrong in Kampala City Council for a long time. And indeed there have been many commissions instituted to investigate the irregularities in there.  It is true we have got the Katorobo report and so many IGG reports, and more recently we got the Minister of Local Inquiry report. 

However, what is surprising is the fact that none of the recommendations in those reports has ever been implemented. And this appears to be the problem. If we could implement some of the recommendations in the reports of the commissions we have instituted, Kampala would certainly be better. People are asking what the problem is. 

My conclusion is that the problem is political interest and interference from a certain man called “Above” because, even as we talk now, even as we debate this report, there are directions from “above” that the land in question is given to UTODA. For us to resolve the issues in Kampala, we must have a fully fledged Judicial commission of inquiry into the running of that City Council. Based on the recommendations of the commission, we will start to streamline affairs in there –(Mr Okello-Okello rose_) you are a very informed man, please give me information.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. The information I want to give is that in 1982, the government got very concerned about the running of Kampala City. A commission was set up to investigate and recommend to Government – you know what happened? The office where the commission was sitting was burnt at night. Someone came with acid or something that they poured and burnt all the files. The work that had been done was lost. So, when you are trying to do it again, be very careful. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: Thank you. Hon. Byandala has today suggested very brilliant proposals and I do agree with him, and how I wish he acted as brilliantly as he has spoken today when he was still acting as the City Engineer. It is true that the developments in the Old Taxi Park cannot be conducted disjointedly, but we need a common project; a single development. The truth of the matter is that even if UTODA is deemed to be the sitting tenant, it has no capacity. The same UTODA we are talking about here has billions of arrears with Kampala City Council. When we talk about the other shop tenants, I think these do not have any capacity and it is true. 

I would like to agree that we must have a single development if at all this project is to take off. My worry is that Kampala City Council is a body corporate, it has the capacity to win and dispose of land -(Interjections)– yes. This procedure may have been irregular, but we must be mindful that those who were allocated plots of land, paid billions and I do not know to who. We must be mindful that when we are reversing that transaction, it is the public funds that are supposed to compensate those individuals because certainly, it is now very clear that they are going to court. They are going to seek compensation and who is going to pay this compensation? It is the ordinary tax payer who is at the end of the day going to meet the compensation costs for this irregular transaction –(Member timed out.)

12.57
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you. The development of the Old Taxi Park presupposes a new site and I would like to thank the committee for particularly raising a matter which was implied, but not core; the issue of the fate of schools under Kampala City Council, because it seemed implied, that the alternative place for relocation would be the Nakivubo Settlement Primary School. We know that in the recent past, we have had KCC and I do not know whether the powers “above” gave out the Shimoni complex to a developer. We also know that in the recent past, another school which I forget – I think it was Kitante, was given to a developer. What confronts us now is population increase; We are producing children by the minute and we need space for these children. 

I am glad that the committee has said that whatever happens with the Old Taxi Park, the relocation should not be to Nakivubo Settlement Primary School. The committee described a very pathetic look of that school which should embarrass KCC and the Ministry of Education and Sports that our children are studying under asbestos-roofed houses. Even the Nakivubo Blue Primary School which was talked about has asbestos roofs and wooden walls. I would like to use this opportunity to implore the Ministry of Education to specifically look at the fate of the children under the Universal Primary Education who go to these schools. 

Secondly, I appeal to Government and the Kampala City Council to take their eyes off the schools because at the end of the day, all our children in the city cannot go to Kampala Parents or to other very powerful schools, but can only go to schools under Government and that is where the Nakivubo Blue and Nakivubo Settlement primary schools fall. 

So, instead of looking at them as potential for relocation of the Old Taxi Park, Government should look at them as areas that need immediate redress, development, classrooms and need to be secured for the future of our children. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe to add to what hon. Alaso has said, you know the poor now spend more to go to school because where they used to walk, they now have to go by boda boda and taxi for which they pay. So, the point you have raised is very important. 

1.01
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you. The petitioner, Hon. Nathan Byanyima, prayed that Parliament directs KCC to hold and revoke the sale of plots in the Old Taxi Park. Probably to understand this issue, we need to know the historical perspective of this Old Taxi Park. Way back, I think in 1990, as hon. Okello Okello said, a gentlemen called Mr Vilani who is a businessman in London, came and he was offered a lease of a peripheral area of the Old Taxi Park, and he did not develop it within the time he was given. He became a speculator. KCC approached him and he was told to develop the land, otherwise it would be given to other people. This gentleman did not develop the land and he went to court and put a caveat on this land. When KCC under the leadership of His Worship the Mayor, John Sebaana Kizito, found out that this land had a caveat, they approached his agents here. One of the issues that has been raised is that this land was irregularly allocated to the developers without following the right procedure. 

The chairman of this committee, hon. Yiga, was a CAO in one of the districts of Uganda and in all the districts, we have land boards. Can the Minister of Local Government tell us whether there is any district in Uganda, including the Uganda Land Commission, that has ever advertised a piece of land in the city or in the districts? Local governments have got their own laws that govern them and once –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I thank my colleague for giving way. I declared earlier that it is dangerous for Members not to follow. I want hon. Mathius Nsubuga to go back to the stage where the developer had put a caveat and when His Worship the Mayor Ssebaana Kizito discovered that there was a caveat. I got lost at that point. What happened then? (Laughter)

MR NSUBUGA: Yes, I will clarify. Mr Vilani was from London. He had put a caveat on this land because he realised that KCC was becoming impatient without this area being developed. Most of you know these old shops which were built in 1958. In 2004, the tenants were told that this area was going to be developed. That is when they realised that there was a caveat on this land. This gentleman was approached and he willingly accepted - in fact, this is exactly what hon. Okello-Okello said, that he became a land speculator. He then said that he wanted Shs 750 million to be able to remove the caveat so that this land could be developed. This park belongs to KCC and like in any other district, there is no plan that can be approved without consultation or without the input of a city engineer or a district engineer. The department of planning together with that of engineering sit together and approve a plan and that is what you did, Eng. Byandala. Today you have denied it here -(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, when you submit a plan for approval, you are supposed to bring four copies so that they are checked, to ensure that your plan is approved. One copy goes to the land officer who is not an engineer; the second one goes to the medical officer; the third goes to the planner; and the fourth copy goes to the building inspectors. All those are not in the engineering department. 

MR M.B. NSUBUGA: So, Madam Speaker, I think as you said, he has become wiser now that he is in the House. KCC went ahead and realised the Shs 750 from the would-be tenants – the people who expressed interest to develop this land - and this Asian from London was given that money and he removed the caveat from the land. That is when Ugandan businessmen who had interest – and I did challenge hon. Byanyima that the sitting tenants had been given notice from January 2004 that this area was going to be developed and none of them made an application. (Interjections) You will bring it in this House to prove that you were wrong to have said that –(Interjections)- I will give an example of the Naguru-Nakawa Estate; when KCC tried to develop it, it was the very Ministry of Local Government that said “No, this land is not yours…” –(Member timed out.)

1.08
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to make my contribution by way of seeking guidance from you. The chairperson of the committee together with seven others is a member of the Standing Committee on Local Government Accounts. So, the chairperson and those members know exactly what is going on within this standing committee. The issue regarding the Old Taxi Park has come to our committee as a result of a special audit by the Auditor-General on Kampala. 

So, the guidance I would like to seek is, if this House takes a decision, wouldn’t it be pre-empting the decisions or the work of the standing committee on Local Government Accounts? The committee knows exactly how far they went and they know how far we have gone. That is why on page 8 they propose, rightly so in my view, that the standing committee continues to handle this report relating to the sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park. If we are to take a decision now like I understand hon. Byanyima is suggesting, then there would be no reason why the Committee on Local Government Accounts should continue considering the Auditor-General’s report. It would be beneficial to this House that you get all the details and I am constrained; I cannot release the details that I have now. Similarly, the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government is constrained to release all the details he has in this report. This is the quagmire we are in and we shall need guidance from you, Madam Speaker, because this matter should be finally resolved in one way or the other. 

The biggest problem we have is that some Members seem to have some background information which we do not have, which can only come out in a detailed report of the committee which has fully investigated these issues. It is quite unfortunate that the Kamba committee butchered this thing –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: I was a member of this committee [Hon. Members: “But you did not sign.”] I did. The only mistake that our chairman made was to give an order on a matter that had not been decided by Parliament. Our committee gave only two recommendations; I think on page 20 of our report. Of interest is recommendation number two and I want to read, “Government should always respect and implement reports of commissions of inquiry that it puts in place”. Why? Because we spend tax payers’ money on this. What was this commission of inquiry? It was Prof. Katarobo’s commission of inquiry. Where are these recommendations? They are here and this is the recommendation we had that Government should go back to the recommendations and make sure that we implement and resolve this problem once and for all. 

Now, the new Parliamentary committee – now there is another new report and there are a lot of problems here. In their recommendation no.3, the last paragraph reads, “The committee, however, finds the proposal in Prof. Katarobo’s report that such a complex development should be left to a few individual developers identified through a public tender process plausible.” Now, they are recommending the same thing that we had recommended. So, we were not all involved in butchering our report; our report was very good. The second committee has pointed out the same thing. I only request this House and the Ministry of Local Government to go back to Prof. Katarobo’s report and enforce the recommendations. Do not waste Parliament’s time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, it would not be fair to dismiss a petition that was brought to this House – [Hon. Kibanzanga: “It is wasting our time”] – It is not. Hon. Member, unless you find an area, which is contradictory to the other reports, that is what you should point out. Otherwise, the petition was brought here; we have spent time on it; let us deal with it. When the committee on Public Service and Local Government’s report comes, we shall deal with it also.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, where this Parliament will deal with the same subject matter twice; I want to be advised -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you not going to present your Local Government report?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, that is the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to delete this part of it? Hon. Member, you are causing us to anticipate what is in your report and we do not want to do that. Deal with this report now and we finish.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for yielding the floor. Madam Speaker, as members of the Committee on Local Government Public Accounts, we are getting constrained. Hon. Mathius Nsubuga has been pleading for and clearing Mr Sebaana Kizito yet he appeared before the committee, testified, acknowledged and admitted having participated in the fracas of Vilani, which led to a loss of Shs 750 million. 

Now, we want to release some information, but we are constrained because it is as if he was clearing him yet when he appeared, he was apologising because they were just sourcing investors locally. They would meet at some drinking point and say, “come and develop this place.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But has this report cleared Mr Sebaana? Does this report deal with Mr Sebaana? Because when we adopt, we do not adopt the debate but the report.

MR KATUNTU: I need your advice on this because there is no way my committee will continue discussing the Auditor General’s report on the special audit on the Old Taxi Park when Parliament has already taken a decision. We have been meeting witnesses and getting confessions. We have spent tax payers’ money investigating this matter and the reason why the Public Service and Local Government committee is suggesting that this matter be concluded that way is because they have been privy to the details. 

The alternative is for us to start discussing in detail what is going on in our committee. That is the alternative we have and that will infringe on our Rules of Procedure. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker because we must act professionally and in accordance with our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what are the aspects you are investigating in the Local Government Accounts Committee? Are they here fully or partly? Are there areas, which are not there and which are in this report?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, they are fully there because the aspect of the irregularities of the sale or allocation of this land appeared in a special audit not the ordinary audit of the Auditor General’s report, but a special audit, which was ordered and the Auditor General produced a report, which is with us. That is why the committee chairperson is saying the details of this matter are there. Does this House expect us to start revealing those details here? Wouldn’t it infringe on the Rules of the House?

MS NAGAYI: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on the same issues being handled by different committees. We knew that there has been a long standing petition and the special audit was handed after. Couldn’t this audit have enriched this report because it is the same thing we are talking about? This is because committees are actually fighting over presenting this report. I think we are –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you had an opportunity -

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, my committee is mandated to consider the Auditor General’s reports. We did not go out on our own initiative to investigate this matter and under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, this House is obliged to consider the audit reports of the Auditor General. Where is this fight my hon. colleague is talking about? Where is it coming from? By the way, I would not mind if any other committee could handle and conclude this, but our committee has a job to do and is mandated by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. What was needed was a harmony such that there is no duplication. What recommendation No.4 is suggesting is that harmony. Is my honourable colleague in order, therefore, to impute a fight between my committee and any other committee when actually there is none?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this committee had terms of reference. Confine yourselves to the terms of reference of this committee.

1.20
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this report. I want to start by lamenting over land issues. Everywhere, we will find those who have the money grabbing land from those who don’t have. 

Regarding issues of the plots, which were sold irregularly, I would like to ask those who were concerned to make sure that we look into the irregularities and then confirm who owns the plots because we have seen even in the markets they tell us that sitting tenants should take up the land and then other people come and say they are the ones to take it up because they can afford to. Now that we have not resolved these irregularities, can we look into this? 

I have seen things, which have gone wrong like someone selling a road, which was in the plan for a long time. I think we need to see to it that the Ministry of Local Government gets to know who belongs where, who was here and who is buying and what has he used to buy what belongs to other people. Land is going to become an issue over which people are going to kill one another if it is not handled properly. I beg that whoever is involved, especially the government takes up arms to see that land issues are dealt with properly so that we know when someone is going to take over the land or buy it. We should know whether he is doing it properly and whether he knew who owned it at the beginning. Thank you.

1.23
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I am happy with all the recommendations from one to six. They are very clear and give direction. 

However, I want to raise one concern that Kampala is the city of the Republic of Uganda. We have all travelled to other areas in Africa and beyond. We look at beautiful cities, forests and roads; enjoy very good hotels and environment but when you come to Kampala - recently we moved around as the Committee on Natural Resources trying to look at the Kampala Sanitation Programme. What you find in Kampala is appalling. All the waste in Kampala is going directly to Lake Victoria; all the swamps in Nakivubo Channel have been taken up and it is all titled. We looked at these land titles. We have to do away with this business of dealing with one spot; Nakasero Market, taxi park, Naguru estates; that cannot help us. 

The recommendations are very clear and good. Recommendation No. 1 must be adhered to and as Parliament, we must charge government and Kampala City Council to plan for Kampala City under the auspices of the private-public partnerships because of land ownership aspects. Unless we have that plan, we are just wasting time. Look at the floods and the matatus. Everything is just a mess in Kampala city. Some of us now don’t wish to live here as everywhere you go, you are just holding your noses; the stench is terrible!

Therefore, my general recommendation is that as Parliament, whether it means us getting a big loan, we must make sure that we task government - the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Lands are here. They have given away all the swamps and faeces are going directly into Lake Victoria. We went to Luzira and what we saw is unheard of. 

The problem is that when you talk of developing the taxi park, the UTODA people don’t know where to go, because if we had planned, people would know that in Bugolobi and Nateete there is a taxi park; this area is for a market. We would even find our levels and not conflict over property. But now all of us are conflicting over the taxi park, over Kisekka Market and when that one is gone we shall conflict over Nakivubo channel. If we had planned this area –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: I want to give information that city council had come up with alternative spaces for parking buses and had provided space in Nateete but it is the NRM Government itself, which came in to confuse them. The President came up and re-directed the buses back to the roadside so now when Kampala City Council comes to re-direct issues and plans, its hands are tied with the interference of the Executive.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you very much. My recommendation is that government and KCC should sit, get their act together and give us a plan. We should give them a specific time that, “By next financial year; let us get a Kampala master plan showing us all the roads and the green belts so that we scamper for areas that are planned”. Even if we alter the plan, we would do so later but unless we have a plan that is known by everyone, what we are doing cannot help us.

Finally, there is a very big problem in KCC and with Kampala. I want to make two other additional recommendations. One, we were told that Kampala City is going to be organised under a new arrangement maybe to be brought under local government. I want to ask the Minister of Local Government how far that law has gone, because for Kampala City, you have a lot to do to bring it under the control of the central government. I want to ask the Minister of Local Government, how far has that law gone? You have a law to bring Kampala City under the control of the central government. I recommend that we expedite that.

Secondly, we should look at other satellite cities either in the vicinity of Kampala or other districts so that we decongest Kampala. How can you travel from Ntinda, Kyambogo or Nakasero to Kampala? Where is Kampala? Those people from Makindye are all going to Kampala. Kampala is now too small. What you perceive as Kampala is a small area. If you could put other satellite cities it would help us so that the interests of these people - all these UTODA people cannot fit in that taxi park. They will start fighting themselves even when we give it to them. So, that is my recommendation. We must be serious; we must plan ahead as government. This business of treating symptoms cannot help us. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.28
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. The NRM Government believes in majority -(Interjections)- and I have no problem with UTODA. Hon. Lukwago was asked a very interesting question, “Who are the sitting tenants?” If this can be answered then I will have no problem.

I have a similar problem in my constituency, Fort Portal Municipality. We are also in the process of developing a new taxi park for Fort Portal. I have the same problems and maybe at an appropriate time I will also run to Parliament for a solution.

When you go to the Old Taxi Park, you will find that there are some business people who own small shops surrounding the whole park. Who are those people? Are those also sitting tenants? If we give UTODA a chance, are they going to bring those people on board or are they going to evict them? If we give UTODA a chance, are all those members of UTODA - I think they are in thousands - going to benefit from this deal, or is it going to benefit a few people? We have to be very careful as we debate this issue because we would not like some two or three people to hide under thousands of people, saying that this deal is going to benefit UTODA yet it is going to benefit just one person, Katuntu, there. (Laughter) 

So I would like to charge the minister in charge of local government to ensure that if this deal eventually goes to UTODA, all stakeholders will be brought on board and if it is really going to benefit one, two or three people [Mr Lukwago: “Clarification”.] Wait! We have the same problems, hon. Lukwago. You wait and I will - there is nothing you are clarifying. You wait.

Madam Speaker, I am sorry to take you back. I was once a Member of the Local Government Public Accounts Committee. The current chairperson has raised a very salient issue. In this report, in the recommendation on page 8 they are saying that the standing Committee of Parliament on Local Government Accounts should continue handling the Auditor-General’s report relating to the sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park. So, I do not know. After we have pronounced ourselves now and hon. Abdu Katuntu brings his report on the same matter, maybe in agreement or contradiction, but in case it is contradictory, how shall we pronounce ourselves?

I would like to agree with my sister from Masaka that we stay action on this matter until maybe we also receive the report from Local Government Public Accounts Committee -(Applause)- so that we harmonise the two reports and come up with a well-informed decision on the matter. But as we are now, really I do not see how we are going to handle hon. Katuntu’s report after we have pronounced ourselves on this matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.33
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see the problems we are facing are mainly raised from corruption and ambiguity in doing things. This is because there were reasons why the Katorobo Commission was put in place. This report was not debated against the directive of even the President of this country. 

Then there came another report, the Kamba Saleh Report, which was also very ambiguous. Most of these problems by the way came from the letter that Hon. Kamba Saleh wrote. Hon. Kamba Saleh is not here and I think he is not even bothered. I do not know if as Parliament we cannot take disciplinary action if he went against the rules of this Parliament. Some members are already saying that there is a directive. I think I have heard about that. There is a directive that these plots again be allocated. Someone commented about it. Where are our institutions in this country if someone can direct and say, “Be it done; give it to them”? Really I get disturbed. 

My good friend hon. Byandala brought a good proposal of a win-win situation but now a win-win situation may not work because I can see you are saying that the UTODA people and all these stakeholders be brought together so that others develop underground and others somewhere else. But there are people who paid their money and they may not accept this. 

Hon. Abdu Katuntu says we should not pre-empt his report but the Auditor-General’s report is in the hands of most Members of Parliament, and so I believe we can comment because the Auditor-General’s report puts it clearly that the money that was paid cannot be traced. And I think this is enough reason for the people who pocketed the money to be held responsible. (Applause) They should be held responsible. It is around Shs 700 million.

MR KATUNTU: The other arm of Government has assisted the committee to trace that money. We now know where some of it went. It ended up somewhere within the city council. I will not give the details lest I risk running the problem of disclosing what is going on.

MR KASAIJA: I do not see how we can implement what hon. Byandala was saying. In my view even if you are saying that we should not take a stand, we should guide ourselves. I will agree with hon. Lukwago that government has a duty to have land, and this would mean that government has a duty to sit with these people whose money was taken and we pay back. Meanwhile this money should come from the people who pocketed it. And when the land goes back to government, we can start from there; otherwise we are not doing anything. 

I would like to conclude by agreeing with hon. Sauda Mugerwa from Masaka that we need to have a master plan. When she said it, engineer Byandala said, “No, we already have a plan”.  But if this plan is in existence then it is a fake one because it has not helped the situation in the city. If it is there, it is a fake one. The situation is worsening each day. Hon. Byandala we are not refuting that the plan is not there, but if it is there then it is not the right one.

I think Kampala city belongs to all of us -(Interruption)- if it was approved by government depending on whatever fake means, when it is fake it is fake; whether approved by Kampala City Council or not, we are looking at its working capabilities. Unless it was approved by God, any other person can make a mistake. So, we need to have that master plan. We need to decongest the city. We are saying that government should take up Kampala City Council and I truly support this.

MS NAMAYANJA: I rise on a point of procedure, and I find difficulty in us debating this report and we do not come up with a resolution on one hand and then on the other hand, we come up with a resolution and then rescind it ourselves after we have got the other report. Prudence would demand that we handle the issue conclusively and we can’t do it if we partially debate it, because I saw hon. Katuntu fearing to divulge some information and yet it would be very important for us to conclude this matter.

Can Parliament task the committee on Local Government Accounts to expedite the process such that we handle the issue conclusively? Otherwise we are going to come up with resolutions and then rescind the same resolutions. I believe the Auditor-General’s report is real, authentic and a thorough document that if the committee went through it and enriched it with these other reports, then Parliament can reach a position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know I wanted to remind the members here that our resolutions are recommendations to the government, we are not the implementers. We can make our recommendations and the government can decide to not even implement them. So, let us finish with this one. When the other report comes we shall deal with it. Otherwise, I have not forgotten that when we were discussing the Budget you indicted that my office failed to bring your work to this House; I am also doing my work.

1.40
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with your wise counsel. I have heard and listened very attentively to the debate, which has occurred this morning. I appreciate the zeal with which Members have expressed themselves because of the importance of the matter. But I want to re-direct our attention to the report because that is the basis of all this debate. Everything else that has been said just comes in because of this report. 

I want to particularly re-draw our attention to the recommendations of the committee. I have looked at each one of them and it looks as if every member was agreeing with one particular aspect of the report of the recommendation but not coming out to say that it was supporting this particular recommendation. I find all the recommendations plausible and acceptable. Recommendation No. 3 is alright because it goes to support the report of the commission.  Can I read for you paragraph three? It says, “The committee, however, finds the proposal in the Katorobo Report that such a complex development should be left to a few individual developers identified through a public tender process ….” I think that what some people are saying is already here.  

I want to move a motion that this House, having heard the debate on the report of the Sessional Committee on Public service and Local Government on the alleged illegal sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park, hereby adopts in totality the recommendations of the said committee. I move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But don’t you want the minister to say something? He will contribute to the motion by what he is going to say. 

1.43
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I thought I would be allowed to contribute to the report and then we could go to the motion, because I have not made my contribution to the report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for its report and also the committees that have investigated this matter before. I will just try to summarise the facts surrounding this issue as I understand them.

One, at the time when these plots were allocated to the so-called developers, there were three categories of sitting tenants: UTODA, Kampala Disabled Persons Association; and the Old Taxi Park non-resident Tenants Association. These tenants had running contracts which expire in 2011. So at the time, KCC allocated these plots, KCC had contracts with these people which expire in 2011. This is a fact which I have established. The plots, which were allocated, are plots 15–43 Ben Kiwanuka Street, 9-10 Burton Street, 38–40 Luwum Street, M7 Kampala, and 14–18 Nakivubo Place.

The Katorobo Report which was commissioned by my ministry, among other things, did find that these allocations were irregular –(Interjection)– yes, all of them were irregular. Therefore, Katorobo did recommend that these allocations should be revoked; that is one of the most important recommendations.

An issue was raised about why the sitting tenants are not paying rent to KCC. The reasons are really obvious, because in a situation where the tenants had running contracts with KCC and KCC had allocated the premises in which some people operate, anybody would naturally be reluctant to pay rent. What the tenants did was to stop paying rent to KCC because their legal status was uncertain but vowed to continue occupying their premises and they have remained there –(Interjection)-  you had your opportunity to give your version; just allow me to give the version the way I know it.

One of the reasons the Katorobo Report recommended these leases to be revoked was because they were given irregularly. As hon. Kagwera was saying, the Auditor-General’s report which is being examined by the committee – and I will make a comment on that – found that the money paid for these plots could not be traced anywhere in the accounts of KCC; that is a fact. And I am happy that the committee is investigating that matter, we would be interested in knowing. 

Hon. Nsubuga talked about Vellani; Vellani was invited by Mr Ssebaana Kizito when he was chairman – (Interjection)– I am relating the facts the way I know them; they can be investigated by this Parliament. Vellani was invited by Mr Ssebaana Kizito to buy plots where sitting tenants were –(Mr Mathius Nsubuga rose)- the Speaker has disallowed you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, sit down; you had an opportunity to speak.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, this House has a mechanism of verifying what is said on the Floor of the House. 

So when the situation became very difficult because the tenants protested the allocation of the land to Vellani, Mr Ssebaana Kizito did organise - with the help of the developers - Shs 750 million and paid it to Vellani who in turn vacated the premises. And that is when these plots were allocated to these so-called developers. 

As far as I am concerned, I don’t know why the Katorobo Report was not implemented. My view is that the first committee report, speaking as a lawyer, was extremely contradictory because its findings and recommendations do not say the same thing. So I found it strange that a committee can make findings but the conclusions are not consistent with the findings. That is why I am happy that this committee has finally come out with a clear report, which this House should discuss and pronounce itself on and give us clear directions. 

If you can allow, Madam Speaker, I would like to turn myself to the conclusions to the recommendations and tell you what, first of all, we have done as government, what we accept and maybe what we pray could be reviewed.

Recommendation No. 1, on proper planning, is okay because this is what government should do and we have no problem with proceeding to implement recommendation No. 1. 

Recommendation No. 2, His Excellency the President has already written to KCC and to the Ministry of Local Government to stop the eviction of this school from this site. I have already communicated this directive to KCC and they have stopped the relocation of Nakivubo Settlement Primary School from the site where it exists. 

Recommendation No.3: The desire of sitting non-resident tenants that they may be given opportunity. This is what our ministry wanted to do because the policy of government now is that where sitting tenants exist, when government seeks to lease that land in which they operate, those tenants should be given priority to develop the premises in which they operate. This is what government did for Kisekka Market – I am saying, it is a policy; there is such a thing as policy in government. If you have ever worked in government, you should know that policy precedes the law. 

So our policy is that where sitting tenants operate, they should be given priority. And this is what government has done for Kisekka Market because it had again been irregularly allocated to an individual at the exclusion of the vendors there. So, government decided that the lease to an individual should be revoked and priority be given to sitting tenants. We are doing the same for Nakasero; we are doing the same for Owino Market and our view, if this House agrees, is that the sitting tenants who had running contracts in the Old Taxi Park namely, UTODA, the non-resident sitting tenants –(Interjection)– I am just giving my proposal. This House is going to debate hon. Ben Wacha’s motion; I am just giving you my view. Let those tenants be given priority and be allowed to develop this park.   

The views given by hon. Byandala are very useful. If these tenants are allowed to develop the park then conditions like presentation of development plans, insurance bonds, demonstration of capacity to develop the Old Park should be made clear in the agreements for them to develop the park.

Recommendation No.4 is very important that the committee on Local Government Accounts should continue handling the matter, and I totally agree because there are issues which that committee is handling and this is what complicates my situation. Should this Parliament now pronounce itself on these recommendations and I start implementing those that government accepts, what happens if the committee on Local Government Accounts comes up with different recommendations and this House again adopts them? That will complicate my work as an implementer of resolutions of this Parliament.

I would, therefore, recommend that we could adopt these recommendations subject to the final presentation of the report of the committee on Local Government Accounts so that then I have a window to review or adjust the decisions I will have taken following today’s motion. I beg to stop there, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu -

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Well, I will talk about six. Six really says that we should stop. Six contradicts one, two and three because it says we stay everything until KCC and government have identified a suitable site for a new taxi park and streamlined public transport in the city. 

Of course identifying a suitable site for a taxi park can be explored. Streamlined public transport in the city should be done because there is no reason why we cannot do this. This will depend, of course, on the report of the Public Accounts Committee. If we have to do this before we implement one, two and three, then should I proceed with one? Should I proceed with three because I have implemented two? 

I have been working on three. I have been negotiating with those who bought the land with the view of compensating them so that they can release the park to the sitting tenants. This is what I have been negotiating. So does it mean that I have to wait to implement No.3 and then implement No.6 and then come back to No. 3? What are the implications because there is paralysis really in that park? All these tenants you see; UTODA sitting tenants have occupied the park, the people who hold their titles cannot access the park. One of them tried to take a grader to prepare his plot; the grader was burnt to ashes. This is the situation I am dealing with, and I think this Parliament should help us to resolve the impasse that exists in the park.

My proposal is a win-win solution. Those who paid their money, namely, the investors should not really lose out. We should find ways of making sure they recover their money. We can discuss the modalities -(Applause)- but we should also discuss with the sitting tenants; they demonstrate capacity and I have emphasised this to them over and over again. They should demonstrate the financial capacity, management capacity and planning capacity to re-develop this place of the Old Taxi Park. Then if they do, they are Ugandans like everybody else, we will allocate them leases conditional upon fulfilling those covenants and they proceed and we have peace in the Old Taxi Park and the city. This is what I recommend if it is accepted by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Hon. Katuntu, how far are you on reporting? How far are you from writing your report and presenting it here?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we have gone three quarter way. We are only remaining with a quarter of our task and then report writing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In terms of time, are you talking about a week or a month? I want time.

MR KATUNTU: Four weeks, I think. We have got up country programmes like this evening we are leaving for Masaka and we have another up country programme next week. So four weeks would be most appropriate, and I do not want to say something which I will not fulfil. Four weeks is definite and let the Parliament not push me to say what the committee cannot do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we adopt these recommendations subject to the conditions which have been proposed. Thank you, hon. Members. I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted together with the recommendations proposed by the Minister and Members of Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report, as amended, adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is 2 O’clock now. I would like to suspend the House up to 3 O’clock when we shall come back to attend to the other business. The House suspended for one hour.

(The House was suspended at 1.58 p.m.)
 (On resumption at 3.15 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

3.16
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the document is being distributed. This is to inform Parliament — some people picked the reports from outside apparently. Can I proceed? Some Members already have copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, you can start.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: This is to inform Parliament about the preparations toward the hosting of the special summit of the African Union on Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees in Africa, which will take place from the 19th to the 23rd of October this year at the Commonwealth Resort, Munyonyo. 

Colleagues, as you are aware, Uganda is the host nation to over 200,000 refugees mostly from the neighbouring countries: DRC, Rwanda, Sudan, Somalia and some Ethiopians. In addition, Uganda has over the past two decades had a problem of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) mostly in the North and North eastern parts of the country as a result of the LRA insurgency. Being aware of Uganda’s rich experience in hosting 
international events, and in particular, Uganda’s progressive policies in addressing the plight of IDPs and refugees, the African Union requested Uganda to host a special African Union Summit on Refugees in 2007.

This aimed at pursuing durable solutions to the root causes and challenges of Africa’s more than 17 million IDPs and refugees under the theme, “African Union: Addressing the challenges of forced displacement in Africa.”

The summit was not held in 2007 for reasons I do not want to go into. But we are now glad to have it take place from 19 to 23 of this month.

This special summit is a follow up of the AU’s Ministerial Conference Resolutions on Forced Displacement held in Ouagadougou in Burkina Faso in May 2006, and the 9th Ordinary Session of the AU Executive Council of Ministers, held in July 2006 in Banjul, Gambia.

Uganda accepted to host the special AU Summit on IDPs and refugees and H.E the President endorsed 19th to 23rd October as dates when Uganda will host this summit at the Commonwealth Resort, Munyonyo.

Specific aims of the summit

Colleagues, the AU special summit will specifically aim at addressing the following:

    a) The root causes of displacement including adoption of medium to the long term strategies and programmes.

    b) To identify ways of preventing forced displacement in Africa.

    c) Improve the protection of victims forced by displacement in Africa.

    d) Strengthen measures to meet the specific needs of displaced women and children.

    e) Devise strategies to reduce the impact of natural disasters on displacement of people, and finding solutions to their problems.

    f) Devise strategies that will enable the fast- tracking of the rebuilding of the communities emerging from conflict.

    g) Strengthen partnerships in addressing forced displacement in Africa. This, in particular will be on how countries can unite in avoiding or addressing issues of displacements.

    h) To open to signatories, the AU convention for the protection and assistance of IDPs in Africa. It has been proposed that this convention be named, The Kampala Convention.

The progress on preparations

Madam Speaker, the venue, Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort, has been identified as the most suitable for the summit. The permanent secretary of Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has already signed a Memorandum of Understanding in regard to this matter and we are upbeat.

Invitation letters to the various heads of state and ministers have already been dispatched to the corresponding capitals through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Invitations have also been sent to diplomatic missions and selected UN agencies represented in Uganda.

We have equally extended invitations to all of you, Members of Parliament, permanent secretaries, all ministers, chairpersons of regional parliamentary fora from IDPs and refugee hosting areas, all Uganda’s ambassadors and to selected dignitaries.

The host country agreement discussed and finalised with the AU big delegations constituted from three government ministries: Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Foreign Affairs; and the Office of the Prime Minister, who did this from Addis-Ababa.

The Solicitor-General cleared it and gave powers of attorney to Uganda’s Ambassador to Ethiopia and the AU, to sign the final agreement.

The agreement, among others, highlights that US$ 500,000 commitment support by the AU  to the summit will be targeted to meet expenses on conference bags and so on as indicated in that paragraph.

The AU will make available, at its expense, office supplies that will be used during the summit. However, I would like to report that such items attract VAT at the airport and the process of tax refunds are already in progress. Uganda Revenue Authority to handle this.

A national steering committee has been meeting every Monday; they had the last meeting this week to ensure the summit becomes a success. Working committees were set up and they have been handling key outputs.

All sub-committees’ work plans have been completed and the procurement process of the various required items is already taking place to make sure we are set. Conference facilities and hotels have been inspected and recommended. Information handbooks for delegates and the aide memoir are near completion. We should have it ready by Friday. The AU special summit website has been opened and its address is: www.auspecialsummitkampala.ug.

An inter-ministerial technical committee chaired by the head of civil service has been in place all these days to review outputs of the steering committees as to the status of readiness.

A cabinet sub-committee for the special summit has been in place and doing meetings regularly since September, under the chairmanship of the Vice-President, to oversee the progress of the summit.

The summit manual agenda and other awareness materials have had their programmes and only a waits approval by the AU before being shared out.

Furthermore, to strengthen coordination and coherence of the preparations for the summit, an officer from the Office of the Prime Minister has been seconded to the AU Commission in Addis Ababa to help coordination between the two capitals until the summit is over.

His Excellency, the President, has accepted to officially open an exhibition and side events by development projects by IDPs and refugees on the 22 October 2009. One hundred and fifty projects will be on display. Actually we will have participation by other civil society organisations and other agencies. It will be a very interesting exhibition. You are requested to come and share the experience.

Lastly, to create awareness and publicity for this event, international media houses such CNN, BBC and national broadcasting services have been engaged to popularise this conference through airing video clips of the summit. The promotion begun on the 15th September and will continue until the summit ends.

Funding

Government has provided the basic funding though we have had support from humanitarian partners including Algeria, Sweden, Denmark, Luxemburg, Norway and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, but also, as I mentioned earlier on, the African Union.

Mobilisation for participation

A lot has been done in mobilising attendance by the heads of state and ministers. H.E. the President mobilised presidents when he was in New York and has been in touch with them in regard to this issue. I was in Geneva and met a number of ministers who attended the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (EXCOM) about 10 days ago. My interaction with them on the side events was quite active.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, kindly change that figure 10 because as of today I think the figure of the heads of state who have confirmed attendance is now 19. And one hopes that we get many more coming to attend.

As I conclude, I would like to say that the AU special summit avails Uganda an opportunity to market herself to the outside world, which is a clear move towards the strengthening of Uganda’s tourist industry. Our resolve to bring peace not only to Uganda, but Africa as a whole, can no more come under doubt. I would like to say that the convention will be a pacesetter in the new re-examination of Africa’s internal weaknesses.

Your presence at the summit and actual participation will turn the event into another success for a future to read about. I take this opportunity to invite you to participate both in body and mind in this historical event and process. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Yes, hon. Wadri, but very briefly, I hope.

3.30
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has made.

I stand here because I am touched by some of the specific aims of the summit as has been laid out in the minister’s statement. It is a well-known fact that while we make reference to the great experiences that this country has gained, and hence the reason it has been chosen to host this important event, we should also look at our negative aspects. I am saying this because there are majorly two reasons, according to the minister’s statement, why Uganda has been chosen as a host. One is that Uganda is a host to a number of refugees from the Great Lakes Region countries; and secondly, because it is said to have experience in managing problems of IDPs for the last two decades.

However, one of these that I wish to come out openly, with all the sincerity and commitment during this summit, is to say that never again should any country have its people run outside as refugees. 

I would like to make a special appeal to us as Ugandans. Why have we had instances of IDPs for the last two and half decades? Over the last two decade why have we had a number of Kenyans run across? As I talk, some of them are still in Masindi District. Why do we still have Sudanese refugees, some of whom have even refused to return to their country even after signing the comprehensive peace agreement a few years back? Why have we continuously had refugees from Sudan, DRC, Burundi and so on, flock to our country? Why haven’t we registered refugees from the Republic of Tanzania flocking to Kenya, Rwanda or Uganda? I think these are very pertinent questions that we, as a country, must be able to answer.

We have had the problem of refugees running in and out of the country, mainly because of lack of tolerance of one another’s opinions. Are we going to continue priding that we have gained experience in managing IDPs in this country for the last two and half decades when we have not yet put our house in order, in terms of political tolerance? Look at any of these countries that have had problems of refugees and tell me whether the problems have not come due to lack of political tolerance. Make a mention of any of these countries that I have talked about as having had scores of refugees cross their borders, and tell me if that has not been due to lack of adherence and respect for free and fair elections. 

I would rather say that this summit is coming to Uganda timely – we are left with less than one year to the next election. When I look at the road map as given by the Electoral Commission, in September next year we will already have had presidential candidates nominated. And in October, you and I will be back to the drawing board seeking the mandate of the people through elections. But how well prepared are we as a country? I say this because I would like to throw this challenge to my colleagues on the Front bench –(Interjections)– no, it is mutual, but it is you to bring up all the relevant laws that require amendments so that we are able to run a free and fair election that curtails or brings to zero, chances of people running out of the country.

There is the issue of political oppression. For those of us who are Catholics, it is always said that if you are going to the Altar to seek and receive the Body and Blood of the Saviour, Jesus Christ, you must have a clean heart. How clean are we as a country, and more particularly as a government, to come forward and say here we are? When I say, as a country, that means all of us, but there must be the lead person and the lead person in this process is Government. We have reason to believe that this is a country that both the opposition and people in Government must work together. But most important of all, the person who is in charge of the resources, the person who has got the key to machineries, either for good use or abuse, is the person who needs to take this lesson most.

Then the issue of rule of law. A few weeks back, we saw what happened in Kampala when it took us time to leave the Chambers of this Parliament because we were not sure whether we would reach home; that was Thursday the 10th of September. Yes, we were here; you and I caused it; the country caused it. We cannot apportion blame, but this is the time for us to forget about the past and think about the future. Can we move forward so that all that has happened in our neighbouring countries does not happen here? 

On employment policies - good enough, when I say this, my senior brother whom I always make fun of, Omuuhongo hon. Gabriel Opio, is here - what policies do we have that can guarantee employment for the young generation of this country, so that they have no cause to run out of this country because one could become a refugee as a result of lack of employment in one’s home country. How prepared are we as a country to address this issue? At this summit, I will be very grateful if the convener through the relevant ministries could be able to address the issues of the host refugee communities. I say this because for the last more than two decades, my constituency has been hosting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I think those issues would be best addressed in that conference and that is why it has been called. I want to encourage you Members to go and attend this meeting so that you can discuss those issues there. You know, it is not just about Uganda, but about refugees from Tanzania, Burundi among others. 

MR WADRI: I thank you for your wise guidance, Madam Speaker, but the issue is, if all Members of Parliament, as invited, go there, I do not think we would have the opportunity to have our opinions heard, but I know that the Minister for Refugees and Disaster Preparedness, as being central, will certainly catch the eye of whoever will be there to give him an opportunity to talk. So, we are here putting these things across so that when we go there, and we are not able to have an opportunity to talk, he is able to capture our issues and present them, and that is why I am raising this. It is a summit and if it is a summit, much as we have been invited, we will only be in the gallery like our pupils who are in the gallery, and have nothing to say but the heads of state and government will be able to do that. But in the aide memoir that the line ministries should have prepared, some of these issues may help so that those of us who will be in the gallery in Munyonyo will then be able to see that our views have been put across.

The point I was trying to make is that my constituency has hosted refugees for over two decades and having a large number of people on limited resources like land which cannot expand, a lot of destruction has been done on the environment and the host communities are, therefore, left with a lot of problems and challenges. I hope through this summit such issues will also be addressed. How do we revamp the already degenerated environment as a result of having hosted refugees? I know the honourable minister here will come and say the other time we opened a bridge which was as a result of you having hosted refugees, but that is just a drop in the ocean. We need much more in order to address the impact of damage that has been caused by the large refugee communities in areas where they have settled.

Furthermore, I am happy that as per this statement that the minister has issued to us, we as the host country are not unfairly taxed as has been the case with the past summits that have been hosted by us. I am happy that other participating countries and development partners have given a helping hand in meeting this financial commitment that is required in order to make this a success. Once again, I would like to thank the honourable minister. 

Mr Minister, these are a few of the issues which to me are of importance among others, especially that the heads of state and government could consider. But there are also other issues about the plight of women and children. How can we operationalise our policies and laws which are targeting this clientele? Are we on course? Is there a way that we can improve so that the rights of these people can be realised? 

And there are issues of natural disaster. We are told, and yesterday the line minister, Prof. Kabwegyere, was talking about the looming disaster that may befall us as a result of this forthcoming El-Nino. How well prepared are you? These are challenges to us as a country and we commit ourselves to being side by side with you if some of these issues, which are the root causes of people running out of their countries and people ending up in IDPs, are addressed. I thank you and I wish you could bring the relevant laws for amendment so that there is a level playground in terms of political elections; so that none of us runs out of this country.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have some announcements. Tomorrow morning at 8.45 a.m. you are invited to receive the Africa Cup of Nations Trophy. The Speaker will receive it from the Standard Bank Football Ambassador, Abedi Pele. Those of you who play football know Abedi Pele. So, be here at 8.45 a.m. to receive the trophy.

Secondly, in the gallery - I do not know which side - there are students and teachers of Buwoya Day and Boarding Primary School from Bugweri County represented by hon. Katuntu and hon. Magoola. (Applause)  Please stand up. And they are clad in yellow. (Laughter)

On this side of the House, are pupils and teachers of Namatala Primary School in Mbale. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, before we broke off for lunch, there was something we had asked the Minister of Finance to do. Can you please report on your action?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, under your guidance, you gave me leave to go and prepare a letter relating to the sale price increment by National Housing and Construction Company Limited, and I have obliged and wish to Table the letter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read it for the Hansard.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am guided by the Deputy Speaker and I will do as guided. Madam Speaker, this letter is written to you, copied to the Rt hon. Prime Minister who is handling this matter and the letter reads: 

“The Rt hon. Speaker, Parliament of Uganda. 15 October 2009. Ref: Stay of action on sale price increment by National Housing and Construction Company Limited. 

The Parliament of Uganda this morning requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stay action on the increase in the sale price of units at Bugolobi and Buganda Road housing projects that are owned by the National Housing and Construction Company Limited. 

In accordance with the Parliament’s request and pursuant to the shareholders agreement entered into by the government in the said company, this is to confirm that the board of directors of the National Housing and Construction Company Limited has been requested to stay execution until the report of the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been debated by the House.” 

Signed by me, the Minister of State in charge of Planning, copied to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who is handling this matter. I did this after consultation, Madam Speaker, and I lay it on Table. Thank you very much.

3.47
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): I have listened carefully to the minister’s letter, but the petition he is talking about does not include Bugolobi. That particular petition is only on Buganda Road. Ours, I think, was disposed of without being debated. So, unless it is specifically mentioning our petition to the Prime Minister not to increase rent until that petition to the Prime Minister has been disposed of. Otherwise, ours as Bugolobi is not there in the petition to the Finance Committee.

3.47
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I can recollect, we thought that he is supposed to write a letter as a minister whose docket is National Housing, to inform National Housing not to increase rent. I do not see any copy to National Housing who are evicting people and increasing rent. I thought there should have been a copy to National Housing. So, it is a bit vague now. 

I thought this was very clear. We are trying to save our people from the hiked rent and from eviction. So, National Housing should be informed that Parliament today resolved a, b, c, d. I thank you.

3.48
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear in my mind what we wanted. We wanted a letter from the Ministry of Finance to National Housing Corporation stopping them from increasing rent and meddling with the rates of these flats until the issue is settled by Parliament. It is not you, Madam Speaker, who wanted the letter. The letter could have been copied to you and the Prime Minister for information, but the target is the National Housing Corporation and not you, Madam Speaker. 

3.49
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just by way of emphasis, the honourable minister is saying that National Housing is hereby requested; a request can be rejected. What we wanted was a directive. (Applause) You cannot request somebody who is under you. A request goes upwards, it does not go downwards. (Laughter)

There is, therefore, no evidence before Parliament now that the letter has been written to National Housing. This letter is worse than useless. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I think there are issues about how Government works, which I would plead with the Members of the House to appreciate. When the Ministry of Finance undertakes to oblige to the directive of the Speaker of this House, you should expect me to follow it through to the implementing agencies to comply as I have complied. Because National Housing and Construction Corporation Limited, as of now, is not a state enterprise; we are shareholders with a shareholders agreement, which defines how partners should relate. So, when I take to the floor of this House I should not be doubted. I have willingly undertaken to do so, on your directive. When I am doing what I willingly accepted to do, nobody should doubt me. 

This matter affects some Members of Parliament here in the House. Even by the Rules of Procedure, you have to declare your interest before you debate this matter. So, I shouldn’t be pushed when I am working on resolving this matter. I know it affects some of our colleagues; children have been brought to your Office, Madam Speaker, pleading for this matter to be resolved. This matter has reached the President; he wrote to the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister is handling it. So, I want to tell you that this matter has the full weight of every big person in Government.

Even if I wrote to the general manager of the National Housing and Construction Company, does he have any more authority than the President who has directed the Prime Minister on this matter? This is a matter which should not cause anxiety because it is being handled. I can pledge to you, Madam Speaker, that I will follow this matter through until it is done. If you want, I can give a copy to the managing director of National Housing and Construction Company –(Interruptions)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, this morning there was an attempt to accuse the minister of being a liar. It was unparliamentary, we know, but it was a direct description of how he conducts his business. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, we are honourable members in this House, and under the rules of this House, a Member of the House is not expected to lie to the House, and I am not lying. So, you should stop this hon. Member; that he can no longer be heard. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do not heckle the minister. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: You should send this Member out of the House because he is even defying your ruling. (Laughter) Is it in order for a Member to insinuate that I am not telling the truth to this House when I am actually telling the truth; nothing but the whole truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, minister, I think you copy that letter to the National Housing and Construction Company so that we can know how it goes. 

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the ruling. Let me conclude this way that the minister should not try to buy time. The message must be very clear; you direct these fellows in National Housing and Construction Company as requested by the House. I think that is the best way you can implement a parliamentary decision.

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I want the minister to clarify to us – in the effect that National Housing and Construction Company does not comply with the directive, that is actually elusive, what are you going to do with the request. What is Government going to do if they continue hiking the price of the flats and evicting people?

3.56
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to assert the decision of Parliament that this letter is not legal. I know you are a lawyer, but from my elementary law, this letter cannot be taken – unless you write a letter today directed to National Housing; it is not directed to them. You can ask the minister to go and re-address this letter to the right addressee so that it becomes a legal document. Otherwise, this one is addressed to you and unless you re-do it and address it to the right person – if I were working on my desk, I would not take this to National Housing and Construction Company. So, I appeal to you to ask the minister to go back and address it properly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister that is my letter; now you write a letter to National Housing and Construction Company. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was directed already by you and I responded in accordance with the directive. I had already taken note to give copy of this letter to the Managing Director of National Housing and Construction Company. Similarly, if you direct me otherwise, I oblige. I can write another letter to the managing director. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPLOYMENT OF SOLDIERS DURING THE ELECTION OF THE KYABAZINGA IN BUSOGA

4.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Copies of the report are being distributed to you all colleagues.

This week on Tuesday, the Prime Minister promised that the Minister of Defence would make a statement in Parliament in regard to the handling of the security situation in the context of the dispute about the Kyabazingaship of Busoga. It is in this regard that I take to the Floor to make the statement. 

I was not here until late last night but I got the briefing from my colleagues and I also perused our Hansard of that day. As I understand it, colleagues were saying, “Why are people being beaten up”, and asking why the Army is getting involved in the matter of beating up people and being present at or in cultural sites. 

I will first answer the question of why UPDF and the Police Force seem to be appearing in this matter, which appears to be essentially a cultural matter. The current policy of government is that for all the recognised cultural leaders, you could call them “kings”, their security should be provided by soldiers formed as royal guards. 

In the case of the Busoga Kingdom, therefore, this is why royal guards have been deployed at Bugembe and Mpumudde. I would request colleagues to put a full stop there. The additional sentence saying, “Where a new palace is being built”, is an error. The statement should stop at Mpumudde. So that is how the UPDF comes into the picture because of the policy of guarding the cultural leaders.

As far as the Police are concerned, that begs no question because the Police have the constitutional mandate to maintain law and order anywhere in our country. 

As it is now very well known by hon. Members, on the 5th of October this year, the cultural chiefs of Busoga planned to elect the Isebantu - another attempt was being made by the cultural chiefs. However, before that day, the High Court had issued an injunction against proceeding with that particular action. This injunction meant that government could not participate in the election as earlier agreed with the chiefs. I need to explain here what the agreement was. 

The cultural chiefs of Busoga had a meeting with His Excellency the President and they agreed that this matter needed to be settled out of court and amicably. It was agreed that the Electoral Commission should be requested to go and help conduct that particular election. 

But because this injunction had been issued, the Electoral Commission was advised not to participate. At the same time, since this was a matter before court, government did not want to be seen as if it was objecting to what the cultural chiefs wanted to do. So the government merely advised that since by policy we guard these cultural sites, the court injunction not withstanding, if they wish to proceed with the election, we proposed that they hold them anywhere other than in the official cultural places. 

This advice was taken by the chiefs and they decided to convene at Busoga Square and hold the elections. After the elections, the Regional Police Commander responsible for Jinja was requested to provide security of the king-elect and his entourage to Kamuli. According to the information provided to me, the Regional Police Commander agreed and provided police escort to the king and his entourage. 

When the entourage reached Mpumudde Hill, again one of the cultural leaders accompanying the king-elect contacted the Regional Police Commander indicating that they would now wish to proceed to Mpumudde Hill. The RPC advised against that plan. The leadership of the party accompanying the king-elect agreed with this advice and proceeded to Kamuli with the main party that was with the king. 

However, a big crowd of the king decided to remain at the hill saying that they would wait for their king at that spot. It was reported to me that soon, those who remained at the hill became rowdy. The royal guards at the hill; who had been there before, moved to chase away those who had started climbing the hill. 

The crowd started throwing stones at the vehicles on the Kamuli-Jinja Road. Police, therefore, took steps to disperse them in order to protect motorists and ensure order in that area. 

On the issue of the rally that had been organised on Independence Day, I have been informed that this was a rally organised by a private citizen called Mr Dolly Mubarak. He informed the Police and the Police indicated no objection to the organisation of this rally. However, unknown to the police authority, the organiser had also invited the king – one of the contestants to officiate at this rally by way of flagging off the rally. 

So, at the arrival of the entourage of the king to this place where the flagging off of the rally was to take place, I think security got to know that the king was proceeding to this point and in consultation with the RPC, they were requested to disallow the guest of honour to proceed to the function and instead, as I was informed, the RPC negotiated with the stakeholders that the Isabalangira should instead officiate at this function and I was informed that that is what happened. The Isabalangira officiated at this function and thereafter, things proceeded normally.

In summary, to answer the questions and concerns of honourable Members of Parliament, I state as follows:

There is a contest in Busoga as to who should be the Kyabazinga. Government, through His Excellency the President, has held several meetings with the cultural chiefs of Busoga to appeal to them to settle the matter of the Kyabazinga amicably. 

The conflict as to who is the rightful king has also been presented to the courts of law in one form or the other. However, if all the chiefs agree, the matters in court could be withdrawn so that dialogue and understanding between the cultural chiefs will sort out this matter. The government is very hopeful that the route of dialogue outside court will prevail. 

In the course of ensuring law and order as this conflict is being sorted out, some complications appear to have arisen whereby security agencies may have overstepped the limit of their authority. In order to ensure better clarity on how security agencies have conducted themselves, an inquiry will be conducted by a joint team from the Office of the President, the Ministry of Defence and that of Internal Affairs. This work will be mounted and concluded within the next three weeks. Parliament will be informed of the findings and any consequential actions that will be taken. 

In the meantime, government will continue to encourage and facilitate dialogue between the cultural leaders in Busoga region so that this matter is brought to an amicable conclusion. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before I hand over to the Members, I want to tell you about Mpumwire Hill. That hill is the ancestral site of the hereditary 11 chiefs and it is not part of Bugembe. It is a place where each of them is entitled to go. I wanted you to know; do not connect it to Bugembe. 
 
4.11
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement but also allow me put a few facts to the minister. The place where they are constructing the Lubiri is at Igenge Hill and not Mpumudde. As if that is not enough, I want to inform the minister, probably because he was out of the country, that even the military police, the so-called “red top” were the ones that blocked one of the elected Kyabazingas, who was going to flag off the rally. Either or not the RDC was commanding from the background but there was some chaos created by the military police. 

As government looks at having amicable solutions to this problem, one of the recommendations I can also give them is that they withdraw the Army from all the royal guards in the meantime since we are still contesting the true Kyabazinga. Since both sides are not yet convinced, it would be better that you withdraw the guards as you carry out the investigations that you hope to report about within the three weeks being talked about. 

The fact of the matter, however, is that the minister has tried to explain some of the events that took place but he is not exhaustive and we still pray that the Basoga remain non-confrontational. The people of Busoga are not aggressive; we always wish to negotiate. It is my humble prayer that we do not involve the military; we do not involve force as far as this matter is concerned. People are willing and are ready to sit and talk until a lasting solution to this problem is found. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.14 
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Defence for attempting to respond to the issues that were raised over the Kyabazinga saga. When I looked at this report, I expected the minister to first apologise to the people of Busoga who were actually beaten up by his forces. The minister has told us about the role of the UPDF and the Police and that it is the policy of government to guard the kings by the Army but I wonder; if the Army men were supposed to provide security, why then did they go ahead to beat up people?

The minister talks about the RPCS but I get perturbed and with great pain for the people of Busoga. When the RPC was confronted by the Basoga, he clearly told the people that he got the orders from above and people were beaten. We cannot let this to continue.

Media houses have gone ahead to publish pictures to show what happened in Busoga and it is terrible. I even have Bukedde; I do not know how to read Luganda because I am not conversant with it but when you look at the second last page of Bukedde, there are terrible pictures of people being beaten.

The issue of the Kyabazingaship should be handled with care and I do not see why the government up to now does not come out clearly to see that this confusion is got out of the way. We have information that even the Shs 1 billion that the government sent to the kingdom; I think they sent Shs 300 million - was used to pay the “kanyamas” to beat our people, which is terrible! The people Of Busoga are in great pain over the matter and I have pictures here, which I would like to lay on the Table and maybe the Minister will look at them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bring them down.

MR BALIKOWA: I want to lay on the Table these photographs that were taken showing how the Army was involved in beating up people. People were brutalised. I have one with black Mambas. Honourable Minister, you can see what happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Explain.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are interested in knowing what took place. If those pictures are laid on the Table, “This is one, this is another one” without telling us what was happening, it will not help us. (Laughter) Show us the pictures; tell us, “In this particular one the army is doing this; the police is doing this”, and then you put them on the Table telling us the source of the pictures and the dates they were taken.

MR BALIKOWA: Madam Speaker, this is a picture showing the elected Kyabazinga being blocked. This is another picture showing Army men blocking people from going to the cultural site. I have another one with Army men and policemen -(Interjections)- this is another one where the Isabalangira was blocked by Army men. I have this one where policemen were busy caning people and then another one where someone is bleeding seriously from the head and the government cannot even apologise. He was beaten by army men and policemen. (Laughter)

This is what happened on the event and I beg to lay these pictures on the Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to debate this statement as a Ugandan but not a Musoga. In my considered opinion, this statement has come at a very right time in the sense that about six or seven days ago, our very own Uganda Human Rights Commission launched its 11th annual report accusing a cross-section of our military and a cross-section of our personnel in the police of torturing fellow Ugandans who are civilians. If there is anybody who still doubts the report by Uganda Human Rights Commission, I think the answer has been given and laid on the Table as it was done in Busoga.

The first fundamental question I would like to ask the Minister is; in this statement the Minister is saying that government withdrew its participation because there was a court injunction but somewhere he is saying it is the policy of government that all the recognised kings’ security is provided by soldiers formed as royal guards. In this case, my assumption is that there was no king as yet and there is still no king in Busoga. Which king were these so called royal guards protecting or guarding? That is the first fundamental question.

Article 79 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws for the good governance, for law and order in this country and as a Parliament, we have done our part. The role of the UPDF is very clear, the role of police is very clear - what is wrong with civilians in Busoga celebrating the election of their very own king who was elected by their very own people although there is still that problem in the courts of law - and they were doing it peacefully? 

There is that joy that comes from having a leader. In the same way, hon. Minister, when you were elected Member of Parliament, there was jubilation among people in your constituency. Why would you deploy a very fierce UPDF battalion to work on the people who are celebrating your victory and yet they were peaceful? 

Instead of protecting law and order as mandated by the law, there are some elements in the military and police who are instead promoting lawlessness by provoking civilians. In that case those people were provoked. That is my view. Those people were provoked by these so called royal guards. 

Hon. Minister, as a young leader in this country, our generation would wish to inherit a country which is united; a country where unity reigns supreme and not a country where beating civilians reigns supreme. And whether you want it or not, nature will dictate and my generation one time will take charge of this country. But we do not want to take charge of a nation that is completely disunited. 

I want to especially ask government, that what is wrong with the people of Busoga electing their very own king without any hand of government in it?  These people are old enough; they are mature enough to determine who should become their king. What has fundamentally gone wrong with our nation? There are two Kyabazingas, fine. There are two Muftis - (Laughter)- and you ask yourself, what must we do? Should we just pray? Should there be some intervention from heaven or what? Something seems to be fundamentally wrong.

As a Ugandan, I think the time has come for us to give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God. And I still appeal to government to stop interfering with issues related to cultural institutions. If they are sticking to their cultural roles and responsibilities, they must be given an opportunity to play their part as provided for in the Constitution. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Byanyima makes his contribution, join me in welcoming children and teachers of Kigezi High School, Kabale Municipality. They are up there. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Rukundo. You are welcome and thank you for coming.

4.28
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy the minister has finally come here with a statement. I have a quick question. You mean our professional army and well-trained police’s way is only to beat people? Why do you beat people really? Some of you have not had that experience. Hon. Omara Atubo had it. (Laughter) In 2001, I had a thorough beating by this Army during the elections but I forgave everybody. 

I would like to appeal to government, especially ministers, and sorry to use this but every dog has its day. Why do you have to beat people? If you saw on TV that day, they were beating somebody as if they were beating cows. Has Uganda changed to beating? There are many ways, I am sure, a professional soldier or a police officer can use to discipline people. But the issue of beating is almost like the order of the day now - kiboko squad and what have you. Let us calm down, please. We still have a long way to go. This is a democratically elected government. Some of us love this government.

Hon. Kiyonga and the Minister of Internal Affairs, please do not laugh over this matter. One day one of you is going to be beaten. He has a good experience. I was beaten but I do not want to see what happened to me happening to any of you people. Some of you saw me on TV. I could not talk even after winning the elections. This was because I was crying having been beaten thoroughly by the Army. (Laughter) So when I hear people beating people it is so -(Interjections)- even after winning. 

It is no longer a laughing matter because everyday you see people in cars with sticks to beat people. Let us find a better way of disciplining our people rather than -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to inform my brother here that the government we are in has its origin in the bush. They took power through a military arrangement and all along have been controlling people through military might. Therefore, we are in a democracy which is being patronised by the Army and if we continue at this rate, my brother, the next time you win an election you will go down for winning. 

So, I appeal to you and all Ugandans -(Laughter)- no, his case was different because he was also beaten thoroughly. Anyway, this is not a laughing matter. It is very serious because now even the Police that we should rely on has already been militarised as well as all the institutions including the people who guard us. The other day, I got one with an AK-47 in plain uniform and he was saying he was a guard. They are everywhere. When you go to the park, these boda boda cyclists are all armed. You go and check the boot or under the seat – many people are armed. What I am saying really is that this is a military state being patronised -(Interjections)- I am telling you the truth. You can say no but the next time you will be in the arrangement and you will be beaten. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I am happy the minister has proposed that the doors will remain open for dialogue and I pray to God to touch the hearts of those people who are involved in the dialogue so that we can have an amicable solution. But for kiboko, I curse it and I think the Army and the Police have been infiltrated by the bayaye because beating was not a fashion of the NRM. Hon. Ministers, when you are seated somewhere under a tree - recently you had a retreat – please, do not talk of kiboko. Some of you may one day be beaten. I thank you.

4.33
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I greatly sympathise with the people of Busoga and I know what they are going through. We must be very grateful to the creator that nobody was killed because similar situations happen and many people lose their lives. Memories of what took place in the Buganda region are still fresh in our minds. 

The million dollar question is what is the government’s role in its involvement in the Kyabazingaship? If you may recall the election of the Kyabazinga, one had a court injunction stopping it and they went ahead and I vividly remember that the government was represented at that inauguration of the Kyabazinga I and then when it came to Kyabazinga II, there was another injunction and here I do not know whether the government was there or it was there in a different form.

I believe that the government is not sincere, the government and more so his Excellency the President is pin-pointing fingers to one Kyabazinga. I want to be sincere because I am the Imam of this institution (Parliament). The President favours Wambuzi because if the government were neutral, why did the President himself go there some two months ago when the first Kyabazinga was seated on the throne? The message the President was sending is that, “This is the Kyabazinga I trust”, yet the Kyabazingaship is squarely a matter to be left to the Basoga and their cultural leaders. 

If that is the extent to which the President has gone and is saying, “This is the one I want in Buruuli, this is the one I want in Bumooli, this is the one I want in Busoga”, where are we going?

I cannot agree with the minister that the government is neutral in the Kyabazingaship - the President is all out supporting the other Kyabazinga - actions speak louder than words.

The President is doing a disservice to this nation because there is no way you can be a leader of this great state and you start sidelining people in as far as cultural institutions are concerned. I believe even our leaders in Busoga know that there is an upper hand in the conflicts in Busoga.

When you look at what the minister has stated on page 2, he said, “However, a big crowd of the supporters of the king elect decided to remain on the hill saying they would wait for their king at that spot. Soon, it is reported, they became a nuisance.” A minister calling the people of Busoga “a nuisance” - those who came to witness the official inauguration of their king; I think the minister must be ruled out of order and he must apologise to the people of Busoga.

These people who were elected have a lot of trust –

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: This was a carefully written statement and in reporting that incident, I did say that “it was reported” as all of you have read. I said that it was reported that people became a nuisance - is the honourable member in order to twist words around and say it is me who called those people a nuisance? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But minister, this is your statement. Everything here is yours and these are your words.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for your wise ruling. Unless the minister is telling us that he is disowning this statement, but if he is the one who has given us this statement, he must own every letter in it.

4.40
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): My conscience and professional training dictate that I do respect people who do not agree with me and I would like to declare from the onset that I am not a big fan of these traditional institutions. However, I do respect the people who believe in these traditional institutions. 

I am very much saddened by the casual nature with which hon. Kiyonga has come to this House to start explaining this very serious matter. I do not know whether if this particular incident happened in Kasese, hon. Kiyonga would come up with this statement. We have had problems in Kasese as to whether they recognise Mumbere or not, we have not had his forces beating up people.

MR KYETUNDA: I do believe and I am convinced that the people of Kasese are very patriotic and nationalistic, including my colleague hon. Kiyonga and I. Is it, therefore, in order for a Member of Parliament to insinuate and propose that hon. Kiyonga would have treated the people of Kasese differently from the people of other regions? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the word “Kasese” caught your ear prematurely. Wait until he has said what he wants to say and then you can raise a point of order. Proceed. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from the area where this incident took place and my reaction to the hon. Minister’s statement is - I think he should have treated this matter differently. Our people are annoyed, our people are angered. For us who come from that region, we are not taking this action as lightly as the hon. Minister wishes us to do, including this insulting language. 

These are voluntary institutions. We had a meeting with Hon. Adolf Mwesige, the minister the President appointed to run between both groups. I asked him this very pertinent question: How will Government stop people from giving their loyalty to the king they so wish? Tomorrow if Prince Nadiope, the Kyabazinga - I will call him so - goes to a place in Bugweri, are you going to get the Police to beat him up? If Wambuzi goes to Kaliro, are you going to get Police to beat up people? Where will you stop! 

Your Army today is known for one thing - beating up people. I saw my colleague laying pictures on the Table, which I have also done before because I have been a victim of your Army. In 2006, the same group – UPDF soldiers - with those huge logs they call sticks moved from village to village beating up people. It happened in Bugweri, but that was politics. This is another story. 

We have been thinking that it is a political problem and those being beaten are political lumpens. Now you have started beating up people who believe in their own culture and you have no courage to come and say, “Sorry” on behalf of Government; this will not happen again.” To apologise; to realise your mistake, is decency; and that is what I expected the hon. Minister of Defence to do. You owe us an apology, hon. Kiyonga, and this will not end here with this statement. 

People are in hospital because they were beaten up by people putting on uniforms and carrying guns bought by the people you are beating up. How immoral can you be? How immoral can you be that you use taxpayers’ money to get equipment and beat them up? It is an abuse of the uniform you put on. It is a total abuse of the trust this country has put in you. 

Really, this country belongs to all of us and there is no way, hon. Minister, we will agree. If two people agree all the time, then one of them is a fool. (Laughter) There is no way we can all agree. We shall have differing opinions, but can’t we have the decency to respect those who do not agree with us? Do you have to get guns and teargas and beat them up? 

There is no way Government is going to sort out this problem; it is going to run for a long time. You have to leave it to the institution itself to see how these people are going to reconcile. You will not stop those who want to pay allegiance to Nadiope by guns; it is not possible. You will also not stop those who want to pay allegiance to Wambuzi by Kiboko squad.  We were telling you that you were training this Kiboko squad and you denied but we now see it in Iganga -(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we still have the people of Busoga bleeding and mourning after their late king who was buried recently. 

I want to ask a question: Who is meddling in the duties, roles and responsibilities of the cultural institutions in Uganda, and this time, particularly in Busoga? Yesterday it was Buganda and today it is Busoga. So, which one is next and why? (Laughter) In paragraph 2.0 of the hon. minister’s statement, he is telling us of the presence of the UPDF and involvement of the Police in Busoga matters. This is causing interference in the traditional or cultural institutions in this country by the Army and the Police.  

The second question I would like to ask you is: Was it a request to put the Army there, since there was no war between the traditional chiefs who wanted to elect their king? What I still do not understand is, when the kingdoms were abolished, people were not happy. Now that they have been re-established, people are not enjoying; what is the way forward? 

I think this time let us pull away the Army from the traditional and cultural institutions. Let Government not meddle in the affairs of cultural institutions by giving them money, because what is taking it there is to defend its money. (Laughter) There is nothing Government is doing other than alleging that there are conflicts in the kingdoms. Since we allowed the kingdoms to operate again, we should have given them time to reorganise themselves and know whether they want to go back to their former cultural ways or become modern. 

If they want to become modern, who is going to do it for them? They should be able to do it themselves, but the Government is interfering in the name of protecting the people and their cultural sites. One wonders whether they have been invited to do so. This is a shame, hon. Minister. We cannot continue having problems in the kingdoms where people are beaten and others lose their lives as has been evidenced by the papers laid on Table. 

I, therefore, suggest that the people of Busoga be allowed to address the issues of their cultural leadership on their own. If they need Government’s involvement, they should be the ones to call for it but at the moment, I do not see where they need the government. 

You give them Army men and call them royal guards. Who gave them the name royal guards? Was it really given by the kings or Government? Was it their wish that they wanted the royal guards? They could have even got what you call the royal guards from among themselves and trained according to the kingdom’s interests. 

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The information I would like to give hon. Gutomoi is that Article 246 bars cultural institutions or cultural leaders from participating in partisan politics or politics per se.  I think we also need a law to regulate the extent to which politicians and Government institutions participate in affairs of the cultural institutions. 

MR GUTOMOI: Yes, thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you can see clearly that there are three elements in this issue - the cultural institutions, Government and politics. Now, who is that taking politics to cultural institutions? Whose interests? Is it the leaders of the cultural institutions or Government leaders who have interest in the cultural institutions? Because if it is there as you have stated, why are we taking Army men instead of amending the law so that Army men are barred completely from meddling in politics and cultural institutions? I think that this is what we should be doing. So, for this matter I appeal to Government to try to restrain the Police and the Army whenever they sense that there is conflict anywhere in this country. I am a victim of both the Army – the UPDF - and the Police. I was tied this popular kandoya and put in prison, which they called a “hall” for sometime -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Lubani Senior Secondary School in Jinja represented by hon. Nkayi and hon. Tuma. They are up there. 

4.55
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence who clearly said that he was not around. I want to thank you for having attempted to be defensive in putting across this report. 

I like going by testimony. During the heydays of the Movement Government – I think that was patriotism they were trying to teach us at school – one of the former members in the bush came to our school and told us that Obote’s government had become so porous that they would just walk in and out. He then said that they would stage roadblocks pretending to be Obote’s army men and ask for people’s identity cards and voter’s cards. If one bore a DP voter’s card, he would really beat them and it was worse for one that bore a UPC card for they would be beaten more. So, people would wonder what was wrong with them. I would like you to think about that and see what you are doing right now. 

Madam Speaker, I just have some questions to ask: Who are these people beating up our people? How many security agencies do we have in Uganda now and who controls them, deploys them and where do they report? I think these are questions that you as Government must look at.

For us in Lango - I want to talk about Lango – when we see a civilian holding a gun, we just know that he is a rebel and run. But I now see people in plain clothes holding guns and moving around beating up people with clubs and they are in the newspapers. I watched what was happening on television and on the Net, where the whole world was watching what was happening in Uganda. 

If there is an issue where Uganda has been saying that we have scored under this government, it is under the discipline of the Army, but where has it gone? We are spending money in making a professional Army, but what is happening? 

Madam Speaker, I want to give you an example. I do not know Lusoga very well, but in Lango, most of our people do business in Busoga and they have been there since the 40s and you have kept them. So, we are always in Busoga. This Mpumudde they are talking about, Bugembe, Kimaka and Walukuba, is where you have been hosting us and we are comfortable. But now a UPDF soldier whose name I will not mention, whose number you could note - UPDF 4 CPL No. 042531 - beat up a common person, Mr Kakaire, and took his phone plus Shs 200,000 which he has not yet brought back up to now. One wonders whether that was a deployment order or he did it on his own. Can we find out and can this country be made to know that these people who are doing whatever they are doing are not part of an institutional issue. Are they doing it as individuals or what exactly is happening?

Hon. Minister, you would do this country a big service - you are an encyclopaedia of the politics of this country; you have been here for some time, which I really respect. If you remove the Army from Busoga - what you do not know is that strokes do not bring votes; violence diminishes votes. Just go to Lira and beat me up and you see how you will perform. I will tell you why the people of Lira for a long time do not vote for NRM; it is because of beating Omara Atubo. We have held it. Even if Omara Atubo has crossed, the people of Lango have held it and they say if this is how you do things, they cannot move with you.

I would like to ask some other questions. I actually said this on the day we debated the State of the Nation Address. I said, “If we do not change our method of work, the same thing which has happened in Buganda is about to happen in Busoga.” People laughed it off, but it has happened. What do we expect, from Busoga moving to other places? Army men even get up and say they are Ssabamoli and whatever. 

I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that we leave the issue of Busoga to the Basoga. They will handle it. I know the Basoga have said they are very peaceful, but they are also a block to some extent. You have benefited from it, but let me tell you that when you hurt these quiet people - I would like to say that sometimes you have to be quiet to be heard and maybe that is why they are quiet. I thank you.

5.00
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I really want us to reflect and be a little bit sober. When I listened to this statement, I remembered the statement hon. Amama Mbabazi gave on the Floor of this House after his Army beat us up in our own constituencies. It was I, hon. Otto, hon. Ocula and Prof. Latigo. When we arrived, we had not even got out of the vehicle, but hon. Otto was getting out of the vehicle and they said, “Get back into your vehicle”, just to provoke him. When hon. Otto said, “Please, why are you doing this?” they started beating him straight away. 

When I see this statement, this is a defence that cannot hold water. Many of us saw the television footage of what was taking place there. Why must you humiliate people? You say cultural institutions must be accepted by the people and where there is dispute there must be a democratic process. My reading of the situation was that the recently elected leader had the majority. Now, if the majority are saying “this is our leader”, who are you to even dispute? If out of 11 clans, the majority of them are saying “this is our leader”, who are you to come and say, “No, you must wait; we are sending a government minister to mediate between the two groups”? I think this is interference in cultural matters.

Honourable minister, you have been reported several times disputing and not accepting your own cultural leader in Kasese. He had never been recognised, but recently when I attended a function with you in the church, you made a statement that you have had a change of mind and you are now supporting your cultural leader. Government then came forth to say the king is going to be coronated on Monday. 

Is there a foreign hand in this process, perhaps somebody from Busoga? I know that there is the Minister of Internal Affairs who is the Third Deputy Prime Minister and who should actually have made this statement. Who then gave the order from above? Was it from the Third Deputy Prime Minister, because you are below that? He is the Minister of Internal Affairs and Third Deputy Prime Minister and he has also been widely claimed to be involved in that saga. 

The Police go out and brutalise the population who are peaceful. I watched how people allowed themselves to be walked on. I do not think anybody in this House, however popular you are, can walk over your voters; you cannot! But where people accept and say, “You can walk on me”, what greater thing can you get? 

I would like to appeal to some elements in Government. I do not think that this is the entire Government but I think there are some elements in Government that are trying to undermine some processes to suit their own personal interests. I am sorry that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here, otherwise I wanted him to really give clarification on whether he was the one who gave the orders to the Police, because this is an internal affairs matter. 

If the Army is invited, they can only be invited by the Police. The first order must come from Ministry of Internal Affairs. It should not have been you to come here to say the Police have a constitutional duty; it should have been the Police to come here and say, “You know, we invited the army because matters were out of our control”, the way it happened in Buganda. The Army got involved here but we got a statement from Ministry of Internal Affairs saying the situation was out of control, the Police were thin on the ground and we asked for reinforcement from the army. 

Personally, I still think that there are hands in this; it is not the entire Government, but I think there are some individuals within Government who just want to satisfy their own interests by using the forceful arm of the state to show that they also exist and that they are also powerful –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the testimonies colleagues have given here, it has come to my understanding that quite a big product of this Parliament is a product of beatings. I am one of those who twice suffered the brutality of undisciplined Army officers in 1988. To date, I still have the effect on my head. Twice in 1988, I was picked with my mother from the garden and tortured. Other colleagues were taken together with me - we were six - for firing squad. We were tied on Mvule trees in what is now Pakwa Health Centre IV. By God’s grace Capt. Kibuuka, who was heading that group, pulled me down. That is how I survived. My other friends and villagemates were killed.

On 20 August 1998 while going to Teso College, I was picked again by the soldiers. I was tortured for two weeks while fully naked. I thought those were the early days of the bush mentality. We thought we would outlive it, but it has continued, from what I have heard from my colleagues. It is painful. When it happened in Buganda here, they said it was the Opposition. The question I want to ask is: Was the Opposition involved in Busoga? Was the Opposition there? We have been asking –(Interjection)- Good Princess Kabakumba is saying yes. You will substantiate. 

When you push people to a corner, they are bound to use whatever means they have to try and protect themselves. A few days ago, you beat the people of Busoga. The next time you go and beat them, it will be different because they must be preparing now to react to defend themselves when you get there. We would not like that situation to happen. 

That is why we are appealing to you; please, leave the chiefs of Busoga to sort this matter. How can you take the whole Army, the whole Police, Electoral Commission, Ministry of Local Government to monitor an election of 11 voters? (Laughter) How? (Laughter) Do you need such an Army to monitor the election of 11 voters, the 11 chiefs? That shows that there is an invisible hand behind the beatings in Busoga. You cannot do that.

I am even surprised that hon. Opio is not featuring anywhere in the picture yet his ministry is where these cultural institutions fall. Why are you alienating him? He has not featured anywhere. He has not even made any statement. It is either hon. Adolf Mwesige, hon. Kiyonga or hon. KK. We have not even mentioned that he has been in any of the meetings. It is hon. Kabakumba issuing statements in the news, which are even inflammatory. Yesterday, Hon. Henry Balikoowa quoted what she was saying. I do not know whether she was the one, but at least that is what our colleague told us. So, where is the Minister of Culture in these issues? We know hon. Opio. We are seeing you there. I am not saying I have not seen you but where are you in these matters? Maybe let me give you an opportunity to feature now on this matter. (Laughter) 

It is so embarrassing. Ugandans are not so stupid to know that there is direct interference politically by the government in this matter. We are not stupid. However much you try to tell us that the President is not involved, you are lying to us. A mere presence of the Army among these cultural institutions is an indication. The people of Uganda know who the Army of this country pays allegiance to. 

Despite militarising the Police, people still have hope and trust that the Police are fairly neutral. Why can’t we have the police provide these royal guards? Why take to the military police? Even the Prime Minister here and the Vice-President are guarded by the Police. The Speaker, who is no. 3 in the country, is guarded by the Police, and is very safe. The Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker here - have they faced any danger? For the royal tombs, the place where the people are supposed to do their cultural things, it is the Army; why? 

5.12
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a national issue. We have a Constitution in this country and we have laws; why don’t we follow the law? The Government claims to be law abiding but the practice is totally different. My concern is that the government is not following the Constitution; the government is not following the law. Now, if the government does not do that, who will do it? 

Not all the people who are nursing wounds in Busoga are Basoga. There are other people who live there who were engulfed in this mayhem and they were injured. These are people who had nothing to do with this cultural leadership, just like it happened here in Kampala. So, the government should be mindful of these kinds of unnecessary injuries to our people.

The frequency of occurrence

Last month, we had a terrible event here when more than 27 people lost their lives. These people should not have died. Their deaths were very unnecessary and yet within three weeks, the same government is repeating the same mistake. It is unbelievable.

I want to look at the statement, paragraph 5.1. It says that the President was negotiating with the chiefs in Busoga. This is my concern. This morning we were debating flats of National Housing and this Parliament was informed that even the President had written about the flats - flats, accommodation for Ugandans! The other time, bibanja holders were launching their association and the President was the chief guest. The boda bodas were complaining here and the President was there. Does the President have an office where he can sit down and do work for the government?  During Idi Amin’s rule, this was very common because we did understand Idi Amin. He did not have the capacity to sit and do work in the office and so he was all over the place. (Laughter) Now we seem to have received Amin back. What is happening? What is going on? 

I think the President should really allow Ugandans to do certain things. Very soon we shall hear people quarrelling in their marriages and the President will be involved. (Laughter) Honestly, where are we going to end? I really beg those who are in close contact with the President to please advise him and do not fear losing your jobs. That is your job and it is your responsibility to advise the President. 

Lastly, paragraph 5.4 says that there will be an investigation into this matter and the institutions that will investigate are the Presidency, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The people who are involved in beating our people are the ones going to do the investigation. What are we doing? What do we expect? You beat me and then you come to investigate and you want me to accept your report. I appeal to Government to put neutral people to investigate this matter if it is to be investigated. You cannot go and commit a crime and then you say you are going to investigate yourself. It does not make sense. 

Madam Speaker, I normally console myself when I see a government so desperate like this one is now –(Laughter)- it is through my experience - that the end is not very far. That is my consolation. (Laughter) 

5.18
MR JULIUS PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you for giving me this chance. It is now about two months that I have tried to be close to hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga and it is only unfortunate that I did not tell him one thing. I think let him take this opportunity to hear it from me. 

On page 1, where they are talking about the role of the UPDF, under bullet 2.1 (I) they say that the policy of Government for all the recognised kings is that security is provided by soldiers formed as royal guards. I only want to inform hon. Kiyonga that some of us in Uganda have suffered in the hands of these soldiers, now baptised UPDF, but we knew them properly as NRA. They tortured our people. When we see the soldiers moving, we know that actually that is moving insecurity. So, I suspect that immediately the Basoga saw the soldiers moving that day – we know the soldiers in Teso - then they knew actually that insecurity has now moved to Busoga. It is moving insecurity. 

I just have about three questions to ask the hon. Minister: First, is guarding the traditional kings such a serious or dangerous matter that it actually needs soldiers or red tops? 

Secondly, Mr Minister, when I was looking at hon. Balikowa laying the pictures on the Table, I saw that the people or the thugs who were beating up people were putting on blue uniforms; which Ugandan security force is this that I do not know? I know the kind of uniforms the Police and soldiers put on. Who are those wearing that particular uniform which is very different? Maybe you could educate me so that I know. Which force is that? Is it the kiboko squad? I thought those ones did not have uniforms, unless they have now been gazetted. 

Finally, when you look at the pictures and the people who are being beaten and hurt like that, do you think the soldiers that were sent there provided security and peace? Or maybe they went to provide confusion and chaos amongst the people who were electing their leaders. 

As I sit down, I want to say that those who claim that they have provided security or peace to this country should maybe think twice. Last month they beat up people in Kampala and it is exactly about a month again and they were beating up people in Busoga. I am actually afraid for any region that is going to say something in this country; you know that the ball is now rolling to your court so be prepared. I thank you.

5.22
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you. When the President was addressing the nation and Parliament after the riots in Kampala and in many parts of Buganda, I saw many members of parliament cheering him on, but I was just crying internally. I knew that what was happening in Buganda would spread to other parts of Uganda, and less than three weeks down the road we are now faced with this same kind of scenario. 

When the President was addressing us, he made an argument that one would buy. He said that traditional leaders played their parts a long time ago, but they do not seem to have an important role in a modern society. In fact, the President said that their main role now is to basically look after languages and tombs. (Laughter)  They are supposed to care for tombs. 

At that time when the President was making this statement, you could buy it, but with the events in Busoga, that argument is being defeated. Is the President trying to tell us that the job of looking after tombs is so serious that it requires the Army to protect one tomb caretaker against the other? Is it this serious? Even then, let our ministers know that they are the principal advisers of the President and in cases like these, our ministers must stand firm and advise the President firmly. Hon. Kiyonga is a very well meaning senior member of this House, but if I were hon. Kiyonga, with such stature, I would not read a statement like this before an august assembly. 

In line with this, some of our esteemed ministers make statements that actually destroy them and put their reputation on a weighing scale. I would like to talk about the statements that are day in, day out coming from hon. Kabakumba who is a Luo princess of Bunyoro married to a Mukiga. You find her making serious and terrible statements against Bafuruki and Bakiga who are her in-laws -(Laughter)- because she is defending a position. She actually makes statements against her own children because her children are Bakiga. (Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to this House to debate with a sober mind. Is hon. Mabikke in order, without substantiating, to allege that I have always made statements against the Bakiga? And for the record of this House, I am a princess from the great Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom and I know the dynamics of these kingdoms. Even the subjects under discussion today, for your information, are descendants from Bunyoro. 

I am on record in all the fora for having said that we are looking for a solution where the Bafuruki and the Banyoro can live harmoniously in Bunyoro. I have said this repeatedly in public and in private. 

For the record, all of you know that I am above 18 and I am happily married to Maj. Henry Moses Masiko Muhoozi who is a Mukiga born in Mparo-Rukiga, Kabale. My husband has never migrated from Kabale to anywhere whether in Bunyoro or otherwise. So, is hon. Mabikke in order to allege that I have been issuing statements abusing the Bakiga whereas I have never issued any statement against the Bakiga? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, I do not know why you are really antagonising our grandmother. Can you concentrate on the Busoga issues. Even those tombs where the soldiers are, those are our grandparents and one of the kings of Bunyoro is buried there. So, please focus on this statement. Leave her alone. (Laughter) 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, my point has been taken. Finally, the truth is coming out that actually, traditional institutions were restored as a vote-catching net for the NRM and they are supposed to tow the line. Every traditional leader who appears or who begins to see things differently is dubbed as one who engages in partisan politics. 

I want to associate with the position of hon. Namayanja who said that while we clamour and fight to make laws to regulate traditional institutions, we should also come up with a law to regulate political interference in the affairs of traditional institutions by Government officials and the President in particular. The beatings have begun. This nation is slowly sinking to the level of Zimbabwe. This is what happens to a regime that overstays in power. We are sure that it will not stop in Busoga; it is going to move to Bunyoro very soon, and it will go to Toro and Kasese –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my submission, I would like to lay on the Table further documentation concerning the beating of the people of Busoga, particularly as documented by our newspapers. I want to lay on the Table a page from Bukedde, Lwakusatu October 7 2009, page 8 and again Bukedde, Lwakusatu October 14 2009. It has a lot of pictures depicting the situation in Busoga. I beg to lay. 

I intend to draw parallels and perhaps some comparisons on some of the significant developments in our country in the last few years. The kiboko squad was unveiled officially when the court was invaded. The same applied to the black mambas.  Government’s reaction at that time was to feign ignorance and come here and claim that they did not know how the Kiboko squad emerged from CPS. Only two weeks ago, when the Kampala riots ensued, the Kiboko squad again emerged and there is now evidence to show that it was the Army that was dressed in civilian clothes to beat up the ordinary citizens of the country. They were dressed like that so that we would all think it was another kiboko squad for whom nobody was willing to take responsibility.

When they descended on Kampala, the Army - actually now there is evidence - killed over 28 people. Our Army dressed as kiboko squad - for whom no one was willing to take responsibility - killed 28 people. 

When I listen to what is happening in Busoga, I ask myself a number of questions. First of all, when the minister presents this report, I get an impression that the Government of Uganda has developed a terrible phobia for the traditional institutions. First, it was one king going to preside over Youth Day celebrations and they made sure they stopped him and let blood flow. Secondly, it is another king going to officiate at a rally, and they made sure they beat up the civilians and the minister has the strength to come here and say they disallowed him to officiate as guest of honour. 

I want to know where the policy about guests of honour in this country is. Does the Ministry of Defence have a stipulated policy for which you can be identified as a guest of honour, and if the Ministry of Defence does not clear you, your people who invited you should be beaten, should be scattered? How did the Army begin to vet the issue of who becomes a guest of honour at a rally organised by an individual’s citizens, a civilian for that matter.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give to my colleague is that it seems that there is a new wave of innovating Government policy these days. In the statement of the minister, bullet 2.1, he says the policy of Government is that for all the recognised kings, security is provided by soldiers formed as royal guards. I do not know when this became a policy. Maybe the minister will shade more light on this. Given the fact that there is a style of initiating policies these days, you never know there could be one which you do not know.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to belabour the issue of the new rules of engagement that the President presented to this House because the minister’s summary, 5.4, indicates that they are going to constitute an investigation and that he will inform us. First of all, I think the minister should be honest to this House. The other time when the Army went on rampage in the streets and shot people, they promised an investigation. I have not seen one three weeks down the road. There is no investigation although people lost their lives, children were shot and all sorts of things happened. There is no investigation. What guarantees do we have that they will go ahead and investigate what they actually did in Busoga themselves?

Does the minister want to make us believe that he has the capacity to revoke the rules of engagement that the President outlined for this country? What was happening in Busoga was the ultimate implementation of what the President told this House. He told this House “from today onwards, for those who try to freely express themselves, if the Army assumes or if anyone in authority assumes that they are a threat to them, they will be shot to disable”. I do not know whether the Army has now created bullets which when the trigger is ushered on, the moment they leave the gun they will be told that, “you bullet, go shoot to disable and do not shoot to kill” (Member timed out.)

5.39
MR GERALD MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. I want to begin by giving a short history of Busoga Kingdom. Like Churchill said, the further you look backwards, the further you can look into the future. 

In the 100-year history of Busoga, this institution was founded on two basic principles. The fundamental principles are: One, democracy or democratic, meaning that Obwakyabazinga bwa Busoga is a democratic monarchy. Secondly, in Obwakyabazinga bwa Busoga, the leadership or a king is brought on board by rotational basis. He is rotated. Those are the two fundamental principles upon which this institution was formed - democracy or being democratic and then the leader being rotated or rotational.

This takes me to the report of the minister on page 3, point 5.1, where he was summarising and he said: “There is a contest in Busoga as to who should be the Kyabazinga”. As far as the Basoga are concerned, there is no contest as to who the Kyabazinga of Busoga is because out of the 11 hereditary chiefs who sit and elect the Kyabazinga of Busoga, eight sat and democratically elected Nadiope Gabula Wilberforce Kandumbula IV as the Kyabazinga of Busoga. For that matter, I see this statement saying there is a contest in Busoga as to who should be the Kyabazinga rather redundant. It is actually misplaced. I think there is confusion, and I want to say that the crisis in Busoga is being precipitated by Government, otherwise the people of Busoga chose their leader in the name of Gabula Nadiope IV as the Kyabazinga. I would have expected that Government respects this choice.

I am also informed, I was not there, that on 4th October, the honourable minister, Adolf Mwesige, was in Jinja on the eve of the election and the minister met with the 11 hereditary chiefs. One of the minister’s missions was, among other things, to look at the court injunctions and advise Government whether or not to have elections. Having interacted and dialogued over that, in the wisdom of the minister, he did not object to the elections and the elections were held. That meant that Government was represented by a minister and, therefore ,there is no reason as to why Government turns around to say that it is contesting or there is a contest and it does not, therefore, respect Nadiope Gabula IV as the Kyabazinga. 

Madam Speaker, if government insists that there is no Kyabazinga in Busoga, I propose the following -(Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way. I seek clarification from the hon. Member. He has said that the Minister of Local Government sat with his people and they came to some understanding. I am just wondering, is Busoga Kingdom under Local Government? Is it a local government issue? One would be wondering why the Minister of Local Government would actually be involved in issues of a cultural nature.

MR MENHYA: Madam Speaker, that is the one million dollar question of which I hope the Minister for Local Government has taken heed and should answer. 

I am proposing the following: Prince Columbus Wambuzi still occupies the office of the Kyabazinga at Bugembe, which is the seat of Busoga Kingdom. If it is Government’s feeling that neither Columbus Wambuzi nor Gabula is a Kyabazinga, then Prince Columbus should move out of Bugembe which is the seat of Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga. 

Secondly, he has removed the royal chair, on which the king sits, from the office of Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga at Bugembe and we do not know where this important asset of the Basoga is. We are requesting that this royal chair is brought back to the seat at Bugembe as soon as -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I believe he took it despite the security of the royal guards there. (Laughter)

MR MENHYA: Oh yes! Madam Speaker, you have mentioned it like the Bible says - 

Thirdly, Prince Wambuzi is guarded by UPDF royal guards together with ruthless sons of Mzee Kadoko, one of the ministers in Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga. If Government still thinks that the two are not Kyabazingas and still contends that Prince Wambuzi should be given the royal guards, then we ask that royal guards equally be provided for the security and protection of Gabula Nadiope IV.

Fourthly, Prince Wambuzi has been seen and sighted moving in a vehicle which used to belong to the late Kyabazinga. It has a private number plate written on “Busoga 1” meaning that his is the first family in Busoga and he is the King of Busoga. If he is not regarded as a Kyabazinga of Busoga then we request that that number plate be removed so that another Government number plate or something of the sort is put on this vehicle.

I also saw the television footage where people were clobbered and beaten left, right and centre. I want the Minister of Defence to give an apology to the people of Busoga for having humiliated them to the extent of beating those who support this traditional institution. I thank you so much.

5.48
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also sincerely sympathise with our cousins, the Basoga, who are known to be very peaceful and peace-loving people for what they underwent. 

However, my issue is a little bit different from the precedent that has been set. I really want to thank the minister for attempting to highlight what happened on that fateful day. I do not know whether the minister is really comfortable with the statement he made. I will take regard to page 2, paragraph 3.1. When you read that paragraph, it is evident that there was a court injunction and according to the minister, I will read verbatim, he says, “This injunction meant that Government could not participate in the elections as earlier agreed with the chiefs.” If I move down, again it says, “…given the court injunction it would have been improper to participate in the exercise. On the other hand, the government did not want to be seen to be interfering in the cultural affairs of the kingdom. Accordingly, an agreement was reached that the royalists could proceed with their elections provided they did not use the cultural sites which were being guarded by the Central Government.”

I just want clarification from the minister. Was the injunction against Government that, “Please, let the election go on but do not participate as Government”; or was the injunction that there should not be elections until a certain matter is disposed of by court? If so, are you really comfortable with this part that shows that actually, Government, despite the injunction standing, went behind and encouraged the parties to elect a Kyabazinga? Are you in effect saying that Government does not respect courts of law? Are you really comfortable with this statement or should we expunge this part?

Mr Minister, I know you as an NRM ideologue and you have been telling us that NRM promotes and really respects the rule of law. The rule of law here, in part, was that courts have said “do not elect”. Why then did you move behind court’s decision to quietly encourage the royalists to continue with the elections? I think this was the basis of the chaos that you caused.

5.52
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I would like to use this opportunity to send my sympathies to the people of Busoga. It very clear that there has been a lot of suffering, a lot of injustice and that indeed the Army has been involved in the elections. I think the minister has not denied that himself. Of course through me, the people of Nyabushozi send their sympathies to the people of Busoga for what has happened. 

I would like to get some clarification from the minister. As has been said, the Constitution is very clear; the role of the Army and the Police are clearly spelt out. Are you telling us that the two institutions have now merged and they have become one? From what was seen in the media, the situation seemed to have become worse with the coming in of the army. 

I also have some documents that I was given here showing people being beaten. It was on television and everybody saw it. That does not have to be rubbed in a lot. We need to know as legislators whether the Constitution that is in place is being observed. Are the police still in existence? Is it carrying out its law and order responsibility? Has the Army taken up this responsibility? Does it mean that we do not have enough policemen to keep law and order? If we do not, why are we not recruiting more policemen so that they can be in the right offices doing the right job, rather than brining in the Army for everything that happens. 

I would like to appreciate the role of Government here because nobody wants to see violence. I am sure all of us would not want what happened here in Kampala to be repeated. I want to congratulate the people of Busoga for not being violent. I also want to congratulate you for being democratic in terms of how you acquire your kings. This is because most of the kings are born; they are hereditary; but for you your kings are elected, which is a democratic principle of governance of any place. You are involved in an election of your king. 

I would also want to know, through the minister, whether these people that are beating others are being deployed by Government or they are acting on their own. This is because quite often, we are told that these people are acting on their own, but if they are acting on their own, what is government doing about this? 

If I can talk about my individual experience in 1996; I saw a lot of involvement of UPDF in elections and I suffered it. I do not think I will ever forget for the rest of my life. It is an experience that you do not forget. The answer was that these are members of UPDF or soldiers, citizens of the country acting on their own. How are we going to survive this? How can this continue? I know the soldiers of UPDF are very disciplined so I am not so sure that they are acting on their own. (Interruption) I am not spoiling; I know what I am talking about. I am not so sure that they are not being deployed to do these jobs and are acting on their own. We need clarification because we have the pictures and it is clear.

Now, on the issues of cultural leaders, Government has been saying cultural leaders should not be involved in politics. If Government gets involved in their politics, they are definitely going to get involved. 

Lastly, I would like to say that the spirits of my kings are haunting the kingdoms. What is happening? The Ankole Kingdom did not come back and you know that was unconstitutional also, and the kingdoms as a result are suffering because my ancestors are haunting them.

5.58 
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):  I would also like to add my voice to condemn the beatings that took place in Busoga. I would like, on behalf of the people of Toro, to convey our sympathies to our brothers and sisters in Busoga for that unfortunate event. One of the African peace activists, in the names of Dom Camara, argues that violence is not the answer to violence. He says that when violence is met with violence, then the whole earth will be filled with the spill of violence. I would like to appeal to all stakeholders not to use the cultural institutions to create violence in this country. 

Unlike hon. Katuntu, I am a strong believer in cultural institutions. In fact, I am even a supporter. Hon. Namayanja was quoting Article 246 and said that they should have an alternative Article in the Constitution to regulate politicians. In fact, the same Article is regulating politicians. When I joined politics, I had to relinquish my ministerial position in Toro Kingdom. I was a minister in charge of health and poverty eradication. After I joined politics, the law could not allow me to continue serving as a cabinet minister in Toro Kingdom, so the same Article 246 does not allow politicians to be part of the administration in these kingdoms. 

I would like to appeal to politicians in this country, please do Ugandans a favour and stop using these cultural institutions to bring chaos in this country. I have taken time to study what is taking place in Busoga. The local people of Busoga are not bad at all but somewhere on top they are being manipulated. The divisions of the two Kyabazinga’s are brought about because one is pro Government and one is anti Government. Isn’t that a fact? I am told that one –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: It is true that I am a member of the Opposition, but I have just stated it on this Floor that I am not a big fun of these institutions. Is the hon. Kaliba in order to drag the Opposition into a conflict which is cultural? The people of Busoga believe in this institution and have democratically elected which of the two they prefer. Is he in order to dub this conflict as a Government versus Opposition conflict?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaliba, unless you have the facts, you withdraw and apologise to the people of Busoga.

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, let me withdraw and restate it properly. I withdraw and apologise to the people of Busoga. But the point I was trying to make is that if the people of Busoga have elected their leader, we should not have anybody tamper with that election. If people have elected their leader democratically, then what is the problem? There must be a problem somewhere if a democratically elected Kyabazinga should not be the Kyabazinga. This is the point I am putting to the politicians in this country. They should resist from mixing politics with cultural institutions.

I want to thank the Minister of Defence for this statement. If you read page 8, 5.5, the minister has stated that some complications appear to have arisen whereby security agencies may have overstepped the limit lines and in order to ensure better clarity on how security agencies have conducted themselves, an inquiry will be conducted by the Office of the President, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Let us wait for this inquiry, but on behalf of the people of Toro, I would like to propose to Government that Police is used instead of providing guards who are soldiers of UPDF. 

6.05
PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (NRM, Igara West County, Bushenyi): I would like to join all the Members who have condemned excessive use of force. It is true the state has legitimate use of force, but when it oversteps the limits, it is challenged. There is history to show that when the state has misbehaved in Uganda, there has been reaction. Having said that, I think looking at the institution in Busoga, it would not be enough to conclude in the discussion we have had this afternoon by only the excessive use of violence - violence is no good and must be condemned. The state must be tamed. 

I want us to use hindsight. The first charter creating the post of Kyabazinga came in 1937-38. Prior to that period, there was no one Kyabazinga for the whole Busoga. So, the institution itself is recently created from that point of view. It was created to unify the people of Busoga. My worry now is whether the institution is growing into an institution that divides Busoga or unites it. 

I am speaking here as Kabwegyere, Member of Parliament representing Igara West and a Ugandan. My worry is that there seems to be a growing rift between who supports who over these two. Probably, the potential is there for another to emerge. 
This is the worry I have, and I would appeal for consensus to be built. The traditional leaders also seem to be shifting ground here and there because they are dealing with one institution. 

I think in the first elections there were people who were on one side and in this one have moved to this other side. So, why can’t we have consistence and consensus and have a uniting institution called the Kyabazinga? That is my appeal, but there is no reason why violence and riots should be there because riots are also illegal just as the use of violence by the state is condemnable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were no riots. 

6.09
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The pictures which have been laid here and what we saw on TV are really regrettable, and I think the minister should have at least apologised pending the investigations. I hope that when he comes to answer, he will give some form of apology because what was seen was really bad. 

In Luganda we have a proverb that when you are wrestling and you throw your friend down, you should not go ahead and bite them. Merely wrestling him down is enough. So what has been talked about the Police and Army is regrettable and we should learn lessons out of what happened in Kampala and Busoga. What can we learn out of this so that we can improve and these things are not repeated?

I appeal to my colleagues in Busoga to sit down and discuss and also follow the laid down procedures of electing the Kyabazinga. I thought that it would be very easy since this thing is rotational. If your father has been the Kyabazinga and has just died, in the spirit of rotation it would mean that the crown would go somewhere else. So I appeal that they follow the rotational procedures, which are democratic in order to avoid wars and conflicts which can divide us.

Some of us have seen so many wars and have been in conflicts – fortunately I have not been beaten by the UPDF and I don’t wish my colleagues to be beaten up. So, give the people of Busoga a chance to discuss and solve this thing amicably.

I appeal to the minister to see to it that they sit down with the Police and Army councils and see where we can improve because I do not want this thing to bring instability in this country. We would like to enjoy our country – I have children and grand children who must enjoy it when I am gone. So, please, Members let us sit and discuss and have harmony. I thank you.

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER (Ms Lukia Nakadama):	 Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to condemn those who used barbaric acts as they wanted to sort out the violence, which had erupted in Busoga during the elections of the Kyabazinga. 

I want to give information to Members of this House about the allegations, which have been made by hon. Latif Sebaggala as he was contributing. Hon. Sebaggala alleged that His Excellency the President attended the installation of Prince Columbus Wambuzi. 

I want to inform members that the President has never attended such a function in Busoga. Even we in the Ministry of Gender have never been invited to attend such a function. Instead the President attended a memorial service about two and a half weeks back and not two months like he has said. I, therefore, want to inform members that the President is instead spearheading the dialogue to see to it that the two factions can harmonise. We people from Busoga do not know that the President has a side. 

6.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Bugisu we don’t have a king. We only have cultural leaders, and I happen to be one of those cultural leaders. (Laughter) And you have seen that there has been no war. During the time we start our circumcision; there are no guns, we only carry our sticks and knives for circumcising our boys. 

This business of Government getting involved in cultural activities is very dangerous. I have been watching films and I even watched something about Kakungulu who led us in Mbale. The king was always being guarded with spears, sticks and pangas.  These are traditional tools but this business of bringing guns and uniforms to guard our kings is very dangerous and that is why we are having conflicts. 

People want to be guarded with people in Army uniform. For example there is a businessman in Mbale called Mafabi Lumolo who is guarded by army men abusing state resources and yet there is Seracen to guard such people but they are using army uniform -(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that one of the reasons CBS FM was closed was that they informed us that one presenter was telling Kabaka’s subjects that, “We don’t need the army to protect our king, we can protect our king using spears, pangas and arrows”. The information I wanted to give is that the moment you talk about pangas and arrows protecting kings, you are inciting violence, according to the government.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in the speech of Prof. Kabwegyere, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, he said we have resolved to bring peace in Uganda. How do you bring peace when there is a certain sector being defended by government to beat others? It is very dangerous. Maybe because he is a professor of sociology, but you know these are dangerous things. 

Recently the Kabaka of Buganda was supposed to go and visit his people. They brought battalions in Kampala to beat the people yet the Kabaka would only have needed two policemen; one to direct cars where to park and another to say, “Don’t push one another because we love our Kabaka”. 

Cultural leaders are loved by the people. The moment a cultural leader is guarded with guns, he is not a cultural leader but a political leader. Hon. Kiyonga, I even sent to you a note about this businessman in Mbale but you never responded. Why are you making Uganda militarised?

This uniform you are giving these other people will tomorrow turn against you and I am telling you this today. I watched the film and how they beat the Basoga; it was dangerous. If this is the way we are going to beat innocent people who are unarmed, I think this is very dangerous.

In fact I wanted to tell Bagisu that let us carry our knives to go and support these people and finish these people who are beating them because you get somebody walking without anything and you start stepping on his head with a knife and stabbing him! This is very bad. 

We have used the tax payers’ money to buy these guns. The same person you are beating is the one who bought the gun. If you people want to fight the wanainchi, put the guns aside and start with your fists. We shall be happy. Don’t use guns, which we bought. If you continue using guns, we shall also acquire guns, which is very bad.

I heard hon. Mugyenyi talking about the 1996 elections. This is very dangerous. In Bugisu, army uniform is given to hooligans to dress and walk around intimidating people. How do you get people who have never studied to handle a gun and you give him an army uniform with a gun? You are endangering first the person who is carrying it –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is not only in Bugisu but also in Busoga. All LC III chairpersons are now in army uniform, and all sub-county chiefs are in army uniforms with guns. I would like to ask hon. Kiyonga; if this civilian LC III chairperson in a military fatigue and carrying a gun shoots somebody, will the army take responsibility? Because for us civilians, anybody who puts on an army fatigue is actually a soldier, but you have given them army uniforms and guns so can you tell this House whether the UPDF is responsible for all the actions of uniformed people especially LC III chairpersons and sub-county chiefs? We need an answer to that.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, I was in Lira on Independence Day and I saw somebody sitting behind me in full military fatigue. When I turned, that was the Deputy CAO of Lira. I could not believe it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this same uniform can be used for dangerous things because it can even be used by thieves to rob or they can hire them out. We are trying to make Uganda peaceful, but hon. Kiyonga wants to make Uganda un-peaceful by giving a certain sector guns.

Concerning this issue of our cultural leaders, I heard my brother hon. Menhya talking about a number plate being changed. Some of the reasons why people are coming in to claim kingship are those free items. All of you saw when one man came here to Parliament and said, “I am now the Omuyinga of Bugisu”. I said, “Where are you coming from?” He is looking for the Shs 5 million, the car and these army men you are talking about in uniform. Make people work. Let us have cultural leaders who are cultural leaders not those who are looking for benefits. 

If that person is changing the number plates, that is criminal. Why should you use the Army to guard a cultural site, which is not yours? Go and guard your barracks in Mbuya and leave those areas, or go and look for Kony. These sites should be guarded by people who are members of the cultural institution because they understand what the Kabaka will do when he comes; they either kneel or lie down and he walks on them but not this business of you who doesn’t know the culture coming and staying there.

I plead with you that maybe through your office, Madam Speaker, the honourable minister will understand better. Warn him that it is very bad to militarise this country. Currently what is happening is that they are carrying our boys and taking them to Kyankwanzi to learn about guns and come and fight hon. Nandala-Mafabi and remove him from Parliament. Supposing hon. Nandala-Mafabi also decides to go and train his own, what will happen? 

If you want army men from Bugisu to be trained, we are ready to deliver to you young boys and women to be trained. Tell us the day you want them and we shall bring them for you, but this business of coming to pool a few people for election purposes - for God’s sake in 1980 we went to the bush because we stated that the elections had been rigged. (Laughter) We came back in 1986 and said we have brought a fundamental change. Nobody should fear a gun, nobody should be threatened. Now it is the reverse? What did we go for in the bush?

It is very dangerous for us to have gone for one reason and turn around unless we had an investment plan we were going for. We were looking for investments; that is why we went to the bush. But if we went to the bush to bring about peace in Uganda, I request you that the Army should be the Army, the Police should be Police, Prisons should be Prisons, wanaichi should be wanaichi and we should move on. Kyabazinga; Kyabazinga of Busoga, Kabaka wa Buganda, Omugabe of Ankole and Omukama of Tooro. That is why my friend who resigned as a minister of health has become unhealthy because at that time, as a Minister of Health, he was healthy –(Laughter)- now he is unhealthy –(Laughter)- having left such a place to come here –(Laughter)- and deal with problems.

6.25
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At least we are happy that we are responding to the statement, which was promised last week on Tuesday by the Leader of Government business. At least we have something to talk about today.

I am only disappointed that the statement read for this House by the hon. Minister of Defence - the first MP for UPM and NRM at that time, the only one who is highly respected, is not reflecting the respect the country has been giving the hon. Minister. And I want to appeal to him, please, you have two things to do to maintain and regain the respect. One, apologise to the people of Busoga Kingdom for the mess done by the Army, for which you are responsible. 

Two, apologise to the country; it is not your own mistake. You did not beat anybody. We did not see you participate in beating, but it is within your ministry. That will hand you the respect and you will gain back the good name that you built over a period of time. Some of us joined politics because of the good admiration that we picked from your political stature.

I am only disappointed that in the statement on page 2, 3.1 towards the end it says that even when the minister observed and he learnt that there were court injunctions against these elections they advised the royalists to go ahead and conduct elections as long as they are not at the cultural site. As if the injunction was about the venue. 

Adolf Mwesige is a renowned lawyer and he was the one mediating and presiding on behalf of the government. He was the one advising, knowing the consequences of the court injunction. I want to know from the hon. Minister of Defence how they swung into action even after this advice was given by the minister. The minister was representing the President at that time in that meeting.

Then, we want to know why the UPDF and the Army are being used to guard the kings. Our own, the Paramount Chief of the Acholi, is now being guarded by the Army. But initially we were against that kind of thing and when he was being coronated, I was part of the guard. We were seven, yes, and we were using spears and pangas. We protected him for three good nights without any interference and that was a very difficult time. That was a time when we were having the LRA and everything in place, but nobody came to disorganise us, yet we had pangas. Why are we now using AK-47s in military uniform to guard our royals? 

In Ghana, the cultural leaders, the chiefs, are guarded by their own people. Why are we practising very unusual things here? Even before and right after the colonial times, our people were guarded by their own people. If you do not have love and support from your own people, then they kill you. Why are you trying to impose leaders on people? 

On the controversial election of the Kyabazinga in Busoga Kingdom, out of the 11 chiefs, eight voted for one and the three are for the other one. Why are you against the will of the Basoga, the majority? Why are you suppressing them? They are like any other persons. I take it –(Interruption) 

MR BALIKOWA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give this House is that according to the constitution of Busoga, once two-thirds of the 11 royal chiefs vote, the person who is voted will be the legitimate Kyabazinga. In this case Gabula IV was voted according to the constitution of Busoga; so he should be the right Kyabazinga. (Applause)

MR OYET: Thank you so much for that information. I hope the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Information and National Guidance have heard it. I am very happy that the Minister of Labour, Gender and Social Development is here, listening attentively although he is being sidelined yet that belongs to his ministry. You must take charge and come out as a government to pronounce the position that has been taken by Busoga on electing that Kyabazinga and there is no compromise on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe in your answer, you could reconcile your statement under 2.1. The policy of the government is that for all the recognised kings, security is provided by soldiers formed as royal guards. Reconcile that with your No. 5.2 and explain to us who is a recognised king in this context and who was being guarded.

6.32
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we all need assurances from the minister that actually he is not going to unleash his Army again to terrorise the Basoga when they are having their cultural functions -(Interjections)– because I am imagining that if the people of Bugweri hosted Nadiope IV tomorrow, will the minister send the Army to terrorise them? (Laughter) We need this assurance. 

We need assurance that the minister is not going to send soldiers to terrorise Basoga. Really, we do not need the Army to terrorise our people because our people are peaceful and are indulging in their own cultural activities. Give them their freedom because it is guaranteed by the Constitution, and whether you have some preference, please keep off the Busoga kyabazingaship institution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister? Okay, let us hear from hon. Okecho, then the Buganda members and then we close.

6.33
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much for giving me this last opportunity to express our indignation as the Japadhola for what happened in Busoga. 

We also have a cultural institution and an elected king. It is not my hope that when we come to elect our next king, God forbid, we shall be faced with armed men guiding us on how to do it –(Laughter)- we are a very peaceful people as you all know. You have seen how we react to all the intimidation created by some people in government with respect to our district. We think that when time comes for us to elect our king which must be done upon the death of the current one – as I said God forbid we should be intimidated in any way. 

I am of the opinion that after this statement has been presented to us here, Parliament should pronounce itself on the issue in Busoga. (Applause) We should not leave it out because we shall have wasted time debating an issue here without any conclusion. I expect this to be done today so that we are able to resolve this matter once and for all. The Basoga should be left to go ahead with other development projects and not just fighting and killing themselves. Thank very much and it is a pleasure.

6.35
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister who is my old friend. However, I wish to register my disappointment that the minister I have known for a very long time can issue this very statement before the House. Madam Speaker, this is not a district council –(Laughter)- this is a National Legislative Assembly –(Laughter)- a National Legislative Assembly that is supposed to read and understand –(Interruptions)

MR OKECHO: I was so hesitant to push an order to my friendly and namesake, hon. Mathius Nsubuga. But assuming we have local governments, and I presume we want upright individuals in all the tiers of governance, I think it is not in order for you – are you in order –(Laughter)– to assume that local governments are the ones that are supposed to be given such statements? Is my colleague in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think at the back of his mind he is aware that the qualifications of a Member of Parliament are different from those of a local council – 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: And, Madam Speaker, some local councils, like in my place debate in local languages and so a document like this in English would be very difficult for them to comprehend because the questions were: why were people being beaten up? Why do they use tear gas? Why the involvement of the Army? 

Before this Busoga affair, I did stand here under your permission and asked the very questions when people were being beaten in Kayunga before the intended trip of the kabaka. At the same time, they were beating people in Busoga and the Minister of Internal Affairs had to give a statement which he failed to give to this House up to today. 

The most important point I would like the minister to highlight like all my colleagues have asked is, who are these civilians wielding sticks and these people in Army uniforms as far as sub-counties? Are they under charge of the Ministry of Defence? And if not – one writer in West Africa said, “The centre cannot hold when things fall apart.” When everybody is taking the issue of security in their hands and when my friend, the Minister of Defence, is here and he is supposed to guard and protect people and their property, is just looking on. 

This week the papers and the Uganda Human Rights Commission reported that the Army has been top on the list of those violating the human rights of people in this country. It is disheartening, and indeed when the Ministry of Defence is under my brother, hon. Kiyonga, who knows that this government would not have been in power if it were not for the violation of human rights by the regime you replaced. Today, when you see the Army harassing and beating people you think, “Is the NRM Government respecting the rule of law?” The problem we have today is civil-military alliances. This is not a civilian government. Hon. Kiyonga, a civilian government would have a distinction between the Army and the civilians. 

Since 1964 when we had these alliances between the regimes then and the Army, it haunts us up to today and that is why we stand here and talk. Even tomorrow you will see uniformed army men beating up people –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was something the minister did not to include in his statement –

6.41
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Oh, yes. Thank you. Although the RDCs are under the mandate of the Minister for the Presidency, I am expected or I am expecting the minister to make a response on the behaviour, the character and the conduct of the RDC’s office in Jinja and the involvement of the deputy RDC and the RDC of Jinja that have been accused. At least we need mention of it because he is the chairman of the security committee in the district, but instead of promoting security, in a way he could be promoting insecurity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, the Prime Minister had directed that it would be included in the statement. Maybe he did not tell you. He has said you would answer all those issues; so, Mr Minister, answer please. 

6.42
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, who have spoken in response to the statement that I made this afternoon. My first point is to reiterate that I made this statement after very serious and careful consideration. I do appreciate that different people will react to situations differently. There are those who have said that the statement has not answered the issues they raised and there are those like hon. Nsubuga who have said that the statement is below standard, but I want to reiterate that I took time to think through this statement before bringing it to my colleagues in the House. 

Secondly, sitting here and listening to my colleagues, the points that have been raised could be categorised under three headings: there are those issues about whether or not we have a Kyabazinga today in Busoga; there have been a lot of testimonies about what went on during specific incidences in Busoga. The issue of what happened at Mpumudde Hill - although Madam Speaker, you did correct me when you gave another name, but I think we are talking about the same place. There are issues of what is said to have happened during the rally, specific incidents and mistakes that Members have reported as having been caused. The third elements are issues of policy and law and in my response, instead of addressing each honourable member of the House, I will address my response according to these chapters. 

First, on the issue of the Kyabazingaship - and I listened carefully to my good friend hon. Katuntu –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable minister to proceed without making an apology to this House even when the whole House expressed concern that he should apologise and then proceed? Is it in order for him to proceed without making an apology to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know at which stage he is going to, but I hope you are going to apologise, honourable minister. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I am making a response to points that were raised on the Floor in accordance to my understanding, and I have just started. The choice of whether I am going to make an apology or not is my decision and I do hope you agree with that unless you are saying that I have no choice in that matter. That is my understanding. We have clear Rules of Procedure. I made a statement and I am making a response, and I would expect honourable colleagues to listen to me like I listened to them. 

As I was saying, I listened very carefully to my old friend and a prominent lawyer in our country, hon. Katuntu, and I thank him for standing up and saying, “I am on the Opposition and there is this contest of the Kyabazingaship that I have no fuss about. But nevertheless, I respect those who cherish it and I would like them to have the freedom to proceed with giving due respect to their king or their cultural leader.” But being a prominent lawyer in this country, I also expected hon. Katuntu, through the Speaker, to have also assisted us in the legal analysis because as I said - and I don’t think any colleague here is disputing this fact - the High Court of the Republic of Uganda pronounced itself and said no elections should take place and nobody has contested this. In fact, the injunction said, until after October, if I recall very well. So, I expected my good friend and prominent lawyer in this country to also give some perspective to that respect. Yes, people should practise their cultures according to the freedom they have been given, but also, they have to pay due respect to the laws that govern the country. So, when we have a court which says no elections even in regard to culture and the elections do proceed, what should we do? Should we say because people have elected and the numbers are there, what the court has said is incorrect, or should we take steps through the court system to inform –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable minister. Mr Minister, you need to help me understand. Yes, it is true that there was a substantive court injunction, but on the other side, Government also interested itself in the electioneering process. Hence, the powers that be sent the Minister for Local Government to Busoga. And in my mind, I think that probably if Government wanted to enforce the court injunction, they would have said, “Please, this matter is before the courts of law. We should not proceed with the elections, but wait for the matters that are before the courts of law to be disposed of.” But here is a situation where Government clandestinely interested itself in the elections. It only came out to violently beat the people after their interests had been lost in the elections –(Interjections)– yes, it is because the side that Government had wanted to see through lost with three votes and the side that was supported by the people garnered the eight votes. Really, was the beating to enforce the court injunction or to show - please help me understand it. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to my good friend hon. Kassiano and other colleagues, because we are here; the Speaker is calm, even if we are going home at nine. I think it would be better if you could listen and take the full context because the questions you are raising, maybe as I elaborate, will come to those points. 

I have made this point that there was a court injunction, but let me quickly, if hon. Kassiano you could listen through the Speaker, address the particular point you have made. I said in this statement that a number of meetings have been held between the cultural chiefs of Busoga and the President and in those meetings, certain agreements have been reached with these chiefs. One of those agreements was that despite some people going to court and the differences we have been seeing in the papers, that they go back home, withdraw cases they have put in the courts and then have another election in accordance with the cultural constitution. That was the agreement. It was also agreed, in order to help them, that the Electoral Commission should help them to conduct the elections using their electoral college.

On this particular day, the 5th, although preparations were at hand that the Electoral Commission would participate and the minister was also sent there to be with the Electoral Commission, because there was this injunction, the government decided that the Electoral Commission should not participate in respect of the court injunction. (Interjection) Colleagues, if really you could allow me to go to some length to respond -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for this opportunity. The clarification I am seeking is, I am seeing much reliance on the Electoral Commission; that the Electoral Commission was approached and was ready to conduct the election for the Kyabazinga.

This election of 11 chiefs - one, two, ten, eleven - what magic is there to require the commission of the country to be the one to be given the mandate? (Laughter) Why are we abusing institutions of this country? It is terrible abuse! Eleven chiefs and you require the entire Electoral Commission! Am I really hearing it right or I cannot understand the English being talked about? Isn’t it really an abuse? What show is being stage managed in this exercise?

MR BALIKOWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Prince Wambuzi was elected, there was a court injunction and Government went ahead to give him protection. Why is it that Government is changing its goal posts when actually Gabula Nadiope is elected as the Kyabazinga of Busoga? Can the minister clarify?

DR KIYONGA: I would plead to you, Madam Speaker, that much as we have had a heated debate, let us listen to each other. I sat here and listened to each colleague who spoke. I am at the beginning of my response. I do not know if I am going to have to clarify every sentence that I have made, when will I finish? I have just made a statement in response to what hon. Kassiano asked, “There was an injunction, but you the government, how did you conduct yourself despite this injunction?”
 
I just repeated that there was this understanding between the President and the chiefs that they needed help with the election although my good friend from Sembabule is saying “just 11” I want to also inform him that although the chiefs involved are only 11, it has not been easy up to now to form consensus on who should lead them. So, it is not as simple as just 11 numbers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order Members.

DR KIYONGA: When the people that Government sent to Busoga conveyed the message that there is this injunction, the chiefs did not want to go by the issue of there being an injunction. Because when there is an injunction, you the individual can decide to respect it or not, or as a group, and then the process of the law would take its own course.

These chiefs did proceed as we have read in the newspapers and carried out an election. When I said, maybe on this point I may have not been very clear, that we need deeper clarity on what happened in the place, many people are relating what they heard and what they saw. I would like honourable colleagues to also know that I have been reliably informed that although the Electoral College is 11 chiefs, for you to conduct the election, there should be a quorum of eight. There are 11 chiefs who are eligible to participate in the college but for the election to take place there should be a quorum of eight. I was not in Busoga myself as I have said many times. In this particular election, what I have been told is that the people who participated in the Electoral College, were seven. I am just repeating this so that it is on record.

It is not really for the government to decide whether there was a quorum or not; whether this Electoral College sat properly, but I think as we debate, it is very important that we take in as much information as we are being given. I am making this statement; it is on Hansard and I am sure with time, facts will become very clear.

I would like colleagues who have been saying that the election is finished - there is someone elected; that without any question, Government should proceed and recognise the result of the election - to take into account the legal points that I have also put across.

In terms of the incidents, the beatings of which some of the pictures have been presented by one of our colleagues here, and as I said myself, I was not in town; I did not watch the TV. So, what my colleague has put here is additional information for me. What I did was to very carefully read the Hansard - and I must thank our people who do the Hansard; just overnight, you have information of what your colleagues said the previous night.

On behalf of Government, this additional information which has been made available - including what you colleagues have said that you saw footage on television of people being severely beaten. Given that information, I regret that situation because I would not like to be party to such a situation. But as hon. Kaliba said, this is why I wanted colleagues to read my statement carefully. It is me who said that even now there is this contest; but what we hear was done by security people. We feel we need deeper clarity. We need to dig deeper into this situation; that is the demand of natural justice. It would not be correct for any minister, even if one had seen the footage on television, to just say that he or she will take action on that basis, full stop. You need to go into it and take comprehensive action so that you know that you have made a correction and with time such incidences will not be repeated. 

So, I want to repeat here that as we have made a commitment in this paper; that while the dialogue is going on, maybe the Kyabazinga-elect will be the one to be recognised. I do not know. But as that goes on, within a period of three weeks, I promise, with your permission, Madam Speaker, to return here myself - although I made this statement because my colleague was not here. So, having made it myself, I will request the Prime Minister that I return to report on our findings and actions that we would have taken within a period of three weeks.

Now, I will proceed to the issue of policy. How should we be guarding our chiefs and kings? How should we be electing our kings? I have heard honourable members of Parliament very clearly. The majority who have spoken wish that the Army should be out of guarding chiefs and kings. This is what I hear clearly. That is a situation that we will have to examine deeply because the issue of providing royal guards was not like an imposed policy on the chiefs or the kings. It arose out of discussion. But you are the Parliament and you have spoken and your feelings are that the Army is better out of this arrangement. When I return in three weeks, I will also address that matter.

I think all of us are aware that we are moving towards making a law in order to more efficiently implement Article 246 of our Constitution. I do hope that the debate we have had here is also going to make an input in what we shall finally decide in this House. That is because making that law in order to implement more efficiently Article 246 is going to be the responsibility of Government. So, I have heard all these points about the chiefs and what Parliament thinks we should be doing.

Now, Madam Speaker, you have requested that I need to reconcile what I said in paragraph 2.1 and paragraph 5.2. I think this is in regard with the fact that the policy was to provide royal guards to these kings and also explain why the UPDF were in Bugembe and Mpumudde. And I think what you are asking is that given what I said in paragraph 5.2 - yes I think you are asking, in that situation, since there is conflict, who is having the royal guards? That is the point as I understood it. I think that also correlates with what one colleague said that if you Government think that there is a dispute, either you guard both contestants or withdraw from both until the issue is resolved. I would like to undertake here and now that that is what we are going to do. Either we guard both with royal guards or both with just Police. I am saying this because we also have to assess the implications of what we are and the security situation that could go -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have been forced to get up when the minister said, “We are either going to consider both or see what to do.” Now that we are informed that at the coronation that is going to take place in Kasese on Monday, Kyabazinga Nadiope has been invited as the Kyabazinga, how are you going to fit it in because we are going to escort him there? (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this is really my view. Sometimes security concern might not be a political decision to take -(Interjections)- yes. I think it is very dangerous for us to sit here and recommend that security should be withdrawn because if anything happens to any of them, the situation could be worse. I think the minister should take us correctly. What we are saying is, “Can’t you provide security as Government, given the problem as it is?” Can’t you find a professional way of providing security without it appearing that the royal guards are with one if you think there is no king? Otherwise, for us to sit and say, “Parliament recommended that you withdraw security from these two gentlemen,” I think it will be very dangerous, in my view.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for giving way. I know very well that when, for example, our cultural leader was being asked whether he wanted security guards from Government or not, he was also asked to nominate people who could be trained to specifically guard him. Now, I do not know whether this practice is still on and whether the Ministry of Defence in this case will follow another procedure to recruit these people as the royal guards who can be trained specifically to guard kings rather than do ordinary protection or provision of security.  

I needed that clarification because these are specific people nominated by our cultural leaders and trained by Government to guard them. Thank you very much.

DR KIYONGA: First, to respond to what hon. Katuntu has said, I think that we should agree; that is a very responsible position and I hope that we all agree with hon. Katuntu that what Parliament is asking for is equity in this situation. If there are two contestants, until the matter is sorted out, they should be equally protected.

The second issue was about the policy of how the royal guards have been developed. It is true as our honourable colleague has just said that the policy has been that the institution of the cultural leader nominates people from their area who are then trained by the Army but also given command from the Army so that there is responsibility, instead of leaving them at arms’ length. But my view, and I am also going to raise this within Government, is that given the sentiments that honourable colleagues have raised, we need to go back to the drawing board and see whether we sustain this policy or come up with a different modality. It is then that we will be able to come back to you with a position. 

So, in conclusion, Madam Speaker, number one, given the incidents that have been reported by our colleague who showed us pictures here, and given what some colleagues saw on television, on behalf of Government, I regret what you saw and it should not have happened. 

Two, we have undertaken, within a period of three weeks, to get to the bottom of this matter. I can tell you one example. The whole morning I was not here. After reading the Hansard, I was on telephone with people in Busoga, particularly the security people. One of the questions I asked was that even if this king was in dispute, what was going to be the problem if he waived off a rally? I asked the RDC and the other people what was going to be the problem if a rally was waived off and vehicles allowed to continue. The RDC really - it is not that I have exempted him, because I think what I said - in saying what we are going to do - it would appear that security agencies may have overstepped the limit lines. That is a general term which covers Police, intelligence, the Army and the RDC, because he is the chairman of the security committee. He is the one on the ground. So, when we say we are going to deepen our understanding of what happened, the RDC is in that circuit as well. I hear some quiet voices talking about suspension. I think three weeks is not too long; let us be calm and proceed in accordance with the laws of natural justice. 

So, Madam Speaker, I think I have made undertakings. I have done -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from my brother - you know him and I are the only people here who circumcise. (Laughter) There was an issue which was raised by Hon. Elijah Okupa that Kyabazinga Nadiope has been invited and he is now telling us that he is going to provide two guards to guard each. Of these, who will be taken to Kasese? And I am told you are the chairman of the organising committee. Could you help us to understand if our Kyabazinga will appear?

Secondly, I asked you about a businessman in uniform in Mbale. This has been going on for so long. He has threatened people at burials and weddings and he keeps masquerading. Are you aware of a businessman being guarded by the Army? Is he part of the commanders of the Army? Is he one of the Maj. Generals? Maybe I am not aware. He is called -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should end this matter. 

DR KIYONGA: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. It is good to have a brother from the mountains because I had forgotten. Because of his prompting, let me reiterate colleagues, that you are all welcome to Kasese on Monday, whether you have or you have not received cards. We are also joining the class of royals and would like to celebrate with you. (Laughter) 

Having said that, let me also say that I am not the chairman of the organising committee although when MPs come I will be there to receive them. The people who are inviting are very courteous people. If someone turns up and he is carrying a card and representing the cultural institution of Busoga, I can assure you he will be most welcome and will be accorded due respect. (Laughter) So, there will be no discrimination.

But regarding the other business between hon. Nandala and I, my investigations are about to be completed. So, I will let you know as soon as I have a response. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable, I think you will make your statement tomorrow because we have a session - yes, honourable members. He wanted to talk about the World Food Day but we could as well do it tomorrow.

I have already invited you to receive the Africa Cup of Nations Trophy in the morning and I do not know how long that will last. So, I want to adjourn the House to 11.30 a.m. so that we receive the cup, talk and laugh and then come here at 11.30 a.m. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence. When I look at today’s Order Paper, at the business to follow for today, our committee was supposed to present the Auditor-General’s Report 2001/02. The committee is travelling this evening for an upcountry session in Masaka to consider those districts, so we will not be in position to present it tomorrow. We will be back on Tuesday so we can have the Local Government Accounts Committee debated on Tuesday.
 
MR NANDALA: Since the Committee of Local Government has withdrawn, why don’t we put the report for Public Accounts Committee on one of the days?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have a quarterly report on the economy. Let us deal with the National Economy tomorrow and then those two we shall handle on Tuesday. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. House adjourned to tomorrow 11.30a.m.

(The House rose at 7.18 p.m. and was adjourned until Friday, 16 October 2008 at 11.30 a.m.)


