Wednesday 11th October, 2000

Parliament met at 2.20p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the chair)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION AMENDMENT BILL, 2000

(Debate Continued)

THE SPEAKER:  May I advise that we continue with the debate on the amendment of the Constitution. I recognise hon. Kakoba Onyango. Yesterday, where did we stop?

MR.KAKOBA ONYANGO (Buikwe County, Mukono): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: He will be followed by the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister in charge of  Karamoja, then hon. Kirunda Kivejinja.

MR.KAKOBA ONYANGO:  Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the movers of this motion and the Committee for the work they have done. 

The concept of separation of power assumes that there is power and that this power, contrary to the general belief that separates it, in reality it is shared. However, for this power to be shared properly, the roles must be clearly defined and demarcated. What this Bill is trying to do is to clearly define and demarcate the roles of the different players in the sharing of this power. That is why I am supporting this Bill.  

In my view, this Bill is not about individuals, but it is about the institutions that we are building; the institution of Parliament, the institution of the Executive and that of the Judiciary. It is important that these institutions execute their roles, but for these institutions to execute their roles properly, these roles should be clearly defined and demarcated as I have pointed out. What do we achieve out of this? I believe that once you have clearly defined roles, then you achieve efficiency and that is  what this Bill is all about. When you are talking about separating Members of Parliament from Ministers, what we are doing is trying to achieve efficiency.  

The hon. Members who spoke yesterday talked at length about this issue of efficiency. I believe it is important that efficiency is promoted in order to do a good job.  In my view, the Ministers have performed their role, some up to the expected extent, others have not performed very well. But I believe for those who have not performed very well, if we had this kind of arrangement, they could have done effectively well. And for those who have done their role, I believe there is room for improvement once we have this kind of arrangement. I believe that once we separate these powers, then those who will have been appointed Ministers, will have ample time to attend to their Ministerial posts instead of being hampered by other duties supposed to be executed by Members of Parliament. 

Secondly, I believe what we are doing here is to promote accountability. Once you clearly separate these powers, then definitely, the person who is executing the roles, will know where he or she is accountable, but once you have the powers diffused, then there comes a problem. As you know very well, even in the Bible, it is said that you cannot serve two masters at the same time. You may get encumbrances here and there. That is why I strongly support this Bill. I know at the end of it all it will promote efficiency and accountability. 

At our local level here, when I look at this Bill, I think, contrary to what some Members are saying, that it is narrowing the area from where the appointing authority is supposed to pick, in my view, it is broadening it. And I believe once this Bill goes through, definitely, it will give the appointing authority the chance to pick from outside and this is what we believe in. This is in line with the Movement policy of broadbasedness. 

I believe that because we are getting people from outside, we are therefore, bringing them inside. My view is that once you do this, then we shall move away from the thinking that those who are here are the only ones who can do the work. I think this is ironical. Out there, we have quite some good people who can do this good work and therefore, it is quite important that we give them a chance to utilise their talents.   

Furthermore, the Bill is not confining the appointing authority to picking from outside only. The appointing authority can pick from Parliament here, and once this is done, what is required, is for that person who has been appointed, if he or she accepts the appointment, to resign from Parliament. And once you do that, then definitely, you will be giving chance to someone else in the constituency to come and join Parliament here. And I believe that in such a way, we shall be widening the leadership scope. We should completely discard this idea of thinking that once you are a Member of Parliament, then you are the best. We should give chance to other people to come, we should give chance to the appointing authority to expand on the leadership catchment area. 

As far as Parliament is concerned, I believe this Bill is also aimed at promoting harmony within Parliament here. We have had problems in the past when we had cases of censure motions against a fellow Member of Parliament. I am not saying that we should bring this Bill so that we can censure Ministers at will. But all that I am saying is that it is quite a different story. It is easier to handle a censure motion when someone is not part and parcel of this House. If someone is a Member of Parliament, it becomes a problem even after the censure itself -(Interjections) – I will explain that.

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker can you protect me?

THE SPEAKER: Can you allow him to develop his point?

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, as I was still explaining, what has been happening is that after censure motions, we have had situations where cliques are formed simply because someone feels he was censured and he is a Member of Parliament. Whereas if the situation was different, if such people were not hon. Members, then it would be easier to handle. And in such a case we would be promoting harmony for the smooth running of this Parliament (Interruptions.).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we allow the hon. contributor to make his points. If you do not agree with him you will have an opportunity to do so in an orderly fashion?

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker as I was saying out, this Bill is aimed at promoting affirmative action for good leadership.

MR. KANIA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Onyango Kakoba for giving way. I am seeking clarification from the Member holding the Floor on the issue of the easiness of this Parliament in dealing with censuring Cabinet Ministers if they were not Members of Parliament. In the same light, since this should be an exercise of separation of powers, would he also agree that Parliament should remove itself from the appointment, or from having anything to do with the appointment of the Executive or the Cabinet?

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Kania for the clarification he has sought. In the first instance, when I talked about the censure issue, I said that for purposes of harmony. If you have two situations, supposing it arose - no one wants it to arise - but suppose it arose. You have a Cabinet Minister who is a Member of Parliament and he is due for censure and a Cabinet Minister who is not a Member of Parliament and he is also due for censuring; for purposes of creating harmony, you would rather have the latter situation.

On the issue of Parliament having no hand in appointing, I think these are the roles that I am talking about.  When you talk about separation of powers, in theory the powers are separated, but in reality there is sharing of these powers through the roles. Once the Parliament is engaging in vetting the Ministers for the appointments, that is their role. That is how you can operationalise it. 

I want to comment on an issue that was raised yesterday by hon. Francis Babu that even in the American Government these powers are inter-linked and he gave the example of the American Senate where the Vice President is the President of the Senate. I think if we want to understand the American Government better, we need to look at the background. The American Government has a bi-legislature. That is, the House of Representatives and the Senate. Once you have such an arrangement, there should be a system of checks and balances to make sure that the powers are balanced. That is why in the Senate we have some influence over the Executive, whereas in the House of Representatives, there is nothing of the sort.

MR.MAITEKI BAITERA: Mr. Speaker, we are debating a matter which is of great public importance and I am surprised that we are proceeding with the debate in the absence of the mover of this motion and even the seconder! I really do not know whether it is in order for us to proceed this way.

THE SPEAKER: What do we do? They have moved the motion; it is now for debate. I think the interest is there because the hon. Onyango Kakoba is contributing in support of the motion. But on a serious note let me hope that the movers will be here any time.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Capt. Babu Francis): Mr. Speaker, I did not want to disturb the hon. Member, but I just want to clarify a point that I made yesterday. The reason why I quoted the American model was to show the horizontal relationship between the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. That whilst you have a trinity, they are linked horizontally and vertically. I was not trying to prove that the American system was better. All I was trying to say was that whilst we talk about separation of power, the trinity is joined to the main body. Thank you.

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, I personally believe that once a motion comes into this House, it ceases to be the property of the mover, it becomes a property of this House, and that is why we are here.

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Ministers of Agriculture are having a parallel conference in this House, is it in order for them to continue disrupting the proceedings while we are attending to this important motion? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think they were consulting which is allowed, provided they do not disrupt the proceedings of the House.

MR.ONYANGO: Mr. Speaker as I was pointing out, the American system is quite different. And much as the Vice President is the President of the Senate, at no one point, are Senators Ministers or Secretaries of State.  I thought I should bring out that point quite clearly.  Likewise, even if we have situations where at times the Chief Justice for instance presides over impeachment processes.  Even in Uganda here we have it. For example, when we have the election of the Speaker here, it is normally the Chief Justice who presides. But these are just their roles to play once in a while; it is not diffusion of powers. 

I know what I am talking about because I am a student of Comparative Politics (Laughter.). As I was saying, what we are trying to put in this Bill is defining and demarcating the roles. It has nothing to do with diffusing roles. It has nothing to do with weakening the Government, as I have heard from some circles.  

In my view, it is better when you have a situation where people come out boldly to give their views instead of those who pretend to be doing what they are doing when on the contrary they are doing other things. I think those are weakening the Government more than we people who are coming out to give our views on such important issues are.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.   

THE MINISTER OF STATE, THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE, KARAMOJA (Mr. Lokeris Peter): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me the Floor. This motion is a very good motion; an awakening motion, which we should debate in the spirit it deserves. 

A political organisation is formed by a number of people who have a strategic intent, not by a single person. They have a purpose; they want to do something and they must do so in a group. These people have a mission. They have the objectives and they develop the strategies on how to attain these objectives. Who can best do this? This can be best done by those who have the know-how, those who formulated the programme, analysed and designed it. They can be able to monitor and supervise this program but if you gave it to the people who have no idea about it, as is the case in developing countries, they are bound to fail. 

I do not know why a young country like this would always think of abandoning, abdicating their programme and giving it to others; leaving only the head of state to recruit and try to make the new ones internalise the programme. This is the problem in developing countries.  

You remember one time, the Japanese decided to give us a grant so that we have streetlights. They designed it, internalised it and came and worked at a supersonic speed and finished; and the lights are working. If the work was given to other people who had no learn the new design, go and look at the site, they would take a long time to implement it; and time does not wait for anybody. Time is power and it must be well utilised.  

What do our people want? Our people want tangible results. They want to see what you have promised in the manifestos. It is the political leader of the Government in place, together with his team, who should have drawn all these things and they should be drawing these things as we go along. If the people who know the programme are discarded and you bring in a team, which may not even be interested in what the President is saying, they are likely to sabotage him because they are not interested in retaining him in power. And yet if it were those elected into power, they would like to continue with the President and support the continuation of his party. In order to ensure this, There must be people to work with him so that they provide the necessary services. You do not just come here for five years and just walk away. Others must remove you through constitutional means.

The people who really have the feel of the people are those who have campaigned. When you go to campaign for your political organisation with your President, you feel the rigours of the campaign. And when you are in power, you have that feeling that people must be served. But if you walk from nowhere and then you are a Minister, when people are talking, you do not feel it because you do not know where they are; you are just serving them. So you must become a Member of Parliament and become a Minister and when they tell you, we want this, you say, yes, because you have suffered to come here. (Interruption)

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I have followed what the hon. Minister is saying and he said that the people who can feel for the population are those who have campaigned and have suffered in the campaigns. He knows very well that his boss, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, did not campaign, probably did not suffer and he is doing a good job. Do you mean he does not feel for the population?

MR.LOKERIS: Mr. Speaker, I have a lot say in connection with hon. Kazoora’s contribution yesterday’s. If he could wait I will tell him the facts of his speech, especially where he said, we should come here and talk, talk, our people hear that you are talking even when you are saying nothing. Only coming here and talk and just be heard.  You must talk and your talk must be translated into programmes (Interruption.).

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister Lokeris in charge of Karamoja in order to say that people come to Parliament to talk, talk and say nothing. Is he in order to denigrate this House and make it as if it were House of lumpens?                   

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Minister was just giving advice that when you come and talk; say something.

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Peter Lokeris, Minister in Charge of Karamoja and Member for Chekwii County has said, in reference to the speech I made yesterday, that is it realistic for a Member of Parliament to come and talk and talk without showing any results? Can you compare your constituency with mine, or can you show what you have delivered as a Minister in charge of Karamoja so that you would justify your talking?

THE SPEAKER: Let us not reduce this to a duel between two hon. Members. Let us talk generally about our efforts in development and what we are doing in our Constituency.  Can you proceed?

MR.LOKERIS: Thank you Mr. Speaker for the fatherly advice. I was only referring to what the Member said yesterday, and I did not say much really. Because when you say you we compare Constituencies, we have not reached the attainment of Egalitarian society. So, there are always disparities in development, which we have not bridged. And if they are there, they continue to be there until a solution is found to bridge the gap. 

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Lokeris for letting me give this information. I only stood to thank you for your maiden speech after your recent graduation. Thank you (Laughter.).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, I had already advised that we should not reduce our debate to a personal level. I think you have just done that in spite of my advice.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Dr. Philip Byaruhanga): Thank you my colleague for giving way. Mine is to emphasise the main thrust of the argument yesterday in the speech by hon. Maj. John Kazoora was on Constituency Ministers. If he now says that actually Kashaari is blossoming vis-à-vis Karamoja is, he is completely against the spirit of the best of his argument yesterday.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you proceed please?

MR.LOKERIS: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to state that I would like to thank Absolom Ongom for saying I am making a maiden speech since I graduated. You know, I took a tough course and got honours, for your information.

MS.BABIHUGA: Is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to refer to the hon. Absolom Ongom as Absolom Ongom as if he is a mere citizen in this House when our rules of procedure command us to refer to each other as 'honourable' or the hon. Member’s constituency? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member for Rukungiri, if hon. Members are to stop reducing the debate to a personal level, they would not run into those problems, which first of all, hon. Ongom ran into and which lured his colleague, the Minister, into doing the same. You see what is happening? They are shaking hands –(Laughter)- they are greeting each other.  

Hon. Minister, I request that you come to your concluding remarks.

MR.LOKERIS: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Some Members have said that once MPs are appointed Ministers, they should resign from Parliament. Some Members said this Bill has no financial implication. For me, as an Accountant, it has gross financial implication. You can just add the figures and imagine if all of them - the ones were appointed from Parliament and they have to resign. Is there not going to be re-runs, fresh campaigns and what have you? I think it is up to someone to think of the financial implications.  Even next year money has to be collected. The Permanent Secretaries should be allowed to continue to advise us technocrats. 

You see dear members, there is also insecurity in the job of ten-year of those to be appointed Ministers. You see, we have had very rigorous censures in this place and at times when an MP Minister is censured, he comes back and assist us here, as it has happened before. But suppose you have been replaced after re-election, where will you go? You just go home out of no fault of your own? You do not have to go home, it is not fair. That is why they should come here and add to the pool of knowledge in this august House. And also, even the electorate will be at a loss. How can you trust a person whom you did not elect? Only the President is elected, how about the rest? They can come and say, ‘we do not care’. Even the Members of Parliament themselves will be in problems, especially those who come from the same place with Ministers. A shrewd Minister will go and say, ‘that man is just shouting without implementing anything. I am the one moving everything’, especially if they think they will challenge you next time. So, you suffer also. Therefore, why do you accept to invite problems for yourselves? If the non-elected Minister is here and he nullifies your talk as nothing, then the elected Member is in trouble. They will claim they are the prime movers of development. So, take care of that. 

How about if you have a Minister who is a saboteur within the current Government? He will sabotage Government programmes to the disadvantage of the Wanainchi. We have to think about our electorate.  These are the people we have to think about. People who have been elected will serve them better.  

You see, Mr. Speaker, we have a problem of copying things very fast (Interjection.).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I requested you to come to your concluding remarks. You seem to be opening up.

MR.LOKERIS: Mr. Speaker, as I conclude, we always have one problem. When we hear of any model, we want to rush there even without knowing its implications. The model we have suits us well now and those political leaders who will come tomorrow like Mao, who may come in the year 2010 as President and others who may come in 2030. All of you should aspire for higher positions even here in Parliament not only to remain here, and mind you, it is a constitutional right to aspire for higher position. 

Therefore, since this motion has been answered by the formation of a National Planning Authority, which will spread the projects throughout the country; it has been taken over by events and should just be defeated. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to air the views of the people of my area, as the voice of Bugweri.  

First of all, what is being brought here is not new.  When I was looking into my records, the people of Bugweri who had the wisdom to elect me to go and prepare the Constitution, actually had a definite opinion on it. It is one of the 64 proposed amendments to the Constitution when we were debating it, and I can read it here. It was motion No.4, which the people of Bugweri held at that time and still hold, that the Minister should not hold any other elective office. I just want to give you that information. 

I am debating this clearly to tickle the minds of the leaders as to the sort of structures we need to leave in place that will serve the country better and prevent us from going back to situations, which made us go to the bush. The reason then, -(Interruptions)- I am just beginning, I will be clarified later.

I thank the hon. Members who have brought this motion so that we can exchange views on whether we can improve our constitutional provisions so as to make governance more amicable and distributive. I like it in the sense that this is the way constitutional amendments must be done, not when we meet roadblocks, but to visualise in advance. From our experience, what structures should we improve on so that we avoid attending to situations when we meet accidents?  

With that background, I urge Members not to have rigid positions but at least everybody should bring out his or her views and reasons so that we come out of this debate more knowledgeable. After all even when we made the Constitution last time, we also made the provision that there should be a Constitutional Review Commission. So, this is the beginning. Even if it is not carried today, it is the beginning of how to review the organs we set up in the Constitution, which ultimately will be settled in one way or another because any good situation is good for all of us. So, with that background, these are my views.  

The people of Bugweri supported it, even now they support it. Even hon. Mwandha whom we normally differ on a number of issues, will definitely say that these views are not mine, they are even his, as one of my constituents. The wisdom of the people of Bugweri still stands that in our Movement system, everybody has got the right to aspire for any highest position. So, the one who wants to lead this country must emerge from any of us. 

When the President goes to the population to campaign, he goes with the manifesto. With whom does he make that manifesto? He also puts up a task force to make sure that his views are properly explained to the population. He even supplements that with a team of advisors to ensure that he is not misunderstood when he is presenting his manifesto to the population. He even goes beyond that. There are kakuyeges of about a million people, all intending to assist the aspiring President. And the people with whom he made that Constitution, and who want to ensure that he is put in power so that he is able to implement that Constitution. Once that is done, he is the only person who has the authority to govern this country. That is very clear, there is no other person.

Members of Parliament are elected principally to do two jobs:

    1. To make laws so that the person who is elected President does not rule us according to the rules made by his wife and himself in bed.

    2. You are there to ensure that the person you have given power is able to exercise it properly.  

This is what is called monitoring and overseeing of Government programmes. These are two separate roles. My view is that, as hon. Lokeris stated, it is only those who have opted to go with that President and make that Constitution who have got the greatest vested interest to ensure that the manifesto is put in place. And in our governance now, which is democratic, a lot of leadership can emerge. We have got 50,000 leaders at LC.1. So, there is no question of failing to identify leaders. We have got approximately 4,000 leaders at LC.2, 900 at LC.3, about 50 at LC.5 and we have 270 in the Parliament. This constitutes what you call the political class.  
 
It is from this group - Imagine this situation. As much as we have very many contestants in our own constituencies, there may be a time when we shall have more people aspiring to be President as Members of the Movement.  So, there will be others. They will say, ‘this is my manifesto, we are of the same system because they were broad-based and what not, but I want to contest’.  If we do not have a rule that there will be no more Presidents, we shall always have very many contestants in Bugweri County to come here. 

Then we must also envisage a situation where aspiring Presidents from the Movement system will emerge. Therefore, each one will have a group with a manifesto, and once elected, it is from these people, who were with him at his greatest hour of need, that he must be able to pick those who will implement his manifesto. If he abandons those and the situation creates a pool of the fellows who turn up in Parliament - many of you do not know who will be here. Who can guarantee that he will be here? Because we have given the power to the people; they will select. 

Now, you make this President abandon his team that has put him in power so that he could now come and fish from the pool, which he never tended; because everybody comes here on his own merit.  He has no obligation at all that this will bring him here to implement the President's manifesto. So, this is a problem, which we need to examine; that this situation may actually create an irresponsible President.  

Here you are, he is elected with all the powers, there is a ready pool of Members of Parliament whom he never influenced to come to the House but he must hand pick some to implement his programme. If they fail, he drops them conveniently, picks from the same pool and if at all his manifesto is not implemented, there is always somebody to blame. But he himself only gets the credit where the credit has been done. 

I think this situation must be avoided. We need to have a situation where, if he has a group of fellows who put the manifesto in place, who must ensure that it is implemented, he should not abandon the people that put him in power. Then this will  leave Parliament with a very simple job of making laws, look at what they are doing and because they are part of the political class, there is no question that we shall not be able to interact. 

On the Movement structure, we have already provided for these interactions. We have the National Conference whereby all Members of Parliament and they have been people elected - (Interruption)

MRS.MPANGA: I want to seek clarification from hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja. Who are these people he is referring to who put the President in power? I thought all of us put him in power, not just a small group of people he chose to help him campaign.

MR.KIRUNDA: I can clarify that. Hon. Lokeris said if you want to capture power - (Interruption)

MRS.BIRIGWA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Kivenjinja for giving way. I would like hon. Kivejinja to clarify on whether the Directors of the Movement Secretariat should also be Members of Parliament.

MR.KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: That is very simple. The people of Bugweri said Ministers should not hold elected offices. I sold that idea, we won in the committee, but we lost in the plenary. Now the law is that there is no difference, you can be a Minister and you can be a Member of Parliament, you can be a director and you can be - I am constitutionally following what was agreed upon. And now this motion is actually to re-examine that situation. So I am giving my views - (Interruption) - I think, Mr. Speaker, let me finish my contribution. 

I said with the Movement arrangement, we have areas of interaction. The Movement has a National Conference where all Members of Parliament, including the leadership of the country, articulate issues; and that is the highest political organ. We have the National Executive where Members of Parliament are also effectively represented.  That conference also elects the President, the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman. And to avoid a situation which was the cancer of the pre-independence times where the National Political Commissar, who is equivalent to the Secretary General of the political movements then, came under suspicion because the other one was working within the population while the other had the power. They used to bring a lot of rumours that this one is undermining you. We made a modification that the NPC should, although directly elected, be a nominee of the President to ensure that he will not turn on an independent ground and cause the situation. 

Otherwise, we would have ended up with the situation, which we had in Uganda the demise of Kakonge, the demise in Kenya, the demise of Tom Mboya in Tanzania, the demise of Osca Mbona. All these were powerful Secretary-Generals who mobilised the country to independence but could not be able to stand for the next favour. 

So for us, we learnt and we had that hybrid and it is working properly.  So I think we have already a channel whereby we can be able to interface and interact. Not only that, we still have the Movement Caucus. It is not abolished. The thing needs to be ironed up in the Movement Caucus and that is how we are able to face situations, which appear to be hard. So, the system is already in place, we need to get faith in it but we should not take the present situation to be able to guide the future. Because the present President or regime has got more people to listen to even the living and dead.  

Recently he was in Mbale remembering his comrades with whom he started this one. So do not assume that when he is taking decisions there are very many silent listeners to his conversation and watchers of his actions. But the one who may turn up here seeking for votes without those constraints I think we need to make him responsible. Let him roam among - because being in the Movement does not mean that we all want to be Members of Parliament, you want to be President or you have got a manifesto to be able to implement. It is a group that will emerge with a leader and be able to put up a manifesto and put up a system that will put itself in power. And those were Members of the Movement.

 So there is no way, you just decide that you will be together, formulate a manifesto, set up a task force, campaign vigorously, elect your President, form your Government and leave the Parliament to do its own job.  Thank you very much.

MR.NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am alarmed at the course this debate is taking. My understanding of the contribution of the previous speaker was a lamentation of his abandonment after having put his Excellency somewhere.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am greatly distressed that my good friend, hon. Lokeris comes to this debate without the benefit of reading Article 113. For his benefit I will read it. "Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to elected Members of Parliament”. The President is not bound to appoint anybody from Parliament as a Cabinet Minister!  So, on those two clarifications, I want to try and persuade this House that we must put ourselves in the correct context. 

When I was in the CA, this matter was very, very ably debated. To the best of my re-correction, the position the movers are seeking to obtain succeeded one Wednesday afternoon. That night certain people went and consulted.  The following morning in the plenary they re-opened the issue and the argument on which this motion in the CA was lost was, if I am appointed Minister and the President, at his pleasure dismisses me, where do I go? 

I want us to address ourselves to that question because it is a valid question. The validity of that question is, what motivates us into leadership? I am asking that for a reason because if you are a good performer, why should you be sacked? But I am also aware that in our country - and I am going to say this without shame and I hope my colleagues will not be angry with me – most of us come into leadership because leadership is the means of increasing our economic potential. In a lot of what I said I am starting with myself, yes. In other countries, to be a Minister actually causes you, the portfolio holder, to lose money because you hold your businesses in trust. But here, we now say the President must have these Ministers and they can be Members of Parliament and they must also participate in the debates of Parliament. 

The situation obtaining now is slightly different from the situation, which obtained during the Constituency Assembly. Now, we have a Parliament, which has passed the Movement Act, a Parliament obtaining after the referendum has taken place. 

According, to the referendum you have a Movement Government starting with a Movement President with a Movement Cabinet and with a Movement Parliament. Now, what is making me very, very sorry is this suspicion that Parliament will do things contrary to what the Executive wants. When everything is Movement, whom are you afraid of? 

I am Movement by legislation, and I am such a minority that right now the fear of the Executive against Parliament means that there is lack of trust. It is not fair to this country that we have leaders who do not trust one another. The purpose of separation of powers is not physical separation. 

The purpose of separation of powers is that one matter is addressed in one forum, then it is given to another forum to be aerated so that with the wealth of knowledge, it can be revisited. But if one powerful speaker in Cabinet has persuaded Cabinet that this must be it, and that same person comes to this Parliament and says this is the position, then there is very little chance for improved positions of thinking, because of collective Cabinet responsibility.  

We are saying, let the Cabinet consider the matter after which, give it to Parliament and let Parliament deliberate on it without undue influence of the original position. The question of course, for me, is unreal because in my conception, if this Bill were to go to Second Reading, then we would come up with amendments so that the original position in the Constitution which says that Cabinet shall be made up of 21 ministers would obtain. And that would lead to great efficiency because the 21 Ministers will be chosen for the ability to perform and not to appease regions, religions and clans so that we have an untenable situation where you have more Ministers than Permanent Secretaries, it does not make sense in administration.  

I want to stop on a very sensitive point. In a Government, which is operating on cash Budget without a National Planning Authority where money is vired from one sub-head of the Vote to another at the Minister’s pleasure we then have a problem in the country because there is no parameter for projecting national development countrywide. And I think it is instructive to note that no Minister, and I stand to be corrected, no Minister from NRC days has lost a major political campaign at election.  

I want to conclude by saying this-(Interruption)           

MR.KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to inform hon. Nyai that in 1989 I ran against two Ministers for Nakawa division. One was the Minister of Local Government, hon. Bidandi Ssali and another was hon. Mayanja Nkangi who was then Minister of Education. I was runner up to hon. Bidandi Ssali after defeating hon. Mayanja Nkangi when he was a Minister of Education. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First, I would like to say that, that information is correct; and hon. Kutesa said to the people there that “he is more experienced, but I am strong and young”. But in 1994, I think it was for the CA, I lost against hon. Kintu Musoke. So what he was saying can not be true.

PROF.MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker -(Interruptions)- No, I did not lose this time. But in 1989, we had a collegiate election, and actually the truth is, very many Ministers lost their election. I did not lose then but certainly a number of ministers lost the elections; they even lost their Cabinet positions. 

MR.DICK NYAI: You see Mr. Speaker, I am glad about all this information because it enriches my point  (Laughter.). Because when hon. Sam Kutesa edged my good friend and old Budonian, Joash Mayanja Nkangi into last position in Nakawa; both of them were interlopers in hon. Bidandi Ssali’s backyard and it was inevitable that they lost. (Laughter.). 

The constituency Ministers we are talking about are the Ministers who come from the counties where they were born and they are voted there. They will make sure that they channel things into their constituencies so that they are elected ad infinitum.

MR.KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Dick Nyai for giving way. I am born in Kajara. I was a Minister, I stood with hon. Kanyomozi and I was defeated and I lost my position as a Minister. 

MRS.MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Agadi Didi a Minister, hon. Bachou from West Nile both lost and in 1989, I was a Minister and lost to somebody and Betty Bigombe lost to Mao. They are too many. You cannot make that statement.

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, when we are talking of Cabinet Ministers, I do not want hon. Members to think that Ministers of State are Cabinet Ministers. They are not, in my opinion. The Constitution is very clear. “There will be 21 Cabinet Ministers”, and that is what this motion is all about. What I want to end with is a scenario, which I hope my colleagues will address themselves to. At the moment, this House is allowed to make amendments to the Constitution.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Bart Katurebe): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just want to make one clarification with regard to the word 'Minister' which hon. Nyai was talking about. Just for the clarity of Members, the Constitution in Article 257 defines 'Minister' as follows: “Minister means a Minister of the Government and includes a Minister of State and a Deputy Minister.”  

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, you are a great lawyer yourself. If Ministers of State were automatic Cabinet Ministers, that qualification would be unnecessary. But that is not the issue. (Laughter.)

The issue I want to finish on is a very, very touchy one. Among other purposes of this Parliament is to amend the Constitution and to do so, Parliament must determine it by a two-thirds majority. In the current scenario where there are 61 Cabinet Ministers, all the President needs is a few other Backbenchers to frustrate any amendment to the Constitution. At the moment – I am told it is about to happen now.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, I heard you say you are getting to your last point.

MR.DICK NYAI: I am only winding up. Now Mr. Speaker, in a situation where you have a President who is permanently individualistic and selfish, then this Parliament will not be a saving place, a valve, an escape route for the people of Uganda. And it is for this reason that I believe all Members will consider soberly that this motion passes and we go to Second Reading and we Amend it to make it relevant to other sections of our Constitution. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I notice that many of you would like to contribute on this important debate.  But I would like to remind you that we were about to dispose of a very simple Bill yesterday but we could not do so because of some technical problems, namely lack of quorum. As we stand now, we are in quorum. I am proposing that we dispose of that matter so that we are in a position to continue with this lively debate at a later stage.

MAJ.GEN MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the proposal but at the same time, as movers and some of us are seconders have a similar concern. There is a quorum and we would also like to take advantage of this quorum because the other Bill came in about three, four days ago. But we have had a Bill that has been standing for ten months and we would like to finish with it whatever the outcome of it and put it aside. I am not saying that I do not appreciate the concern you have raised, but I thought that even when we finish with this Bill, the other Bill that you propose that we deal with now can be handled at any other time. As you have said, it is a simple Bill. It will not even require a full day.  We can always handle it at whatever time it comes. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muntu, I hope when we reach a stage where we shall not have a quorum to take decisions on your Bill, you are not suggesting that we will not bring another business to proceed on with. We brought in this Bill because we could not take a decision on the other Bill for lack of quorum and we are going to continue doing that. But it seems you are suggesting that – (Interruption)

MAJ.GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: I concede Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for your understanding. So I suggest that we suspend debate on this motion for some time and we deal with The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, debate on this Bill was concluded earlier on. What we now need to do is to pronounce ourselves on the motion for the Second Reading, and I now put the question that “The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000” be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT BILL, 2000

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Chairman, in Clause 2, we have the following definitions as amended. 
    • “Act” means a law made by Parliament. 
    • “Session” means a series of meetings of Parliament within a period of 12 months; and 
    • “Speaker” means the Speaker of Parliament and Deputy Speaker.  
The justification for this is that this is consistent with the definition provided in the Constitution. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): I agree.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification with regard to provision in section six, which reads, “where an Act contains more than one enactment, it shall be divided into sections and sections containing more than one enactment shall be divided into sub-sections.” What about the sub-sections, which contain several paragraphs, how will we refer to the paragraphs? Thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you and the Chairperson, have you got his question? He says you start with the section then you go into sub sections and then from sub sections you may have paragraphs. Now, he wants you also to go to paragraphs and then from paragraphs, sub paragraphs and then we go on and on. In drafting, you know, you can assist us.

MR.NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, you have helped me to answer the question. In the normal drafting, we have Clauses and sub-clauses and there are no paragraphs.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in Clause 7, I beg to move that we insert at the beginning of the Clause the following words, “unless the situation warrants otherwise.” The justification for this is to cater for laws passed and are called by other names such as Statutes. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.NKANGI: I concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed by the Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in Clause 9(1), that is in line four, instead of four copies, we substitute the word “four” with “ten” copies. The justification for this is that there is need to distribute the Bills to various offices. His Excellency the President, the Chief Justice, the First Parliamentary Counsel, the concerned Ministry, the Auditor General, the Clerk to Parliament and the Chief Legislative Counsel. So, we beg that that be amended to ten instead of four. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my brief contribution on the report of the Chairman, I made a remark regarding the need to provide for a specific time frame within which the Clerk of Parliament should prepare the Bill and have it sent to the printers and to the President for a assent. In my argument, I cited a situation where a Bill may be passed by Parliament and the Clerk may not be as expeditious as he is required to be and therefore, the Bill may delay to go to the President and consequently assent may also delay. And I requested that giving a time frame could be considered. I do not know if the Chairman could comment on that before we pronounce ourselves on this particular item. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, have you got his submission?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, it is a pity that when I answered yesterday possibly the hon. Member was not in the House. My answer was that where the Constituent Assembly thought the time was of essence, as in fact it has been done to some of these Clauses, it has provided the time within which the Clerk of Parliament may act.  And in this particular case, that is not the case. 

Secondly, we should trust the integrity of public officers. There is no reason why a Clerk of Parliament should sit on a Bill. 

Thirdly, a Minister piloting the Bill through Parliament because of his sectoral policies will necessarily ensure that the Bill goes for assent to the President. So, I do not really think that it is necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, do you have something to add? Hon. Okumu Ringa, I hope you are satisfied.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am not satisfied but since Members have not seen the import of this argument, I will let it rest. Otherwise, it is of essence that a given time frame be provided so that the Bill is acted upon expeditiously. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause (9) of the Bill be amended in the manner proposed by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have another amendment?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in sub-clause (2) paragraphs (b) and (c) we propose to substitute with the following:  
(b) Carefully compare the copies with the text of the Bill as passed.
(c) If the copies are found to be correct sign on each copy a statement in the form set out in Part One of the Second Schedule to this Act.
The justification is that the paragraphs serve different purposes and should be provided for separately. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister no objection?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I have no objection, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that sub-clause (2) of Clause 9 be amended in the manner proposed by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we propose a new insertion after Clause 15 to read as follows; “Citation: The citation of the Short Title to an Act shall be sufficient to identify the Act.” The justification for this is to cater for circumstances where the citation provision is not included in the Act. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a new section and we regard it as a stage of Second Reading, so if you want to debate it you can.

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, the need for this is that this appeared in the earlier Act which is being repealed, and it was left out in the new Act. We think it was omitted by mistake. It is to provide for where a particular Act does not provide for citation. There are Acts of Parliament, which may be brought up, but citation has not been provided for. So these cater for those omissions in those Acts of Parliament or Bills which may come before this House.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17 (the old Clause 16).

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we propose an amendment to read as follows; “amendment and Repeal in the same Session: An Act passed in any Session of Parliament may be amended or repealed in the same Session.” The justification for it is merely for clarity as it was in the former Act. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I think the crucial position is that an Act once passed may be amended at any time. But if the Chairman thinks it necessary to add that little thing, I have no objection.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, the clarification I am seeking is with regard to the omission of the old 16. It seems we have not dealt with it. We have jumped to 17 and I am seeking clarification whether or not the whole of 16 was abandoned. We have not pronounced ourselves on it.

Clause 16.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that – I thought we had already pronounced ourselves on Clause 17?

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule, agreed to
.
The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and that the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that "The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000" has been considered by the Committee of the whole House and it passed it with some amendments.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I am going to move this motion on the assurance that we have a quorum. I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Acts of Parliament Bill, 2000" be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)
  
THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank you hon. Members for concluding this business and I think we are ready to proceed with the next business, and I am sure hon. Mugisha Muntu is listening. 

Hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs -(Interruptions)- It is not his Bill; he is contributing. Hon. Mwandha and the hon. Member for Kilak County will follow him.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this Bill is the most important Bill in the history of this Parliament. The movers talked about promoting democratic transparency. My reaction to that is that, that is no issue at all. We all agree that there should be transparency in a democracy. 

The mover also said that they need checks and balances on the executive. My question is this; do we not have checks and balances now? With the censures of Ministers and Ministers being thrown out despite the numbers of Ministers! How about motions and Resolutions of Ministers of Cabinet, which have been thrown out or deferred? Do we not have checks and balances? How about the budgets that have been deferred or changed on the Floor of this House?   Are these not checks on the power of the Executive? How about question time?  When Ministers achieve, they are put to task, 'tell us this, tell us the other', during question time. Is this not a method of checking on Government? How about Ministers being summoned to Committees of Parliament to be asked questions, to be roasted, so to speak? Are these not checks and balances?  I submit that there are now, according to our Constitution, sufficient checks and balances.  What then, has not been balanced? I would like to know.   

An argument has been advanced that because Ministers sit here and in Cabinet, those Members of Parliament who would like to be Ministers are compromised. My question is this; do you blame that on the Ministers or on the Members of Parliament? If a Member of Parliament feels he or she is not so strong enough to resist any potential attractions of being a Minister, then he or she should resign and let the constituents elect another person. I do not see that as a strong argument against Members of Parliament and Members of the Cabinet sitting in Parliament just because some Members of Parliament are not strong enough to withstand attractions of Ministerial posts.   

Secondly, if I was a Backbencher and I really wanted to be a Minister, I do not have to be here, I would have ways of contacting the appointing authority. So, what do we achieve by getting Ministers out of here? Nothing!  

Furthermore, if we really wanted to pass this Bill, we would have to amend other Articles, not only 113(1) and (4). We would have to pass other Articles in accordance with Article 261, each one of them by two-thirds majority at Second and Third Reading. What are these?  For instance, let us look at Article 78 (I).   

Article 78(1) says: “Parliament shall consist of - 
(d) the Vice-President and Ministers, who, if not already elected Members of Parliament, shall be ex-officio Members of Parliament …”
  
This motion, if passed in its present form, will have necessarily to have to amend this Article as well with two-thirds majority of Members of Parliament, at the Second and Third Readings.

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, about two weeks ago, this Parliament was engaged in an exercise of constitutional amendment. In the course of the debate and the voting for the amendment, the Speaker who was in the chair then accepted a motion by a Member that other amendments could be entertained so long as the memorandum was amended. The hon. Minister is now suggesting that any other amendment would have to go through the process of Second Reading by having it pass with a two-thirds majority. I want, for my own clarification, what procedure we are going to adopt because if we are going by precedent, then the hon. Minister is misleading this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, and make sure you do not mislead the House.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, if you want to pass this motion, we shall necessarily also have to amend those Articles. I am not saying anything beyond that. I am simply drawing the attention of the movers to that Article; that if you want A, you will necessarily want B; that is all. So, we will have to move that as well so as to remove the Vice President and other Ministers who are not elected Members of Parliament. This Article must therefore, be amended.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that is taken care of in the Committee’s amendments.

MR.WACHA: Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is part of the gist of the Committee’s report and the proposed amendments are annexed.   

THE SPEAKER: That is the impression, unless I misread it, but I read something like –(Interruption)

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, what I am really saying is that, that is a report. But I am really showing Members of Parliament the import of this motion; that when you bring it the way it has been brought, you have got to touch on that Article, you have got to touch on Article 83(1), as well as Article 257(2)(b). 

Article 83 - and I think this is included in the report, reads as follows: “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament-” then it gives the circumstances under which a Member of Parliament may vacate. Now, that Article does not include the question of one being made a Minister and therefore, this will have to be amended. We can say we bring the attention of the movers to this.  Article 257(2)(b) will also have to be amended.  

Now, Article 93 which is dealing with budgets and finances, that provides that a Member of Parliament may not bring a motion or a Bill which has got financial implications. Now, if this issue of getting Ministers out of this Parliament, again we shall have to amend Article 99(4), which says the President may act through officers subordinate to him. So, consider these complications.   

Now, having said all that, -  (Interruption) 

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I am aware that nominated Members of Parliament who are also Ministers have powers to move Bills in this House. Does the Minister mean that if this particular Bill is carried, the Ministers who will be coming here to present programmes of Government will not have powers to move Bills as well?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I have seen no provision in the amendment where Ministers may come here. What I see is possibly what happened with America where Secretaries of State, who are called Ministers here, do not go to congress. This amendment does not provide for the presence of Ministers to defend their Bills. Hon. Members, you have to attend to this.  

The amendment goes on to say that when the President appoints Ministers, he should go for people of integrity and morality or moral “whatever”. I think that is good, but I think if the mover would agree, I would also add the other qualities like intellectual capacity, because you see morality alone will not be sufficient. I wish you were the one to appoint Bishops and Sheikhs.  

On the question of separation of powers; all the arguments given so far are concentrating on separation of organs of State, separation of personnel; ‘get Ministers out of this, then we will have achieved separation of powers’. As far as I am concerned, separation of powers is not really separation of personnel. The movers so far, have not talked about separation of powers. What they really want to achieve is to get Ministers out of Parliament and actually achieve separation of powers. I am submitting that powers and personnel are not the same. 

Now, if we really want transparency, I do not see this being achieved by effecting an administrative divorce. ‘Get Ministers out of Parliament, keep Members who have been here, then by so doing you will achieve the transparency!’ I think if you chase Ministers further away from Parliament where you can watch them and see them, you will not be reducing lack of transparency, but probably just increasing it.

Article 111(2) of the Constitution provides as follows: “The functions of the Cabinet shall be to determine, formulate and implement the policy of the Government and to perform such other functions as maybe conferred by this Constitution or any other law.” 

Now, as against this provision, we have got Article 79(1), which states as follows “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” 

These two Articles show clearly that there is conceptual and functional decision between formulating and determining policy on the one hand and legislating on the other. The import of the motion is to divorce determining policy from passing policy into law. If this is so, what will then be the role of Committees of Parliament which currently spend weeks discussing, shifting and rejecting policies which have already been formulated and accepted by the Cabinet? 

If we want to go this way, Parliament spends time discussing Privatisation Policy, discussing whether we should pay Mehta; all these are not legislation. These are policies, which according to the Constitution should be the preserve of the Executive. But the way it was made by the Constituent Assembly, and according to me, properly, was to fuse the two. That the Legislature and the Executive should work together in Parliament; that the Executive and Members of Parliament should be here and cross-fertilise each other for better legislation of this country. So, I feel that if we let this complete separation of the Executive from the Legislation, we shall not be making for good governance.

Now, they said the present separation where Ministers are Members of Parliament and can freely participate in its deliberations, and where those who are not Ministers also can discuss policy as opposed to legislating, is necessary and more efficient than excluding and divorcing the Executive from Parliament, since when we participate in parliamentary debates, we learn from, and intellectually reinforce each other. There is thus mutual edification whereby those who predominantly initiate and formulate policy can influence those who legislate. And therefore, what we get as a result is a better system than what we could have by having a complete divorce.  

Britain has a Parliamentary Executive. In other words the Executive, the Cabinet in Parliament as for many, many years and other Common Wealth country has shown that this system is better than a complete divorce, which is being suggested by the motion.  

Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja talked about the Movement system.  I can see this motion, if it passes, being a recipe for potential confrontation between Parliament and the Executive. It is one thing to say everybody is Movement, politically or by the Constitution and another to say that in February or March next year, you might get a President with a political orientation quite different from the Parliament that will come in July. With the present system of ours, I can see Parliament pulling against the Executive and possibly creating an impasse. 

Supposing it is a question of passing the Budget such that Parliament could refuse to pass the Budget. It is okay in American; congress may refuse for about five months to pass the Budget, but they can stand because they have got the resources, but Uganda does not have the resources. This is why in July at the beginning of debating the Ministry of Finance’s Budget; we hasten to pass a Vote on Account to authorise the Ministry of Finance to be spending something. Here, if it is only one to pass there, it must be created. I can see problems for this country and this country cannot afford that sort of thing. 

I would rather have the Ministers here who work together, we face each other, we talk and then we get something better rather than passing a measure that is likely to cause problems. And mark you, unlike in England where the Executive may dissolve Parliament with the agreement of the Queen, here Parliament must run its course - five years. It is in England where the Executive, if it finds that Parliament is not agreeing to its policy, they go back to the people to have general elections. Here you cannot have that, otherwise that remedy is not there. So I would rather – in fact I want to caution and say, maybe if you pass this motion you might really be creating potential areas of confrontation between the Legislature and the Executive.

Again, question time is a very good time. Ministers are asked questions about this and the other. Once Ministers are out, and I see no provision for them to come here and answer questions, people will be lost and, I think a valuable instrument of democracy will be lost.

An argument have been advanced that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Could you come to your concluding remarks hon. Minister?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Okay, Sir. My concluding remarks are these; I am advising – and here I agree with hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. This is a matter, which was debated by the C.A. and it was decided in a certain way. It has come up again. It may be better for us not to pass this motion now but let it be decided by the Constitutional Review Commission which is soon to be appointed. And so my advice is that this motion does not make for good governance and it should be rejected, not in my interest or of the ministry or of the Cabinet but in the interest of Uganda.

MR.MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I have a few points to make because the majority of my points have been made by the hon. Members who spoke before me and I do not want to repeat what has already been said.  

I want to start by looking at the current situation where we have 61 Ministers; four of them nominated. I am told some Ministers are in core Ministries and others are in non-core Ministries. Those in core Ministries are well provided for in terms of their offices. If you go and have a look, the vehicles they use and those in non-core Ministries and even the way they travel. Some Ministers are over-worked; they have got so much work while in other Ministries you can hardly find any work going on.

Those Ministers with constituencies are responsible for servicing their constituencies; carry out administration in their Ministries and deal with the heavy paper work. They have fieldwork and they have to preside over functions. Now Mr. Speaker, that kind of situation makes a Minister, who is an elected Member of Parliament, inefficient; not by choice but because of the demands on the Minister. As a result, you have inefficiency in the Ministry, you do not respond to communications, decisions are delayed, you have inefficiency in Parliament because you have problems of quorum because 61 people is a big number. So Parliament is not efficient, the Ministries are not efficient, the Executive is not efficient –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Mwandha. I want to seek clarification. This Parliament has got 276 elected Members of Parliament and 4 ex-officio Ministers, the quorum is 93, the Ministers who actually are supposed to be here most of the time on duty are 58 and therefore that means that the Backbenchers are actually 220. I need clarification, if 220 Backbenchers cannot form a quorum, what is the problem? Is the problem the Front Bench?

MR.MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, if you take the quorum to be 93 and all the time you have you have 57 people not present; how do you compare 57 to 90? So really this is a serious matter but after all a Member of Parliament –(Interruption)

MAJ.KAZOORA: Thank you hon. Mwandha. I would like to follow your debate very clearly. Taking into consideration what hon. Manzi said, that we could as well do without the 53 Ministers. Now, we can as well do without them. What are they for? This is exactly what you are saying, if I am getting your debate very clearly hon. Mwandha.

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Mr. Speaker, I would like the Member on the Floor to clarify mathematically, because if the quorum is missing because of 60, if it is missing because of over 200; what would happen if all 270 of them were Backbenchers? I think the situation would even be worse because if the whole of the Front Bench was not needed in a quorum of voting and you had over 200 Members who would not be under the tutelage of a Leader of Government Business, we may never have business transacted here. So we may as well keep the Members whom you can whip and the Members who are only whipped by their Constituencies. And the Speaker is at their mercy to call upon the Constitution to put them to book; we may as well keep status quo. Thank you.

MR.MWANDHA: I would like to thank the hon. Members and Her Excellency the Vice President for the information and the clarification sought. But in spite of the effective whipping by the Leader of Government Business, we have had embarrassing cases here where a Minister is supposed to present a Bill or a motion and he is not in the House.  This has happened, not once, not twice but a number of times. So, really what we are saying is this – (Interjection)- but I am -(Interruption)– okay, I cannot refuse the Minister.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to disturb the hon. Member. I thank him for giving way. This afternoon when we started these proceedings, the people who had moved this motion were not in this House and they are Backbenchers. I just wanted us to note that. Thank you.

 MR.MWANDHA: Well Mr. Speaker, if hon. Babu noticed, the two hon. Members came in at the same time. They were in the lobby working out tactics on how to push through this motion. (Laughter and Applause). And this is not the kind of absence I am talking about, which was embarrassing on the occasion, which I was referring too. 

To be a Minister and a Member of Parliament, you are bound by the principle of collective responsibility.  Once you go to Cabinet and Cabinet agrees on a position, even if you do not subscribe to that position, even if that position is likely to hurt your constituency, when it comes to Parliament you cannot speak out. And that is a very serious shortcoming in the system. At the end of the day, you really have a lot of inefficiency.  

Something else people here were talking about is the fallback position. A Minister, who is an elected Member of Parliament, will not really be committed to the President because of the comfort of the fallback position. He / she will not ensure that Government policies, and even issues relating to the Presidential Manifesto, are pushed through because he knows that after all, even if he is fired, he will continue representing my constituency in Parliament. 

So, if this motion is carried, I would like to give my views of what I think the situation is going to be and may be later on we may have even to effect other amendments to the motion. I imagine that the President will be free to choose anybody he wishes from the academia, from business, from the press, from civil society and even from Parliament. Now if a Member of Parliament has been identified by the President to be in his Cabinet, that Member of Parliament will have a very strong ground to negotiate his terms with the President.  He will have to negotiate his package, the terms of appointment and the standard of performance so that from day one, he will be sure that if he has the contract for five years. Then if for some reason that contract is not fulfilled, obviously the terms of breaking the contract will have to be taken into account. And in my view, that will give loyalty to those men and women the President will have chosen. They will be loyal to his programmes; they will be loyal to the performance of Government because they want him to succeed. If he succeeds, they succeed. If he fails, they fail. So they will have to be truly committed to him and perform to the best of their performance.  

There were fears here that once this is done, then there will be total separation and there will be no interaction between this House and the Executive. I would like to suggest, and this is also to the movers of the motion and may be the Chairman, that the Ministries can actually assign some of the Ministers to Parliamentary Affairs so that they can follow what is going on in the House. They come here and present policies of their Ministries and also answer Member’s questions. One person can be assigned on permanent basis or the Ministers in a given Ministry can do it in turns so that the linkage between Parliament and the Executive is maintained at that level.  But they will be here like we have the four Ministers without powers to vote but only able to present Ministerial and Government policies and defend Government programmes.  And I think that will answer the concern of the Minister for Constitutional Affairs. 

When we have a Cabinet of men and women from all kinds of professions and businesses committed to the President; a Cabinet that is properly remunerated and facilitated without any favour; a Cabinet of people selected on merit; a Cabinet that the President believes will support his programmes, the final result will be efficiency. We shall have efficient Government machinery running the programmes efficiently because they will not be encumbered by having to think that they must come to Parliament or that they must be in some constituency or that they must be somewhere else. They will concentrate on the business of Government and the business of Government will be run efficiently.  

Some Members feared that when you get these people then there would be an extra burden on the Payroll and so on. I would like to say that given that scenario and the necessary efficiency, the efficiency that is going to accrue will actually pay back the cost of maintaining those Members of Government, and I have no fear about extra costs. The extra costs will be paid off by the efficient performance of Government. Inefficiency is wasteful.

MR.GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, if I listened to the argument being advanced by hon. Mwandha, he is saying the current Government is actually inefficient. Is he in order to suggest continuously that we are actually running an inefficient Government? 

THE SPEAKER: Well hon. Member I think this is precisely what this motion is all about. There is an argument that if we change, we shall be more efficient and hon. Mwandha has probably gone further to say currently we are not efficient. That is his opinion.

MR.MWANDHA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for educating my colleague, the hon. Member for Bulamogi, but let me now come to my final point. I personally feel that if we are going to have that kind of scenario, we must have some conditions. The conditions which I would like to propose is that people should forget about balancing tribes, balancing regions, balancing religions, balancing this, the President should have the freedom to put up his Cabinet in the best way possible. If he believes that balancing tribes is going to make his Government efficient, he will be free to do that. But this is one of the areas where, I think, people are put in Cabinet for the sake of balancing.

The other point which I want to close on –(Interruptions)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE, LUWERO (Ms. Nankabirwa Ruth): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Mwandha for giving way. People have been talking about the President appointing Ministers on merit, that if we go by this Bill, the Ministers who will be appointed will be performers et cetera, et cetera.  But there is an Appointment Committee of this Parliament; when the President appoints Ministers, the Appointments Committee approves the names.  Does this, therefore, mean that the Appointments Committee is incompetent, or it very difficult to disapprove of some of the names appointed by the President?  Thank you.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you for allowing me to give this information. I was once a Member of the Appointments Committee of this 6th Parliament. At the beginning of this Parliament, many people who had prospects of being Ministers actually rushed to be elected in the Appointments Committee, and they approved almost everything and then they retired after they appointed themselves. That is a true information.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, let us discuss and debate in accordance with our rules.  

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I want to come to my last point, I will be very brief. I think if all that is in place as I have tried to explain, then maybe this Parliament may revisit Article 118.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not read out that Article for the benefit of the hon. Members?

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, Article 118 of our Constitution reads as follows:  
(1) “Parliament may, by Resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a vote of censure against a Minister on any of the following grounds-
    (a) abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of allegiance or oath of office; 
    (b) misconduct or misbehaviour; 
    (c) physical or mental incapacity, namely, that he or she is incapable of performing the functions of his or her office by reason of physical or mental incapacity; 
    (d) mismanagement; or 
    (e) incompetence.”  

I wanted to refer only to Sub-article (1). I am not saying that we shall get rid of it altogether, but I am saying that certain parts of this Article may have to be revisited so that we leave the disciplining of the Minister to the President. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.NYEKO PEN’MOGI (Kilak County, Gulu): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I read the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on this Bill, and I took note of these particular points. 

The Committee is of the opinion that the movers of the Bill were not accorded reasonable assistance as required by Article 94 of the Constitution. Then the Committee proceeded to say that consequently, they did not take into consideration other Articles of the Constitution that should be consequently amended in pursuance of the proposed amendment.  

Now, get this recommendation. The Committee recommends that debate on the Bill should take into consideration all these Articles of the Constitution and proposed amendments should encompass them. 

This is where I personally think that this Bill, according to the background of the Committee’s report, is not very urgent. Because if we are going to look at all these other constitutional amendments which are supposed to be related, and if the movers were not sufficiently assisted, then I find it difficult to support this amendment at this stage. I suggest that since it is not an urgent matter to discuss, we could leave this to wait for the Constitutional Review Commission, which will –(Interruption)

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Pen’mogi for giving way. Could he clarify to me what makes a matter urgent? It seems that he is saying that since there was no sufficient assistance from the Executive, it therefore, means that there is no urgency in the matter. I would like to understand whether that is the position he is taking. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.NYEKO PEN’MOGI: Mr. Speaker, I said the Committee is of the opinion that the movers of the Bill were not accorded reasonable assistance as required by the Article 94. I mean, this is very clear; the movers were not sufficiently assisted, in which case - if I could just answer this. They went further in the recommendation that the debate should look at all these other areas of the Constitution and what I am saying is at this stage it may not be wise to go into all those other areas of the constitutional amendment. This is why I am saying, since, in my view, this is not a very urgent issue, it is not a very urgent Constitutional amendment (Interruption.).

MAJ. GEN.MUGISHA MUNTU: I thank you again hon. Pen'mogi. I would like again to get clarification from hon. Pen'mogi - (Interruption) - I am following his trend of thinking.  Does he, therefore, mean that unless - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mugisha Muntu, I would like you to continue to debate this issue in the normal way by not addressing hon. Pen'mogi. I do not want you to reduce it to a dialogue between the two of you. You should address the Speaker.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: Thank you Mr. Speaker for the guidance.  I am sorry about that. I would like to understand the trend of thinking of the hon. Member holding the Floor because it would be very interesting for all of us as Members of Parliament. Does it mean that unless the Executive thinks that something is urgent, it cannot be urgent? We would like to understand the thinking of the Member holding the Floor?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, Clause (2) of this Bill reads as follows "This Act shall come into effect as the expression of the term of Sixth Parliament as prescribed by Article 77 of the Constitution". In other words wise it will come into effect some time in June or July next year, about so months afterwards. What urgency then do we show in the Bill?  

MR.ONAPITO: Thank you Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you should wait until you catch my eye. The essence of this is to avoid direct confrontation between hon. Members. But having said that let me give you the Floor. You are giving further information. The contributor on the Floor is the hon. Pen'mogi.

MR.ONAPITO: I thank you Mr. Speaker. I wanted to give information to illustrate that even if, as the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, has said that the Law would take effect in the next Parliament but it has also been pending for one year! It is the only Private Member's Bill so far being considered by Parliament in terms of amending the Constitution. So I think the one year shows that it has taken long enough to at least become an urgent matter. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katurebe Bart): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to make this clarification because hon. Pen'mogi raised it and it also came out of the report of the Committee. This issue about the Attorney General's office not giving assistance to the movers of this Bill; When I appeared before the Committee they asked me whether the movers of the Bill had got assistance from my office. My answer was that I could not remember the movers of the Bill seeking assistance, because whoever wants assistance must seek it. There is no way I could know who wants assistance. However, I am sure the Members of the Committee will bear me out, I proceeded at great lengths to discuss the Bill with them all the implications and, in fact, drew to their attention all the Articles in the Constitution that must necessarily be consequentially amended if this Bill passes. Therefore, I do not want it to remain on the record of Parliament as if we refused to give assistance to the movers of the Bill.  

Two, when the Constitution was enacted at that time there was no administration of Parliament Act where now Parliament has its Parliamentary Counsel and many Members moving Bills have tended to use the services of Parliamentary Counsel of Parliament and less so of the First Parliamentary Counsel of Government. I wish to remind Members that the constitutional provision is still there. If you are moving a Bill, even after you have obtained assistance of the Parliamentary Counsel, you can still come and the Attorney General is afforded the chance to perform his constitutional duty of advising you. Thank you.

DR.NYEKO PEN’MOGI: I thank you Mr. Speaker. What I expected is purely what the report says. I read the report and gave my view so I have not virtually stated my points. What I stated was exactly what has been written down in the report. 

Now, number four - (Interruption)- I have not talked please. Number four in the report states that the “Bill will minimise politics of intrigue and opportunism.  Currently Members of Parliament are compromised by the desire to become Ministers”. But if I look at this amendment under 3(b), "A Minister shall resign his or her office on appointment as Minister if he or she is a Member of Parliament or Local Government". I do not see how this will minimise opportunism even if you adopt this Bill because those who want to be Ministers although they are Members of Parliament will still be kneeling down somewhere so that they are nominated or appointed. So this opportunism will continue as far as I know. This Bill will not solve that problem; even the intrigue will continue.

Number five states that "the current situation encourages Ministers to use their positions to influence and direct the allocation of Government programmes and projects to their constituencies and or districts". Whether the Minister comes from outside Parliament, they will continue taking projects to their areas; they will target their homes. The Bible is very clear on this, “charity begins at home” and I think the Bible also stated somewhere - I am not very good at quoting the Bible. But what I am saying is that, this thing will not stop.  Whether the Minster is coming from outside or from inside Parliament. Even this week it was reported in the newspapers that the LCV chairman of Luwero and one of the Ministers are saying that they are going to support one another in the coming elections. If we are not careful, hon. Members, these things will backfire on us because we are going to have 63 Ministers in 63 constituencies. I wish hon. Pascal Mukasa of Nakaseke could give us some experience. But the fact is-(Interruption)

MR.MUKASA PASCAL: Point of information.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Nyeko, you will lose your opportunity to contribute if you take it upon yourself to decide who should speak on a subject. Can you proceed please.

DR.NYEKO: Mr. Speaker, I did not invite hon. Pascal Mukasa but I am just saying that maybe subsequently he could contribute.

THE SPEAKER: Whether he contributes or not, it is not your decision. Why do you not confine yourself-(Interruption)

MR.MUKASA PASCAL: Information, Mr. Speaker.

DR.NYEKO: No, I do not accept information now -(Laughter)– but I encourage you to talk. So, what I am saying is, you are going to have 63 Ministers in 63 constituencies and those of us who are likely to be Backbenchers have to know this. You are going to have a lot of problems once they appoint Ministers from outside. They will now want to come to Parliament and they will use resources, they will be going to their constituencies, they come from some constituencies although they are not elected. So, they will be going to those constituencies and you will have a lot of problems.  You may again come and want to change or amend the Constitution at some experience. So, we need to be very careful when we are handling this.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Nyeko for allowing me to seek this clarification. You have just made a very interesting remark. I would like the hon. Prime Minister who is nominated to tell his experience whether he is doing the kind of thing that hon. Nyeko is suggesting.

THE SPEAKER: I hope hon. Ongom you are directing that question to the Prime Minister through the Speaker, because this is about the fourth time you are firing direct to your colleagues, and I do not like it.

MR.ONGOM: I am sorry if I appeared as if I was working outside of the procedure -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Exactly, this is the fourth time.

MR.ONGOM: I have said I have learnt my lesson, but in the meantime, through you, may be I could ask the Prime Minister to assist us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Nyeko can you get ready to listen.

MR.PASCAL MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor. He pointed out that a Minister, because he wants to be a Member of Parliament, is tempted to potentially misuse the powers given to him or her. I will give some examples. Ministers in charge of power in this country go around saying, ‘I am going to give you electricity in this place’, yet it is within the Budget. We are going to borrow from the World Bank US$150 million according to the programme laid out for rural electrification! One wonders whether the Minister is misleading the constituency or is the Minister doing the right thing and yet is campaigning using his position. If that Minister did not have the conflict of interest in being a Minister, that temptation of appearing to distribute what comes under her Ministry would not arise. 

But more importantly is the point raised regarding a coercion between an LCV chairman who says that a particular person was a member of the World Bank at one stage and contributed to the struggle during the liberation war. Incidentally, this information is false yet it gets wide publicity. It is sort of ill guidance, and it is not in best interest of the country. I would probably -(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukasa, If I understood hon. Nyeko well, I think he was asking for your experience by way of information - alright that is what he would like - to know - in relation to the proposed amendment to the Constitution. Why do you not confine yourself to that? You seem to be opening up -(Interruption)

MR.PASCAL MUKASA: Mr. Speaker, the information I was giving is related to point No.5 in the Committee’s report, relating to the Minister who is tempted to potentially misuse his / her position. But in addition, a debate has been on this Floor regarding the misuse of Government facilities. This Minister comes in a Government car with Government fuel and is using his position to campaign. I think there is a real point that ought to be viewed as a disservice in that context, I am clarifying item No.5 of the Committee’s report in this regard. That is the information I am giving, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

DR.NYEKO: I thank you. I think the point I raised is exactly what hon. Pascal was explaining in a better, long sentence. I think at this stage, we have to look critically; we have some Ministers from outside Parliament; they are not Members of Parliament. We have the basis to start comparing what is happening. What is the level of efficiency between the Ministers who are appointed from outside and those from inside? These are the things we need to look into. Otherwise, I also note that even those Ministers who are nominated from outside Parliament, most of them have not gone to Gulu, this is one example. Their visits also rotate around their home areas. So, the same total is going to be the same. So we do not have to disturb the Constitution at this stage when I know the effect will not change anything. 

If I could conclude, Mr. Speaker, the Constitution is very clear in Article 113 that the President will appoint the Minister and then Parliament will approve. I think Parliament should have a provision for rejecting those candidates, those Ministers whose names appear and you know they have been canvassing. Those who have been opportunistically looking for a way to be Ministers. In some jobs when you advertise, it is made very clearly that there should be no canvassing. I think Parliament should make this clear. There should be no canvassing for ministerial positions. In which case, if somebody has canvassed the President and we are aware of it, we should reject this person. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

The Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Prof.Kagonyera): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I stand here to oppose the motion. I am advised that it is obvious but it is not as obvious as the hon. Member thinks. I would have loved it if this motion had come more than 16 months ago but I would still have opposed it from the Backbench.  

First of all, I want to beg the indulgence of the House just in case I repeat some of the points that Members of Parliament have already talked about. But if you look at the report of the Committee, they said currently, where issues being debated do not favour the Executive, the Parliamentary Minister is inclined to side with the Executive even if doing so does not promote institutionalisation of democratic practice in the country. This presupposes that it is only Parliament that promotes institutionalisation of a democratic system in the country and that the Executive is not in the least interested in that.  

The Executive is as interested in institutionalisation of democratic practice in the country as much as the Backbench. But it is also true that there is absolutely nothing wrong with a Minister coming here and promoting the interests of the Executive. Why not? Does it mean that the interests of the Executive are invariably incongruent with the interests of the Backbench? Is it only the Backbench that looks after the interests of the country? In my opinion, there is nothing wrong with a Minister or even a Member of the Backbench promoting the interests of the Executive (Interruption.). If I can be allowed to continue with my debate –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The choice is yours. Proceed.

PROF.KAGONYERA: I am told clarifications are mandatory.

THE SPEAKER: No.

PROF.KAGONYERA: So if I can continue. I can hear hon. Ongom’s threats from the back.

THE SPEAKER: Although he is very close to you, I will make sure I protect you.

PROF.KAGONYERA: Thank you very much. I will now turn to the Committee’s observations on page two. “The Bill will minimise politics of intrigue and opportunism”. How will it do that? Intrigue and opportunism exist everywhere in the world including the Backbench. So when you remove Ministers from Parliament, it is absolutely incorrect to say that you will in any way or manner minimise intrigue and opportunism. After this bill is passed and the Constitution is amended, there is nothing wrong with Members of the Backbench engaging in opportunism and intrigue in order to come to the Front Bench because this Bill is not going to shut Members of Parliament from that opportunity of becoming Ministers. Someone may want to come here as an MP in order to have more leverage to influence the appointing authority to be appointed Minister. So that opportunism can still continue even if this Bill is passed and the Constitution is amended.  

Let me say a little bit more outside this report. This amendment wants us to act like the Americans, who have a Cabinet that is outside Parliament. This is historical.  I would have hoped that the people who moved this motion carefully studied the historical development of American constitutionalism. 

The first point they should know is that after winning the independence war, most of the American States wanted to go their own way and become independent countries.  Therefore, they had to form an extremely weak central Government in order to maintain their sovereignty and power. That is why they made sure that these Ministers are ordinary persons who could be dealt with in any formal manner and they created a very strong Committee system in their House. So unless we have reached that point, it is not quite fair of us to compare ourselves to the Americans. 

By the way, have the movers of this motion helped us to study comparatively the advantages of the American system versus those systems where we have Ministers that are elected Members of Parliament? Have they been able to do that? I think this motion is of such fundamental nature that there ought to have been a lot more public debate and intellectual study of the consequences of passing this motion. And I would have said that even if I was a Backbencher or even outside this House because this is not only going to affect Members of Parliament. It is going to affect the way this country is run. Going through an election is a tempering exercise. I cannot imagine leaders holding executive powers in this country all of whom have never had the experience of presenting themselves to the people and convincing themselves that indeed they want to serve the people.  

MS.WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Kagonyera for giving way. I am just seeking a clarification. I agree with you very much that this amendment of the Constitution will cause a big change on the way the country is going to be run and indeed, the public needs to make its in-put. It should have made its in-put and it should have been consulted. I understand the motion has been before the House for close to a year and I believe that Members of Parliament have consulted their constituencies widely about this particular amendment. Hon. Minister, could it be that you were so busy as a Minister, and you have not consulted the people of Rubabo about this particular amendment? Because I believe we should already have consulted our people by now.   

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following up with the clarification by the hon. Member from Mbarara Municipality, I entirely agree with her but I would also like her to quote the days of the meetings she held in Mbarara Municipality and discussed this issue on the basis of which she is contributing.

PROF.KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Members for the information they have given. I have definitely, consulted. By the way, I do not know whether it is reported, even during the independence celebrations I was at home and the people were extremely happy – she is nodding in agreement. In other words, the people of Rubabo do support the idea of one of theirs being actually a Minister, if you want it. So, I did consult and as far as they are concerned, this amendment is not correct. 

I was talking about how we get tempered by going through an electoral process. First of all, it makes you know the people and their problems. And the problems of Rubabo are not very different from the problems of Ayivu, for example, or of Kisoro. So, when an MP is talking about the problems of his or her constituency, his or her colleague who is an elected Member will find it easy to appreciate and understand. But if we have someone who has never gone through this experience, God forbid! And also, I would like to say this -(Interjection)- but can I not finish, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You have the choice.

MS.KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank my neighbour in the constituency for giving way. I just want clarification. He said that it is through the electoral process that you will know the people and their problems.  Does it mean that hon. Nasasira, hon. Kakembo and a few others do not know the problems of their constituents because they did not go through that electoral process.  Thank you.

PROF.KAGONYERA: Actually, the truth is that the Members who have been mentioned go through the electoral process. They go through the electoral process, they campaign, they reach the people but because they work very hard and maybe their colleagues appreciate, they get elected.  That is participation in the electoral process. Can I continue, Mr. Speaker? 

I want to also say that hon. Members know that we have a Civil Service -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you must think about coming to your conclusion.

PROF.KAGONYERA: Yes, okay. We have a Civil Service.  They are not elected. We are assuming that because Ministers will be nominated, they will not be having constituencies, they will perform very well and I would like to draw a corollary that the Civil Service does the same. In fact, Members of Parliament have quite often complained that the Civil Service members they interact with do not appreciate the problems and work of Members of Parliament because they are not politicians and they do not participate in the electoral process. This electoral process for leadership is an extremely important factor in leadership and Ministers honestly would do well to go through this process.  

I was reading the ‘Orumuri’ newspaper of this week.  Those who can read Runyankole/Rukiga go and read the comment of hon. Capt. Byaruhanga about a statement made by the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry. You can see the kind of unkind words used by the hon. Member, who is otherwise a very good person, but reminding the Minister that since he is not elected, what has he got to do with the politics of that place? Get ‘Orumuri’ and read it. You want Ministers who will come here and be humiliated because they are not elected! The other day, Mr. Speaker - they will come here, you will ask them to come and present Bills and what have you. The other day, I had some work to do with Members of Parliament but because I spent nine years on the Backbench, I know the terrain out there and we had a wonderful time together.

MRS.OGWAL CECILIA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to say that if Ministers are not elected, they are humiliated when it is known that we have high regard for those Ministers who are not elected?  An example is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Is he, therefore, in order to humiliate this House?

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, is he in order to do what?

MRS.OGWAL: Is he in order, Mr. Speaker, to humiliate us, to make us appear as if we humiliate Members of the Front bench who are not elected by the people? Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I took it that the Minister really, in his debate, was cautioning that when Ministers are not elected but appointed from outside Parliament, they are likely to come here and be humiliated by Members of Parliament. That is my understanding. Who will say that ‘you are talking like this, are you an elected person?’ relating it to the statement, which he says he read in ‘Orumuri’. That is my understanding so I think it is not in relation to the Prime Minister. There may be only very few people like our present Prime Minister but this does not mean that the kind of statements, which he read about in ‘Orumuri’ cannot be made. So, I think, hon. Member, the Minister was developing a point.

PROF.KAGONYERA: If I can hurry a clarification but I was going to add that actually it is not -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are reaching a stage where you are inviting a lot of interruptions. If you had taken my advice -(Interruption)

PROF.KAGONYERA: No, I am not taking any clarifications.  If the hon. Member is bothered, the ‘Orumuri’ is there, let him go and read it. I am quoting the ‘Orumuri’ only.  If the ‘Orumuri’ is false, I will apologise but I read the ‘Orumuri’. He can read it. Now, I was adding that actually it is not a one-way traffic. Even these people who have very little concept of how elected leaders work, when they come to work with you, they will not understand us and they can also be part of the problem especially when they know that they have only one constituency and that is the appointing authority. I want hon. Members to think about it. Supposing you had an appointing authority of a sort that there is plenty of difference, hon. Member for Kashari, there is plenty of difference. So, the only thing this proposal can do, instead of separating powers, is actually to create grand canyons between the Executive and Parliament. Yes, it will do that I can assure you, therefore, I would also like to add that while we have a Movement type of system of governance actually this proposal will not work. It is only where you have a multi-party system that both sides of the House are – by the responsible positions that you will have worthwhile debate. Under the Movement system of Government this thing cannot work, yes, we are told here that Government comes to promote the position of the Executive. In the Movement system, if the Ministers do not come to promote the position of the Executive in the Movement system, who is going to promote it? 

I would like to conclude by requesting Members to suspend the idea of passing this motion because, as hon. Nyeko said, we already know that there is going to be a constitutional review and this will be done in a very orderly manner. Experts in constitutionalism will be called upon to advise whoever will be involved in this exercise. Now, a proposed constitutional amendment of this magnitude surely belongs at best in the constitutional review process not here in Parliament were we are even told that Members of the Committee did not get sufficient advise from people who were supposed to help them. Mr. Speaker, I oppose the motion.


MR.AKIDA GABE ((Jonam County, Nebbi): Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to this important debate on the amendment of the Constitution pursuance to the Constitutional amendment Bill, 1999 seeking to bar Members of Parliament from becoming Ministers unless they resign their seats.  

In accordance with the doctrine of separation of power, it has been said that it is customary to divide the powers of Government into three different organs, the Legislative, Executive and Judicial. This, it is said, is to enhance democracy, rule of law and protection of human rights. 

To avoid confusion of thought, it is important to note that separation of powers may mean three different things. One, it may mean that the same person should not form part of more than one of the organs of Government, for example, Ministers should not sit in Parliament. If we are to adhere to that philosophy, then we will not be seeing the hon. Ministers sitting with us in this august House.  

Two, separation of power may mean that one organ of Government should not control or interfere with exercise of its functions by another organ. For example, the Judiciary should be independent of the Executive, or that Ministers should not be responsible to Parliament. And again, if this is the case, we may not have the opportunity to call upon the Ministers to come and answer for the misdeeds they might have committed in the course or courses of performance of their duties.  

Three, that one organ of Government should not exercise the function of another for example that Ministers should not have legislative powers. If again we go by this doctrine, which I believe is the intention of this Bill before this hon. House, then we shall have Ministers in the capacity of hon. Syda Bbumba and others who are appointed to Parliament; they will have no power to legislate in this august House. This may sound academic as one Member had stated and to me I would like to say that it is only academic but extremely very academic.  

Four, the doctrine of separation of powers was first formulated by the French Jury Montesquie who based his exposition on the British Constitution of the first part of the 18th Century as he understood it. Montesquie’s statement of the doctrine, if I can say, have been interpreted that if the Executive and the legislature are the same person or body of persons there must be a danger of the Legislature enacting oppressive laws that may be administered by the Executive to attain their own aims.  And if that is the case, the argument’s end result is tyranny, arbitrary conducts, which definitely would end up in misrule. This may be true of a personal executive not responsible in law to courts or politically to a representative assembly. The Executive in Uganda is, in fact, and in law, responsible to this august House, and politically, they are still responsible to the people through the Members of Parliament in this august House.  

Therefore, I would say that in an ideal system of Government, the doctrine of separation of powers expresses possible perfection, but it is unlikely that this can exist in a real governance in the present world we are in.  In fact, the practice of separation of powers tends to break down in actual administration of the state. If you look at it critically, it does not say that there should be rigid following of this doctrine; that is not the case. And I want to submit that when Montesquie came out with this doctrine, I do not think that it meant that the Legislature and the Executive are not to have influence or control over the acts of the other, but that neither should exercise the whole power of the other. This is how I understand it. Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for having given me an opportunity at this point in time to talk about this.

I would now like to allude to the system in the USA.  In the USA there is no such complete separation of power as some Friends have argued here. I have noted here, and hon. Kutesa has pointed out that the President of the United States of America appoints the Chief Justice of the States, and that the Vice-President of the USA is the President of the Senate. This to me brings us to a conclusion that we shall never attain the perfect separation of powers within a Government. Uganda, as a developing country, should be allowed to take a course and develop a system, which is pertinent to its circumstances putting into account the historical development we have witnessed in this country.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Speaker, I am just seeking guidance. The hon. Member is a Member of our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and the way I understand his argument, he seems to be departing from the decision of the Committee. As I understand our rules of procedure, which I believe we are all conversant with, if a Member does not agree with the report of his Committee, he writes a minority report. I am just seeking your guidance on this, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I was not aware that the hon. Member contributing is a Member of the Committee. I think we have, by our practice here, agreed that people who are part and parcel of a report should give opportunity to others to contribute. But it appears that in this particular case, the hon. Member has even gone beyond that. If I understood the Chairman right, he is saying that the hon. Member is departing from the report for which he signed. I do not know whether that is true.  Is that the case?

MR.OGALO: No, he did not sign, Mr. Speaker, but the point I am raising is, should he not having taken part in our Committee’s deliberations, should not such a Member procedurally submit the minority report giving his view or the opposing view?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us hear the Attorney General, he seems to have some point to make.

MR.KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just for clarity.  The rule in question sets that when the Committee of the House has finished writing its report, every Member who agrees with it shall sign. So, the Members who signed are those who agree with the report. This is the rule; I am just citing the rule. It says, Members who agree with the report shall sign it. If any Member does not sign, there is a presumption that he did not agree with the report even if he has not written a minority report. Mr. Speaker, those are the rules, which you can consult.

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney General is saying there is a presumption, but I think he leaves it open to the fact that somebody may not be available to sign the report.

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, it is true that if a Member does not agree with the report, he may refuse to sign it. But the hon. Attorney General is now pointing out that there is also a rule that such a Member may then if he is going to disagree write a minority report. I just want to get the guidance of the Attorney General about the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, is it not may?  Is it not the word “may”? If the word is he may file a minority report, he does not have to. 

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker. What happens when you get convinced in the middle of the debate? Is the Member not entitled to change his mind? Why are we debating?

MR.OGALO: It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the word used is “may” and the rule reads as follows: “a Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a Committee, may state in writing the reasons for their dissent, and the statements or reasons shall, if presented in time, be appended to the report of the Committee”.  Now, it is true the word used here is 'may', but for purposes of enriching debate, would it not be really prudent for us to have those reasons so that we can debate with them in mind?

THE SPEAKER: Well, let me know the position of the hon. Member. Actually we are talking but nobody has told me whether or not the hon. Member signed the report. Nobody has told me that -(Interruption)- Oh yes, we do not want to go into rules of evidence to prove his signature, but I think he signed it. Number 12? Do you have the report?  

MR.AKIDA GABE: Mr. Speaker, at number 12, it is written on Akida Alli Gabe. I did not sign this report and I have got reason not to.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know, are we looking at the same report?

MR.AKIDA GABE: I did not sign it.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, this is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Acts of Parliament Bill, Number 12, hon. Akida Alli Gabe. Which one is this?  The hon. Member again Number 12, did not sign the report.  So, where does that take us?

MR.OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, before you make a final ruling on this matter, since you are going to put firmly something which we are going to follow for quite some time, I would also like to get a procedural clarification from you regarding the interpretation of this rule. If this rule is interpreted so rigidly, it can mean that a Member of Parliament who has a significant different view, which may reflect what he thinks is for his constituency, would be stopped from giving it here. But having said that, it should also apply to the Committees in reporting here. 

For example, when I was contributing yesterday, I made a very important point that all the views which this Committee has given in this report are theirs, not of the groups that they met as they have submitted the names there. Therefore, this is my view of a very false report, because they should have brought the views of the Law Commission, of the Movement Secretariat, of the Attorney General and comparatively put them here. But they have brought us a biased report.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Speaker, I think it is not really fair to say that the views in this report are views of the Committee and that the Committee did not put in the view of the people they invited. The hon. Attorney General has just been here, he has said that he appeared before the Committee and brought the attention of the Committee the fact of other amendments to be affected and they are reflected. And you do not write a report by saying, ‘Obiga Kania from the Movement Secretariat said this; this one said this’. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us go back to this rule which allows a Member of a Committee who has a different view to file a minority report. My understanding of the situation is that the word is “may” and I think for a good reason, namely, that he or she may not have appended the signature because he was not readily available, and that may not necessarily mean that he disagrees with the report. But on the other hand, he may leave a blank because he disagrees and again, it is permissible. He may or he may not file a minority report. That being the case, therefore, if such a Member comes here, I think he should be allowed to state his position so that the House can benefit.  

MR.AKIDA GABE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to put it on record that I have ever signed some reports that were made in my absence after having satisfied myself, that the contents are pertinent to my own thinking. In this particular case, I totally disagreed with the Bill right from the beginning when I read it. I intended to strongly oppose it. 

I am a Detective by profession and I can read and detect. I am also a lawyer, I think I can read and understand a document very well. Once you read in any Statute the word “may”, it means that you are not compelled to do anything; you can take options. My option in this particular case was that I would speak from here. I could as well have tendered in a minority report. I wanted to stand here and strongly oppose this Bill. I believe this Bill is intended to curtail the powers of the President of this country, that he needs to run this country. We need to give the President wide area of choice without hampering him in any way. I will say this; the President is hampered to pick from Members of Parliament if this Bill goes through.

THE SPEAKER: Could you come to your concluding remarks, please?

MR.AKIDA GABE: I will do that, Mr. Speaker. In this particular Bill, the President is hampered in the selection of the persons he would require to help him in good governance of this country. Suppose the President appoints a Member of Parliament a Minister, then that Member of Parliament says, ‘no’ to the appointment if he is to vacate his seat, he would not come in. That would already be a hindrance. This kind of hindrance should be stopped, and I think I will use my vote to do that.   

Secondly, I support what hon. Nyeko said. If we pass this Bill, we may put the Members of Parliament who may come here into problems in that, the moment a Minister develops the idea of becoming a Member of Parliament, he will use the resources of Government to destabilise the incumbent of the constituency. This is likely to destabilise the MP, who will now look at the Minister as a threat to his seat and may decide to pay all his attention and time to try to make good the damages that the Minister could have made to his detriment in the constituency. I think this will not be good for the efficient running of this Parliament. Mr. Speaker, I beg to strongly oppose this Bill.

MRS.AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The last paragraph of the Committee’s report says that the proposed amendments should encompass amendments to Articles 71, 83(1) and 113(b)(ii) of the Constitution. In looking at these proposed amendments, they have not encompassed these amendments which were given by the Committee. (Interjection)  Protect me Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you contributing? I thought you are seeking clarification on a simple matter of procedure, but now it seems you are dealing with the Bill and according to the way we are moving, the person next on my list is the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Maj. Tom Butime): Mr. Speaker, I have been in this House since 1986 and I have been a Minister especially in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The point that Ministers divert Government resources to their constituencies cannot be true. If it is true, then it is relative. I wonder what I could divert to my constituency when I was in the Ministry of Internal Affairs? You would have to create Police posts or a prison farm or something like that, in every village! So, I think that point is not strong enough. That area was treated as any other area in Uganda to try and establish Police posts in every sub-county including Amuria county. 

In the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the Minister would have to pray that an earthquake occurs in his constituency so that you send there relief assistance or whatever. Really that point should not be looked at as a very strong point as far as diverting State resources is concerned. I agree with hon. Prof. Kagonyera about the way Members of Parliament can intimidate and harass Ministers. I can imagine a situation of the whole of the Front Bench here being un-elected; there can actually be anarchy in this House and that can result into a disaster in the House (Laughter.).

CAPT.GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Information.

MAJ.BUTIME: I will take it Mr. Speaker.

CAPT.GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Butime for accepting a point of information. Does hon. Butime mean that Members of Parliament who are ex-officio Members are people who can now be intimidated like the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Bbumba and others? And does he mean that the motion is really saying that no Member of Parliament can be appointed a Minister? If you are appointed a Minister, you resign.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this point about the current Ministers, who are not elected Members of Parliament, have been cited enough. I think we should not keep on harping on it. Several people have made this point and I think there is really no need to go back and say, do you think these people who are not elected are not performing and so on and so forth; unless you have a new point to add.

MAJ.BUTIME: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The only point I want to add to this is that most of the ex-officio Members of this House I have seen and talked to would like to be elected in the next Parliament except the Prime Minister.  - Let me make my substantive point. I think what hon. Kutesa talked about is separation of powers. I want to say that the Executive will always flow into the Legislature and the Legislature likewise, because I have seen ministerial delegations where Members of Parliament are.  So, where is the separation here?  If the movers of this motion are looking for mathematical precision of separation of powers, that is utopia. These institutions, the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive, complement each other. But the argument here is that none should control the other and none should interfere with the other, but that there is cross-pollination. And the separation cannot assume mathematical precision. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will recognise three other people to speak, one of whom is hon. Mugisha Muntu. Okay, let me do this; the persons who are on my list are hon. Mugisha Muntu, hon. Chebet Maikut, hon. Ndege and hon. Okumu Ringa. No, these are the ones I have just – I am not saying that you are not going to speak tomorrow, not at all. If you catch my eye, you will be there. So, if the feeling is that you are – I do not want to use a crude word - you need a bit of break; this is about the right time. So, I will adjourn the House until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow, and this time I will be here at exactly 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12th October 2000 at 2.00p.m.)
