Thursday, 22 October 2009

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and take this opportunity to introduce our visitors in the gallery. We have director generals of various ministries from Southern Somali land. The delegation is led by hon. Mohamed Said Farah, State Minister for Good Governance, who is undertaking a regional experimental tour of Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda so as to learn from the experiences of their counterpart permanent secretaries in those countries. These director generals are equivalent to our permanent secretaries.

Other members of the delegation include the following:
    • Hodane Yousouf
    • Ali Mohanned Abdirahman
    • Abdrizak Hassan Muse Gul
    • Osman Omar Gure
    • Jama Mohamed Osman
    • Saido Hussein Ali
    • Hassan Shre Abidi
    • Mohammed Said Omar
    • Abdierazak Nuh Mohammed
    • Mohamed Ali Ismail
    • Ahmed Hassan Bile
    • Mohammed Said Farah
    • Abdullahi Shiek Farah
    • Abdullahi Shiek Abdinoor
    • Ms Gladys Na’ang’a
Please, join me to welcome them to Parliament. (Applause)

Also in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Busiika UMEA Primary School, which is represented by hon. Ali Sekyanzi, MP Bamunanika. You are welcome. 

We also have pupils and teachers of Kayumba Parents Memorial Primary School represented by hon. Ndawula Kaweesa of Kiboga West, Kiboga District. You are welcome and the other guests are welcome too. (Applause)

Hon. Members, on your behalf, I wrote to the Inter-Parliamentary Union headquarters in Geneva offering Uganda to host them here for the first time. You remember a delegation from Geneva came here and toured Uganda and visited several parts of the country and made a good report of the country. Last night, the hon. Deputy Speaker, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, rang me to say that although there were two candidates, namely Canada and Uganda; Uganda was selected to host the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 2012. (Applause) I thank those who helped to market Uganda to the Inter-Parliamentary Union. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE CELEBRATION OF TEN YEARS OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY

2.54
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this august House will recall that the treaty for the establishment of the EAC was signed in Arusha, Tanzania on 30 November 1999. This date has been marked annually as the EAC Day following the decision of the Summit of the EAC Heads of State to showcase the achievements of the community and rededicate efforts in the regional integration process – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, where are the copies?

MR KATEGAYA: They are on the Table, Sir; they will get you a copy. May I continue?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KATEGAYA: The 30th of November 2009 will therefore mark the 10th anniversary of the EAC. In view of the significance of the 10th anniversary, arrangements and activities for the anniversary commenced in July 2009 and will culminate in a week-long activities and festivities leading to the main event namely, the 10th Anniversary Summit on 20th November, 2009 at Sheikh Amani Abedi Stadium in Arusha. 

We expect that the main event will also witness the signing of the protocol on the establishment of the EAC common market by the EAC Heads of State. East Africans from all walks of life, regional and foreign dignitaries, representatives of the African Regional Economic Communities and international organisations are expected to attend the main event. 

The date of the main event has been brought forward from 30th to 20th November, 2009 due to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) due to take place in Trinidad and Tobago towards the end of November, 2009.

The theme of the observance is, “East African Community Ten Years of Integration, (1999-2009), One People, one Destiny”.

The EAC 10th anniversary observance is being held to showcase the EAC achievements during the first decade of its operations, 1999-2009; to renew commitment to the regional integration and to rededicate the regional integration effort into the next decade, 2010-2020. 

The objectives and outcomes of the observance are as follows:
    (i) To record the achievements of the EAC during the first decade of its operations, highlight and showcase the achievements and recognise the roles and contributions of the various players and actors.
    (ii) To identify the challenges experienced by the EAC during the first decade of its operations and project to the second decade of 2010-2020
    (iii) To celebrate, publicise and popularise the EAC and galvanise the renewed commitment and broad participation in the EAC interaction process.

Partner states are expected to organise activities/celebrations at national level. The EAC diplomatic missions will also organise joint activities of the EAC 10th anniversary observance in their respective missions.

Mr Speaker, various activities will be undertaken and others have already been accomplished in accordance with the 10th anniversary observance programme. These include symposia and setting EAC vision 2010-2020; sporting and cultural activities as well as trade, investments and tourism exhibitions. A special EAC Third Media Summit was held here in Kampala in August, 2009.

Other activities include the following:
    • Ceremonial inauguration of Arusha-Namanga–Athi River Road construction in April 2007;
    • EAC military games held in July 2009 in Kigali;
    • Launch of the East African Students Essay Competition; 
    • EAC Expo 2009; the Expo will be staged in November, 2009 incorporating EAC Jua Kali Exhibition, EAC agricultural show and EAC manufacturers, investments and trade exhibition;
    • An EAC 2nd investment conference was also held in Nairobi Kenya in July, 2009;
    • Joint field training exercise code named “EX MLIMA KILIMANJARO, 3rd – 26th September, 2009 in Arusha, Tanzania;
    • Joint field training exercise code named “EX NATURAL FIRE” from 16th – 26th October, 2009 in Kitgum, Uganda; 
    • More information on regional activities can be found on the dedicated EAC 10th anniversary website; www.EAC10anniversary.EAC.int 
    • A three-day conference on peace and security was held in Kampala from 5th – 7th October, 2009 at the Speke Commonwealth Resort, Munyonyo, as part of the Activities to observe the EAC 10th anniversary.

At the national level, my ministry has organised four regional sensitisation workshops in Lira, Mbale, Kampala and Mbarara centres as part of the activities to mark the EAC 10th anniversary. Area Members of Parliament and local government leaders have been invited to participate in these workshops. 

On 06 November 2009, Uganda will observe the EAC Day. A symposium to mark this day is being organised and will attract local government leadership, civil society, Members of Parliament, and other stakeholders. His Excellency the President is expected to preside over the symposium which will be preceded by a city walk from the Constitutional Square. 

In a nutshell, the good progress made by the EAC since its launching into full operation in 1996 and the subsequent signing of the treaty in 1999 lays a strong foundation for the fulfilment of its mission of regional integration, development and progress. Getting the Customs Union fully in place in 2010, the Monetary Union by 2012 and preparing for the establishment of a political federation will deepen the integration process and put East Africa on a sure flight path to development. 

Mr Speaker, with the above highlights outlined in this statement, I beg to inform this House of the observance of the EAC 10th anniversary. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the statement. 

3.03
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for giving a very good brief to this Parliament. I have two concerns. 

First, it is indeed true that one of the activities organised for the 10th anniversary include the EAC parliamentary sports. And as members of the Parliamentary Football Club of Uganda, we have been undergoing training for one month in preparation for one of the activities that the minister has talked about. I encourage Members that one of these mornings, Monday to Friday, from 7 a.m. to 9 a.m. come to Kampala Rugby Club and join or at least watch the members of the Parliamentary Football Club as we prepare for the regional tournament between the five parliaments of EAC, including the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Secondly, I would like to appeal to the First Deputy Prime Minister to have a written communication like this sent to all the districts; especially the LC V chairpersons, the district councils and the RDCs because the version being presented at the grassroots level is different from this one. 

For example, the RDC of my district went on radio and said that East Africa is now becoming one country; people can live anywhere; which is true. But he went on to say that small parties like FDC and DP will now disappear and only NRM will get amalgamated at the regional level. (Laughter) That is the local version – that these smaller parties will disappear because it is the NRM signing the treaty with the other EAC countries. My prayer is that this information is supplied to all district CAOs and RDCs so that we can speak one language. Otherwise, they are putting us under unnecessary pressure from our voters who also want to integrate at the regional level. 

3.06
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Affairs for the highlights of the 10th anniversary of the EAC. I have two issues to put forward. 

The first is about his information, which is very thin on the ground. We have been advocating for communities at the village, parish and sub-county level should know that the East African Community is in existence. Therefore, if you can reach that level in one way or another, as hon. Odonga Otto has put it – but you only reach district levels and when we start talking about objectives and the outcomes of these activities, it becomes difficult for the people in the villages to understand us. 

You should have given us the achievements so far reached. I know you have told us that there are achievements that have been attained so far, but what kind of achievements are they? 

The challenges that we still face should have been put clearly. I am saying this because when you just talk of identifying the challenges, that is not enough. I think when that is done you can put such information on a leaflet before sending it to the districts. I am saying this because many people still think of this Community in terms of the former East African Community. If there are new issues that have been included, that can be very helpful in reaching our local community. Otherwise, many people still think about the community as only intended to benefit the urban people. You should be able to tell the community that is involved in production, the benefits of federating under the East African Community. To help these people own this community, we should give them the information because the Community is for everybody in East Africa. Thank you very much.

3.08
MR MATTHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister in charge of the East African Community, for the elaborate explanation as far as the ten years achievements of the East African Community are concerned.

I would like to borrow one word that he used on the second page of the statement and the word is “showcase” which has been used in the East African Tenth Anniversary Observance as a showcase of the East African achievements. It is quite important that we are showcasing. 

Allow me to appreciate all that has been achieved at bilateral and inter-governmental levels. There are quite a number of achievements at institutional level. For example, the UPDF is working jointly with the Tanzanian People’s Defence Forces together with the Kenyan Forces. That is evident. Members will recall that recently there were joint military exercises in the Kilimanjaro and currently there is another exercise that is going on in Kitgum where my sister “Mabira” comes from. These are indications that at government institutional levels like in the Police, Prisons and inter-ministerial discussions, we have done quite a lot. 

But when it comes to the theme of the achievements in ten years which is: “One people, one destiny,” I think we still have a long way to go. I come from Kakuuto, a constituency that borders Tanzania at Mutukula border. I would like to appreciate the fact that Tanzania of late has been giving us quite a lot of foodstuffs like dried cassava. So many tones of cassava are coming to Uganda from Tanzania. And of late, we are even receiving fresh bananas from the Karagwe region.

I would like to take this opportunity to appreciate His Excellency, Kikwete’s effort. When he crossed from Tanzania to Uganda via Mutukula Border Post recently, he was told quite a number of issues that disrupted trade between the two countries. There were quite a number of encumbrances that were explained to him especially the US $100 fee that was a requirement for every Ugandan going to Tanzania to do business. I have been reliably informed that this requirement has been removed following that field visit by President Kikwete. This is a very good indication.

However, I would be very much appreciative, given the fact that the theme of the day is “One people, one destiny,” - I would like to appeal to the heads of state that after celebrating ten years, they should give one week of free movement of people across the borders as a test case. This will help them monitor how people behave when they freely cross borders from their country to another like Kenya or Rwanda without any encumbrances like having to first secure a visa. 

This will help us achieve the theme “One people, one destination.” It will make us develop arrangements that will not require people to secure visas before crossing from say, Uganda to Tanzania. 

Further, it will enhance the people’s movement within the East African Community. I am talking about situations that will enable people to cross borders within East Africa without the requirement of visas and passports. That is the type of arrangement we should be envisaging to help us see a close communication and co-operation within the East African countries. I am saying this because when we talk about one people and one destiny, it means there should be no further encumbrances in crossing borders within the East African region. This will enable people to move freely without any limitations. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I want to take this opportunity to welcome the sub-county councillors of Bulamagi sub-county in Kigulu South constituency, who are in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

Let us hear from the Minister of Finance first because we still have another statement regarding waragi, to come. (Laughter)

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I have is just information to the Member who has just been holding the Floor. The information is that I come from a border district and I would like to report that if you compare the time before we revived the East African Community and now, you realise that there is freer trade across the border of Kenya and Uganda today than in the past. There is nobody who blocks any person from taking anything across the border. There are people who have been going to Kenya to get treatment without any requirement of a visa. I think the issue of a visa no longer exists. Businesses are also going on very well. Thank you very much.

3.14
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the minister for presenting the report to which I am one of the beneficiaries. 

I further would like to be on record by saying that on behalf of the people of Kitgum District where one of the activities is taking place, I am appreciative for having selected my place as the venue for the celebrations. Yesterday we had at least 1,500 people in Palabek treated. This morning when I got in touch with the people, I was told that the hospital was overflowing with people receiving treatment. We also appreciate the undertaking at Kitgum High School. 

In same vein, we further appreciate the undertaking at Kitgum Hospital. It is the only government hospital, but which has been in a sorry state. I hope we shall now have a facelift. Again let me say that on behalf of the people of Kitgum, I appreciate all these undertakings. (Applause) 

However, I want to draw the attention of this House to the fact that such good things – this country belongs to all of us despite the fact that we sit opposite to each other. From the beginning we had a problem regarding this programme just because there was little or no information flow. If all these arrangements had been so transparent and involving as you heard from my brother hon. Odonga Otto and others - even we Members of Parliament were sceptical about this arrangement because we had not been involved.

I would like to say that while doing all programmes for this country, do not look at me with the blue eyes, but as a Ugandan. That means I should be informed of any activities that take place in my constituency because I am the people’s representative, take it or leave it. I should be involved on behalf of my people. 

As I talked to my people this morning, I told them that there is a programme in Pajim, but because they had not been involved, some of them told me that those were army things and they had nothing to do with them. 

I would like to advise the minister that if he is to fast-track this programme for East Africa, he should leave no stone unturned. It might be the people from Kitgum to let you down if you do not fully involve them. We would like you to get people involved for the good of Uganda.

At one time some Members of Parliament were invited for the opening and closing ceremonies from the region and I think in Kitgum, I was the only one invited. However, I can tell you that I received my invitation on the very day of the opening and so I could not make it. And for the closing ceremony, when I consulted, I was told that arrangements had already been made. I told my colleague, hon. Okello-Okello – I had been told by some people in the minister’s office that there would be transport the following day at 7 a.m. but when I went to crosscheck, I was again told that the transport had been arranged only for government ministers. I got so perturbed because they should have told us early so we could get there by road much earlier. My effort to convince them that I am also a minister in waiting did not work out for me –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Beatrice Anywar, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the hon. Member on the Floor is raising an important issue on information dissemination. But I would like to say that I am reliably informed by the UPDF spokesperson that a number of radio talk shows were conducted including a press conference that was held at the Media Centre.

I am also aware that the First Deputy Premier who is the minister in charge addressed us through such interactions. Probably, what we need to do is to make sure we categorise the type of people to attend and devise ways of reaching out to them. I am saying this because sometimes letters delay to reach the pigeonholes so we need to do follow ups with phone calls. 

Otherwise, I know that the UPDF together with the Ministry for East African Affairs tried to disseminate this information. They tried to alert the whole country not to get scared of the movement of troops. This information was very much available to people through radios, newspapers and so on. 

But also, this is not the first time this country is hosting such an activity. In my capacity as the Minister of State for Defence at that time, I was in charge of this programme and I can tell you the programme involves everybody. What I can say is that sometimes probably information gets lost somewhere. Anyway, why I stood up was to bear witness and also to encourage colleagues to keep on tracking programmes that get into their constituencies. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague for the information. But I think it is common knowledge that not every Ugandan has access to radios. For example –(Interjections)– if you went to my district you would realise that not everybody, including the poor from Okidi, has access to such information. What I am saying is that it should be incumbent upon us to ensure all the vulnerable people – I have also said that we, Members of Parliament had a problem with this programme. Some people had to think that this was a programme meant to train the UPDF from Kitgum District in which case their shooting as part of training would remind people of memories of the war. That is why people developed a negative thinking. So, take it in good faith that we need to go an extra mile to ensure information is given to everybody concerned. 

If I am not on board, it is going to be difficult for me to implement it or to appreciate what I am saying here now. You should be appreciative rather than going on the defensive. Therefore, let us continue involving all stakeholders at various levels. It would be smooth for us when implementing it. We welcome the programme but we need information flow. If you are going to restrict it to ministers in government, it will get lost. For God and my country!

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end this debate. There is another statement and you will contribute to that.

3.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I get to the statement, let me just bring on record the absence of my team. Most of my team has gone to Obongi for the Obongi Day, which will be celebrated tomorrow. His Excellency, the President of Uganda and President Salva Kiir will be presiding over that function so most of my members took an earlier flight to be there by 9 a.m. tomorrow.

Having said that, I would like to thank the minister and say that ten years of integration is a commendable achievement given the fact that we are coming a long way from the time when integration had previously failed. However, I want to ask the First Deputy Prime Minister why he is not listing our own centres of excellence as something to showcase. I am interested in the centres of excellence because five years ago, Soroti Flying School was earmarked to be a centre of excellence. The rest of the country and the community have gone a long way in developing their centres of excellence and I am sure that these are some of the things that will be showcased on this occasion. What is it that Uganda will be showcasing for purposes of showing the community our centres of excellence given the fact that we as a country have not done anything to help Soroti Flying School, which was earmarked to come up to a level where we can boast about it as a centre of excellence? 

Yes, Soroti Flying School continues to be in a very dilapidated state, Mr Speaker. It only has two crafts for purposes of training and you cannot talk about that as a centre of excellence for the East African Community; you cannot talk about dormitories for students for East Africa, which are cracked; you cannot talk about very few instructors. I would like the honourable minister to help us prove to East Africa that we actually addressed our own centre of excellence. 

Secondly, integration has to be felt in our villages, markets, schools, and in our homes. I am interested in hearing the extent to which, as East Africans, we can communicate amongst ourselves. I thought that I would hear at least one Kiswahili word in the statement about this integration but it was not there and it reminded me that as Ugandans, our second official language is Kiswahili. And Kiswahili, I think, is the language of integration. I thought that by now, we would be teaching Kiswahili officially in our schools.

I would like government to help us know the extent to which we are developing Kiswahili as a language of communication. When we have the Common Market, what language am I going to speak in some of those villages in Tanzania? I am sure that it would be very difficult to communicate.

Lastly, of interest to us should be the issues of security particularly to do with cross-border security. The north-eastern side of this country has suffered a lot of cattle rustling. Across the border, there are arms that are coming in and out of Uganda, Kenya, Somalia and I want the First Deputy Prime Minister to at least highlight the progress that has been made to ensure that as part of the integration process, we are more secure across the borders as people who live in those areas that are prone to cattle raids. Thank you.

3.28
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, on the question of information dissemination about this exercise in the North, definitely the local leadership in the district was aware that we are going to be there. If some Members missed out on the information; that should not mean that they were not informed. The RDCs, the LC V, all of them were informed about the presence of the troops in the region. Some information was also put in the pigeon holes and if one does not turn up to read it, then it is not our fault.  

On a wide scale, my ministry is planning to go down up to the LC III informing the population about the integration of East Africa. We have started with the regions, we will go to the districts and we want to go as far as LC III, that is, if funds are permitting.

Hon. Odonga Otto, I think we shall give the correct information to the RDCs and LC V chairmen but those who are excited about integration cannot be stopped from saying we are one country because that is where we are going. Our objective is to form one country at the end of the day. If you look at Article 5(2) of the Treaty, the stages are: Customs Union, Common Market, one currency or Monetary Union, and then Political Federation. These are on the agenda. So, some people are ahead of us and I do not think there is any problem with that.

The achievements, so far, I did not want to bother the Parliament with a whole list of achievements because they are there but to just mention a few, we now have a wider community. At the beginning we were three states but now we are five, which means that the Community has expanded.

Secondly, we have a better atmosphere of discussing Community affairs than before because when we started in 1999, I remember there was tension and even war in our discussions but now I find that we have a very amiable atmosphere in which we are discussing our issues.

Thirdly, we have started a programme at the university level through the Inter-University Council to harmonise and standardise our curricula and syllabuses so that graduates coming from the universities in the region are employable and saleable in the region.

On the question of defense and security, we have established a Directorate of Defense and Security in which all the chiefs of the Army, Police and Intelligence Services meet and discuss the security of the region, including cross-border crimes and we freely exchange information and intelligence in the region. So, all this is being done.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, you remember that we had a consultation on what people think about the future of Political Federation and I am glad to report that of the samples that we did in the five countries, people support the integration of the region at a political level.

MR BANYENZAKI: I thank you honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from you is when you talk about regional integration, especially now that we are going for a Common Market, there is an issue of cross-border trade and the situation is that there are markets on almost every border. Currently, the visa fees for single day entry have been increased to Shs 5,000. For example, at Katuna Border, women and men who go to trade across have to pay – if they are coming from Rwanda to enter Uganda - they have to pay Shs 5,000 and the items that they sell in those markets may not profit them that amount of money. This makes cross-border trade very difficult. 

Hon. Minister, I am raising this issue because at one time I attended a conference on COMESA in Kabale and that was one of the complaints that was raised by the traders. They said that the single entry fees for traders were very high to the extent that if they computed how much they lose in a year, it makes trade very difficult. The cost of doing business across the borders is very expensive and this makes the integration that we are talking about more difficult. I think we need to harmonise these kinds of documents for these regional citizens so that trade is not very difficult. 

MR KATEGAYA: I will comment on hon. Banyenzaki’s issue later. 

Hon. Kasamba, on the US $100 charged by Tanzania on people crossing the border, we are definitely having serious meetings to remove those irritations on cross-border trade and what we have been telling Tanzania is to remove the US $100 because it does not make sense. But on the question of trade, it will be solved after we have signed the Protocol on the Common Market. We have finished negotiation on the Common Market and what is remaining is signing by the Heads of State and I hope this will be done in the coming month of November on the 20th. 

Once the Common Market protocol is signed, some of the issues that Members are raising will be solved; issues like freedom of movement, freedom of trade, freedom of investment; all these will be solved within the Protocol of the Common Market which is not yet in place but will be signed hopefully on the 20th of next month. 

Hon. Anywar, the closure is on the 25th on Sunday in Kitgum and not tomorrow and you are invited to come and attend.

Hon. Alaso raised a question of centres of excellence; she was a bit local and cited Soroti Flying School. Soroti Flying School is actually going to be a centre of excellence in terms of training pilots and aeroplane engineers. I want to tell you that they are going to receive six planes for training; they are going to have modern simulators for training pilots and they are going to have an independent budget from the Government of Uganda to run their own academy. I think the planes should be on the way because the last time I was there, two months ago, there were advance plans to receive at least two planes. 

Kiswahili in my statement; I was addressing the Parliament of Uganda otherwise it is the second official language in the Community. I have had discussions with the Minister of Education to see how we can incorporate Kiswahili as an examinable subject in particularly our primary school syllabus because we think that anybody who studies Kiswahili for seven years will be fluent. 

At the moment, there are some schools that are teaching Kiswahili on a voluntary basis but it is not examinable, which means that it is not compulsory. I have been discussing with the Education Ministry to see how we can make it examinable, which means it will be compulsory.

Meanwhile, as you remember, we organised some Kiswahili lessons for this Parliament but I do not know how much you picked. But in my ministry, everybody now speaks Kiswahili because we have been taking lessons.  

Lastly, on hon. Banyenzaki’s problem, I do not think you are right to say that cross-border trade is very expensive. If anything, cross-border trade is more in volume and income than official trade. There was a study done on it and actually border trade is more than the official trade; the border people will tell you that. If you ask hon. Chekamondo and hon. Opio or even hon. Kasamba, they will tell you that there is more trade on the border than what is official. (Laughter)

Thank you, Mr Speaker. Asante sana. (Laughter)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND THE PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

MS SEZI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009 is before this Parliament for consideration and seeks to achieve the following objectives:

1. To repeal and replace the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, Cap. 263                                                     

2. To provide for the salaries, allowances and retirement benefits of serving and retired presidents, vice-presidents, prime ministers and their spouses and dependant children upon retirement of their excellencies and the Rt hon. Prime Minister.

3. To improve on the terminal benefits of the president and the vice-president upon retirement in terms of adequacy and coverage. 

The proposals in the Bill are generally in line with the retirement arrangements of retired presidents, vice-presidents and prime ministers within the region. They are intended to provide a decent lifestyle to our senior political leaders commensurate with their social and political standing in society while in retirement. 

I, therefore, request that the honourable Members of Parliament support the proposal and subsequently approve the Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Let us hear from the chairman of the committee.

3.43
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gerald Menhya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I stand here to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009. 

The Bill was read for the first time on Thursday, 05 March 2009 by the Second Deputy Prime Minister who also doubles as the Minister of Public Service. The Bill was then forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee received and considered the Bill as per Article 90 of the 1995 Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I am now pleased to present to this august House the report of the committee on the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009.

By way of methodology, the committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings with different stakeholders including the following: 

a) 	The Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Service, his state minister and technical staff.

b) 	Former leaders of Uganda namely, Her Excellency Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, former Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda and currently the board chairperson of the Micro Finance Support Centre; hon. Moses Kigongo, former Vice-Chairman, National Resistance Council and current Vice-Chairperson, NRM party; and hon. Henry Kyemba, a senior and veteran politician and former minister. 

c) 	All leaders of political parties who were invited for a half-day consultative meeting on the Bill. The following parties were represented: Forum for Integrity in Leadership; Movement for Democratic Change; Farmers Party of Uganda; Congress Service Volunteers Party; the Economic Party of Uganda; National Peasants Party of Uganda; the Peoples’ United Party; the National Youth Revolutionary Party and lastly, Uganda Peoples’ Congress (UPC).

The committee sought to interact with the former President of Uganda, His Excellency Lukongwa Binaisa, and former Vice-President of Uganda, His Excellency Adrisi Mustafa. However, both of them could not attend for unspecified reasons.

Objectives of the Bill

The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009 seeks to provide for benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister while in office and on retirement. It specifically seeks, like the minister of state said, to: 

a) 	Improve on the terminal benefits of the President and to introduce terminal benefits for the Vice-President and Prime Minister which are not provided for under the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, Cap. 263.

b) 	Repeal the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, Cap. 263 and make benefits consistent with the prevailing circumstances.

c) 	Make provisions for the spouse or spouses and children, both biological and adopted and dependants of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minster; and  

d) 	Provide for funeral benefits for a president, vice president and prime minister who dies while in office.

Salient Provisions of the Bill

a) 	The Bill provides for the purchase of a house and health insurance policy for a retired president, vice president and prime minister. 

b) 	It makes provisions for payments of survivors’ benefits to surviving spouse(s) of a retired president until his or her demise or the demise of the spouse or spouses.

c) 	Under clauses 5(2), 8(2), 12(2) of the Bill, one is disqualified from having the benefits of a president, vice-president and prime minister in case of:

i) 	Conviction of subversive activities against Uganda or another country.
ii) 	Conviction of extra judicial killing(s).
iii) 	Conviction of crime(s) involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
iv) 	Conviction for stealing, money laundering, fraud or any other similar unlawful activity.

d) 	Under clause 21 of the Bill, upon misconduct after retirement leading to a conviction of a president, vice-president or prime minister, their benefits are to be suspended until they serve their sentences.

e) 	Where a president, vice-president or prime minister dies while in office, the Bill, under clause 14, 15 and 16, provides for funeral benefits. For avoidance of doubt, clause 17 of the Bill specifies that where the President, Vice-President or Prime Minister dies while in office, the government is to contribute 30 percent of the gross annual salary towards the funeral expenses. Clause 18 makes similar provisions for the spouses of office holders.

f) 	Under clause 27 of the Bill, the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act is not to apply to any period in respect of which a person is paid or granted any salary, allowances or benefits under the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minster Bill, 2009.

g) 	arliament may, by resolution, make such adjustments as may be necessary to accommodate any person who acts temporarily in office of the President, Vice-President or Prime Minister to this Act.

Please turn to page 6 and we look at observations and recommendations by the committee.

The committee takes note that the offices of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister are very important in running the affairs of the state. It is, therefore, of paramount importance to enhance the benefits of the bearers of these offices and their spouses to ensure that they offer full commitment to the nation and feel secure both during and after their tenure of service. 

The committee would wish to make the following observations with respect to this Bill:

a) Beneficiaries

Observation
The application of the Bill is limited to leaders who have served under the 1995 Constitution. The committee feels it is important for purposes of national unity and addressing historical hitches to make laws that take into consideration all those personalities who have served their mother nation, Uganda.

Recommendation
The committee recommends that the benefits in the Bill with respect to retired or deceased former leaders be applied to all Ugandans who have served their country in the respective positions.

The committee also recommends that the former National Resistance Council Vice-Chairperson who served during the period from 1986 to 1995 be accorded the benefits of the Vice-President as the said position was the same as that of the Vice-President under the 1995 Constitution.

b) Houses for former Presidents, Vice President and Prime Minister

Observation 
The committee would like to observe that the position of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister are cardinal under the 1995 Constitution. The committee takes note that by the time one chooses to contest or be appointed in any of the above three positions, he or she should be stable with an income and capable of supporting himself or herself.

Recommendation 
The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal of purchasing or building a personal house for a retired president, vice-president and prime minister be removed. If a person assumes office before acquiring such property, he or she should be able to purchase or build for him or herself a house using his or her remuneration. This position was also widely supported by former leaders who interacted with the committee.

c) Benefits for Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament

Observation 

The committee would like to observe that while the Speaker of Parliament is ranked third and the Deputy Speaker is ranked fifth respectively in terms of hierarchy, their emoluments and benefits are not enhanced in comparison to others in the hierarchy of authority in Uganda as proposed in the Emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009.

Recommendation 

We therefore recommend, as a committee, that there is need to revise the relevant laws with respect to the emoluments and benefits for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament given the importance attached to their offices, the roles they play in society and their hierarchy and authority in the country.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the committee’s proposed amendments, the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009 should be passed. The committee takes note that the Bill shall go a long way in strengthening the institution of the presidency and enhance security of tenure of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank very much, chairman and members of the committee, for the report.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): I want to thank the committee and the committee chairman for the comments on where they would want the law emphasised. I want to thank them for the consultations that were made and we take note of their observations.

The emoluments of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister are being operationalised under 1995 Constitution. The past leaders have been paid and covered under the remuneration of members, which falls under the 1967 Constitution, and work is already going on by government to cater and sort out the past leaders.

As regards the Vice-Chairperson of the National Resistance Council, I want to inform the House that work is already ongoing to develop the principles and handle his case. When it comes to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, I want to inform the House that the principles are in the advanced stage, going to Cabinet for consideration.

I wish to emphasise that this Bill is being presented under the 1995 Constitution and the past leaders fall under the 1967 Constitution and the Act that has been mentioned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the point which the committee is raising here about the past leaders is: why do you categorise the leaders? They think that you should treat them uniformly because one stands there and you will say that he is a past president and another is there and he is also a past president. I think that is why they are raising it. I think you should treat them equally. Isn’t that the point?

4.00
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West, Sironko): The issue you have raised, Mr Speaker, is serious. A vice-president is a vice-president and a president is a president, whether retired, not retired or dead. This issue of segregating is not good. The resources we are going to give to these people are from Uganda and these people served Uganda. Why do you want to create double standards in such a situation? If the person did badly, he was paid by maybe being removed from office but he served the country. 

You are talking of the Constitution of 1995; in fact, the 1995 Constitution was based on the 1967 Constitution. If you have amended the emoluments for presidents, then you bring a law of the past or present presidents, then you are amending the previous one. This means that those who were qualifying under the other law will be assumed to be using the current law.

I want to thank the committee for having said presidents or prime ministers must not be given a house. This is because we do not want a president or a vice-president who is a destitute; these are the people who come and take our resources. You must come with something first and then we see it. The reason we are having a problem in Uganda is because we have people who have not had something come to rule and take things.

“Dependants” is relative. I can have dependants in the whole of my village, so if you are calling for the government to do that, then it is very dangerous. We must be specific. In fact, all laws all over refer to your children who are below the age of 18 or who are in university or who have not finished normal education like university. If you talk of dependants to be looked after, people will collect all dependants in their region and say, “These are my dependants”. We shall not manage! I think we shall be finished. I believe all the presidents, by the time they retire, have done something for their children, so why should we really cater for the dependants? Maybe we can look at the children.

Before I comment on the issue of NRC and the Vice-Chairman of NRC, I want to comment on the Judiciary. The Chief Justice and deputy when they retire are given a “handshake”. You recall the other one who went; he went with cash equivalent to US $300,000 and they gave him a house. So that means that the other arm of government is covered, and now we are covering the Executive. Now Parliament must be covered so that all of us work knowing that if we became the Speaker, we will get something as a handshake. So we must not pass this until we have seen the law dealing with Parliament; it is very simple. 

Mr Speaker, it is not that when you are seated there you should suffer; we are here to fight for your rights. If you allow this to go now, this law will not come until the Eleventh Parliament. So we must deal with it. The Speaker must be paid something and the Deputy Speaker must get something as you are dealing with this. These ones are elected; nobody should say that they were just in career development and that is how they reached there. The President and the Prime Minister are all voted. Well, even if the other one was elected, the normal process is voting. Likewise, our Speaker and the Deputy Speaker were voted and they became Speakers. So, we must make a law to take care of that.

I think this is in good faith; it shows that if you work very well, you will get a pension at the end. However, we should also put a proviso that if you have been a vice-president or a prime minister and you have mismanaged public resources - why should we give you more money? We should put something here, not these ones which say that you have been declared bankrupt. We must add something – (Interjection)- No, you could retire when you have not. I know why you are saying that. These are the ones when you have been convicted, but there are those who may not be convicted but they have got our resources. We can see the resources are there – (Interruption)  

MR MENHYA:  Mr Speaker, can I inform my colleague that on page 6 of the Bill, there is something on a president, vice-president or prime minister who misbehaves and the consequences that they are likely to suffer. I would like to refer him to clause 5(2) which says that for a president who ceases to hold office otherwise than by being removed under 107(1), the consequences are as follows:

i. 	Conviction of subversive activities against Uganda or another country;
ii. 	Conviction of extra judicial killing(s);
iii. 	Conviction of crime(s) involving dishonesty or moral turpitude; and
iv. 	Conviction for stealing, money laundering, fraud or any other similar unlawful activity.         

So, what you are saying is already in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is very good if he is convicted. First of all, our law is very clear, you cannot take the President to court until he is out of office. So when will you convict him so that he does not qualify? It is only the Vice-President and other members who can be sued. So, there are those you will convict when they have left and one may say that they are being harassed for nothing. However, there are some indicators where you can see that someone has taken public resources or misbehaved. These are the things we should look at.

In conclusion, first and foremost if we are making the law, we should not make the law selective; we should make a law which takes care of everybody. If the people of the NRC at that time had the President or his equivalent as the chairman and the vice-chairman became the Vice-President, we should take care of them. This is basically a good way of living. We are not worried; Uganda is a very rich country and we can afford that. 

We are looking at the past where these big people like the president and prime minister have access to public resources but we are making them get more. So, we should also go further to enhance retirement benefits for other people and civil servants. If you do not do it, I could go to the bush in order to look for a retirement package. If I am a permanent secretary, for example, and I am given something good at retirement, it is very important. The lower cadres like primary school teachers and nurses are the people we should look after because the country belongs to all of us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.09
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I want to appreciate this report and say that I agree with the recommendations of the committee. It is right that the provisions we are making in this law accommodate all those who have held these offices from 1962 instead of just with the Constitution of 1995. I really find it bad practice that people who have served this country in the past and who are still there now are in a state that is not commensurate with the offices and honour they held while they were in those offices. 

We have one of the only remaining three presidential commissioners in this country, Mzee Wacha Olwor, who was part of the three presidents in 1979 – I believe it was – or maybe 1980. This man, who once held the highest office in this country, is now forgotten and as I speak, is now very sick. Government was not even aware that there was such a distinguished Ugandan suffering all by himself and cannot be extended assistance. We raised it with His Excellency the President and I hope that government has done something about it. Had such a law been in place earlier, he would not have been reduced to that situation he is in right now. 

I also want to agree that we do not only provide for the Executive in this law but we also look at the Parliament of Uganda and provide for people who are leaders in this House. I would think that it would be in very bad test to make provisions for the other arm of government and leave out the leadership of the very House that is making laws and provisions for the Executive. 

I have been wondering what happens when a president is overthrown unconstitutionally - well, if he is overthrown then it has to be unconstitutional. If a president and the whole government are overthrown, what happens? When they come back or when another government comes in place, do we count that their benefits have been running for the years they were in exile? 

I would like to know what really happens because in this country we have had leadership change in ways that were not constitutional in the past. We also have it on record that when they were overthrown, some of these leaders lived in exile in very miserable situations, something that you would not want to know about. Although they lived outside the country, it was an embarrassment in terms of the situations in which they were subjected to. 

So, if a president or government is overthrown, what happens to the emoluments? Do they keep on accumulating? If he is out for ten years, does it accumulate for that period? When he or when order comes back to the country again, does the country then pay him for all those years that he was away? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for bringing such a good report. However, I want to observe that the report is self contradictory. 

The committee recommends thus: “The committee would like to observe that while the Speaker of Parliament is ranked third and the Deputy Speaker is ranked fifth respectively in terms of hierarchy, their emoluments and benefits are not enhanced in comparison to other leaders in the hierarchy of authority in Uganda as proposed in the Emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister’s Bill. The committee recommends, therefore, that there is need to revise relevant laws with respect to the emoluments and benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.”

When we go to the proposed amendments by the committee, it seems they do not know that they have powers to bring the necessary amendments to operationalise their earlier recommendations. It does not serve any purpose for a whole committee of Parliament to recommend that something should be done for the Office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament and then in the actual amendments, we do not see anything like “insert a new clause” to cater for those offices. You have the lockers. 

Article 82(8) and (9) of the Constitution are on the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament, and I want to read them verbatim. Article 82 (8) of the Constitution says: “The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall receive such salaries, allowances and gratuities as may be prescribed by Parliament.” So we have the mandate. Article 82(9) says: “The salaries, allowances and gratuities of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.” 

Some people may be thinking that this is the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, so how does the Speaker come in? However, the long title of the Bill reads, “An Act to provide for salaries, allowances and other benefits of a President, Vice-President in accordance with Articles 106 and 108 of the Constitution and for other related matters”. So I am yet to be persuaded by the Attorney-General about an attempt by Parliament to operationalise right now and today - there is nothing like tomorrow because the way this country is proceeding, it looks like you pay as you go. I am yet to be persuaded by the Attorney-General as to why operationalising Article 82(8) and (9) would not in any way amount to “other related matters”, so that we consolidate all the Bills in one small piece of legislation. 

Recently I was at a workshop at Entebbe; we are now consolidating all the marriage and divorce laws into one piece of legislation. We are now consolidating four different legislations into one namely the Family, Marriage and Divorce Act. So, at an appropriate time, I will move a motion that we sort out the issue of all the heads of institutions once and for all, and I want to persuade members. You see, when we are legislating, we are not legislating looking at someone chairing the House; no. We are legislating looking at how the person chairing the House would be in case he is not in that position. 

The Parliament is not a favoured institution like the Executive. The Executive can dip their hands deepest into the accounts of Bank of Uganda and pick or order any unspecified monies to be released whether classified or unclassified. That is right! The Executive has huge financial muscle. How many vehicles escort the President? Over forty! How many vehicles escort the Speaker? -(Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I have been following the arguments by hon. Otto. He has been in this House, this is his second term, and he knows the process that the Executive goes through in order to access money. All the money that is got and used by the Executive is passed in this House, and we have just passed the budget for this financial year. Is hon. Otto in order to insinuate that the Executive, as and when it wishes, just gets money from Bank of Uganda, dips its hands and picks unspecified money and does whatever it wants with it? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need to do is give him information so that maybe if he was not aware, he gets that information.

MS KABAKUMBA: For that matter, I would like to inform hon. Otto and this House that whatever money is used by the Executive is passed and approved by this House. We do not spend beyond what is approved.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you very much for the information but I want to maintain my focus. We all know how the Executive uses money in this country. I am not going to elaborate. We all know of ministers who have been forced to refund money they illegally took from the Consolidated Fund. They are still on the front bench. I do not want to start mentioning names, but what I was emphasising is that we should jealously use this opportunity to make a law that will finally cater for all the high-ranking personnel in this country.

I am just an ordinary Back Bench Member of Parliament. The day I am not a Member of Parliament, I can comfortably join the streets, but I do not think a similar situation would be easy for a person who has curved the stature of being a Speaker of Parliament. We have to be fair. It is not easy for someone who has curved the status and image of a Speaker of the National Parliament of the Republic to cope with life in this Republic the way Odonga-Otto may cope with life. 

So, at an appropriate time, I will be moving an amendment that following Article 82(9) of the Constitution - and since the long title of this Bill talks of other related matters - we shall once and for all deal with the issues of emolument of these high ranking officers. If the minister is saying next time, then this Bill should leave through the windows and come back next time because we have seen so many “next times.” 

In fact, Uganda is a country where there are very many endless tomorrows. They have even opened term limits and many other issues, so let us sort it out now, once and for all and we focus on other things tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the public gallery we have teachers and pupils of Kumi Girls’ Day Boarding Primary School, which is represented by hon. Patrick Amuriat. (Applause) You are welcome to Parliament.

We also have pupils and teachers of Mutunda Primary School represented by hon. Sam Amooti Otada, Kibanda in Masindi District. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.23
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which is tickling. As a country we are aware of how the public is looking at us, we the leaders of this country. Recently we had the salaries of MPs revised and this has caused a lot of discomfort among the public. Honourable colleagues, this country belongs to all of us and I am saying this because whatever we are talking about, today’s presentation will get a reaction from the public. 

We are talking about how to improve the comfort of the leaders of this country. I hope as we debate this report, not far from now we should also come back and debate how to increase the welfare of civil servants. Otherwise, if we are going to look at the cream of this country and improve their welfare while other Ugandans who are diligently working day and night are not considered - while we are talking about increasing salaries even for a simple teacher to Shs 200,000 and we say it will cause inflation - then we shall be judged when we leave leadership.

On page 4 of the report the committee talks about providing for adopted children and dependants. The committee had already agreed on that. When you talk about adopted and dependent children of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister, then I have a worry. The way Ugandans are, we look at the President as our father, the father of this nation. We are all dependent on him; that is why we are crying for not having shared the national cake appropriately. Now when we bring a Bill and leave it - 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, when we talk about children, there is what we call biological and adopted children. If you strictly use the word adopted, an adopted child is a child of the person who has adopted him/her once the adoption has been finalised. There is no difference. I think that is what you are saying. The term “child” includes an adopted one because once you adopt someone, then he/she does not look to any other person other than you. That is what it means.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance, but the dependants – my worry is; what are the widths and lengths of dependants of the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister? Do we leave it open? Members should look at this. I believe we can still think through about where we are going to commit a lot of resources. If we give a leeway to this, we must describe who, as the Speaker has guided, the adopted children are. Those can be legally dealt with. What about the dependants? Shall we have all of them registered, under what circumstances and at what time?

You know, like now, we were talking about - for instance when we talked about the State House scholarships and we were told that there are so many people who come for help, they become –(Interjections)- I think you shall be – take note of that and you will give us - 

THE SPEAKER: Let them help you to know because you have a problem with the dependants.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: I wish to inform the honourable member that “dependants” is not an open ticket. We are providing for four children and legally adopted children. In the law, we are defining a child as per other laws. Thank you.

MR MENHYA: On page 4 of the Bill, we have defined a child to mean a person below the age of 18 and that includes an adopted child. But also in Schedule 1 of the Bill on page 13, we are talking of only four children to be supported or aided by this law if at all it is passed -(Interruptions)  

MS NAJJEMBA: I am a bit disturbed knowing that many of us here have more than four children. I am really worried that we are telling them four children and I am sure that some of them have 30 or even more. (Laughter) So I just want to know what criteria you are using to limit them to four children. I also want some clarification on the – supposing a leader does not give birth – has no children?

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to supplement the puzzle that seems to be pending on the head of hon. Najjemba regarding the four children. Be it as it may, if Hajji Kyanjo has more than four children, then you compel the law to support four children but at the same time you say you are going to support the adopted. What is the meaning in the African sense really?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: World over, there is always a cap on the number of persons somebody can have as – you can have 100 children but the law will say four will be the ones to be looked after and that is it. These are always biological. Then for the dependants, I do not know how it comes up but the four children – your dependants are always your biological children. But if you adopt a child, that becomes your child and if you have not passed the limit of four and that is the law, then that is it. But leaving the thing open for all the quantity – these people have many children as she said – they are very many. (Laughter) 

4.32 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I do not know where some of my colleagues are getting a stand alone expression of dependants because in the memorandum, there is a reference to dependent children. In other words, the Bill is not talking about dependents as such but dependent children. If you look at the memorandum, look at line four that says, “The object of the Bill is to repeal and replace the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 2(63) to provide for the salaries, allowances, retirement benefits and benefits of spouses and dependent children.” 

Now go on to page 4, as the chairperson guided us and you see the definition of a child – and there is nothing like a definition of dependant in the main text of the Bill and so, there is no contradiction whatsoever. We look at the children as defined.

THE SPEAKER: I think there are worries about the numbers which should not worry you because when you read the law, what happens, if for instance, he does this and the other? What these dependants take is what he was supposed to be earning. So, it is up to them because if they are few, then it will be good for individuals. If they are many, of course it will be to the prejudice but they only take that specific sum, which the head was taking. Why should that worry you? Because if he was getting say Shs 1,000,000 and they say that when he dies, they take that Shs 1,000,000, should that bother you whether the people going to share the Shs 1,000,000 are two, four or five? It should not worry you because that is what it means here. That does not increase your liability. The public liability is not increased because the numbers are big. It remains as it were.

MR KYANJO: Even if the worry was not directly on the amount of money, as a responsible Parliament the worry should extend to the members of the family who remain behind to ask, “Who is that one?” 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you see in their administration, there will be somebody responsible for managing the estate of the deceased and that will be the person they will be dealing with and not government. But when some one dies without an estate, somebody will go and apply for letters of administration to manage. If he has an estate, he will have named so and so to go and have grantor probate - these are the people they are going to handle the issue with and so they are the ones to know the numbers – whether 15 or two.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have seen the law and for the salaries, it is very okay because it will be a fixed amount. But if they fall sick and then they go for treatment that is another thing and cost. There are those which we are very sure we are comfortable with. So, we should cap this thing so that when we are dealing with it – if five of them fall sick, we treat only four and not going beyond that.

THE SPEAKER: No, I thought for sickness it is about taking an insurance cover as we do – a specific amount to cover you for medical benefits. It does not make any difference. It is not open, that is why we stopped it and somebody wrote about it in the papers. The reason we encouraged people to take insurance was that previously if a Member fell sick, it were public funds that would be used to settle a bill of probably Shs 50 million. That is why we decided to start this insurance cover such that the medical insurance takes care of you. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, in that case, probably at the Committee Stage we will have to deal with substituting medical care for medical insurance. That will probably cure the problem. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Once it is done and we know the perimeter, we shall be comfortable with that clause. Otherwise, let us leave it open because it causes us discomfort. 

On page 6, when I saw the recommendation of the committee that the former National Resistance Council Vice-Chairperson who served during the period 1986 to 1995 in the NRM regime be accorded the benefit of the Vice-President as the said position – 

THE SPEAKER: But I think the minister explained. Didn’t she? 

MS ANYWAR: I have a comment, Mr Speaker. I am not okay with it because the said officer that is to be given the privilege is one of those whom the committee consulted while making this report. Isn’t this conflict of interest? The Baganda say, “Enkima tesala gwa kibira”, loosely translated to mean that a monkey cannot decide on what happens in a forest. (Laughter) I find this very discomforting because if a person with an interest in the matter is consulted, what would be his recommendation? (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. First of all, this Bill was discussed by Cabinet which is chaired by the President and the Vice-President and the Prime Minister. So, they were privy to what is in the Bill. 

Secondly, consulting interested parties per se does not give rise to conflict of interest because at the end of the day, it is this Parliament, where the Vice-Chairman of NRM does not sit, that will finally decide. In my opinion, with due respect to the Member, it is wrong to impute a situation of conflict of interest on the part of the vice-chairman just because he was consulted. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The information I wanted to give you and which will fall into the minister’s ears is that every time we met the President as Acholi leaders, in our company was the RDC of Gulu, Col Walter Ochola and I recall that on three separate occasions, he would always remind President Yoweri Museveni that he was the President of Uganda for one day, and it makes our work as Acholi leaders very difficult. For example, in one meeting, he told the President that, “These FDC people are struggling for state power, yet I was there for one day and I failed. There were so many calls from the international community about my programme and I told them that my programme was taking over state power.” That is Walter Ochola.

Honestly speaking, is it possible that people like Col Walter Ochola, who was president for one day, can be accommodated and we give them something? (Laughter) That is the information I wanted to give and I am happy that the minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, one becomes or acts as a President of Uganda when he takes oath for that office. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, the discomfort that I also have with this recommendation is that if we are going to look at one leader in one political party under the multi-party system in which we operate, wouldn’t it be prudent to recommend or recognise the services of people like the late Sulaiman Kiggundu who was our party leader and who did a great job? I think that we should not segregate other party members. 

Lastly, on page 7, I will be comfortable to see the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker getting what is due to them. When the Speaker of Parliament, beginning with the one I see here, retires comfortably, I will be happy. However, my discomfort is on the last recommendation. The Speaker of this Parliament has done a great job for this country. We are supporting the Executive and we are even thinking of how well they should retire but in the last recommendation, we are thinking of the head of the institution of Parliament as if he is the last resort.

My fear here is, is it because the Executive think it is this Parliament to butter the bread of the retiring Executives that they should also include the head of this institution?

Supposing on the other side, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament were not from any political party, from let us say outside this institution or the political set up, would this also be considered or it is just because they are thinking we need to link so that the Bill goes through smoothly since the Parliament has to approve and probably the NRM bigwigs are to benefit from that? I feel uncomfortable with this. We need to amend all this and be very neutral in our own recommendation but if at the end of the day we are lining NRM cadres to benefit from what we are already putting in place, I would feel very uncomfortable and I do not want to be a party to it. I thank you.

MR CUOMO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 5, on observations and recommendations, I would like some clarification. When the National Resistance Council Vice-Chairperson was in place, was he sitting on that chair you are sitting on and as who? Because I believe when you sit on that chair, you are a Speaker of Parliament. Was he there as a Vice-President and a Speaker of Parliament so that he can be accorded this request, which has been recommended by the council? That is the clarification I am trying to seek so that we clearly understand the position of the former Vice-Chairperson of the Resistance Council. Was he the Vice-President or the Speaker of Parliament? Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: I would like to inform the honourable member that when the NRM took power in 1986, the Constitution was amended by Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, which made the NRM the Government of Uganda. The Chairman of the NRM became the Head of State of Uganda, the Vice-Chairman of the NRM became the second in command to the President of Uganda. Of course, there was a Vice-President. The Vice-Chairman of NRM also became the Speaker of NRC and NRC by the same Legal Notice became the Parliament of Uganda and all the laws that were passed by the National Resistance Council are still on our statute books; they have the force of law.

By all legal standards, the Vice-Chairman presided over this House as the Speaker of the Legislative arm of government, which then was the NRC.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you honourable minister for that elaborate and clear clarification. This benefit we would want to accord the Vice-Chairman of the NRM who was the Speaker of the House, we would want to relate - are we according it to him in his capacity as the Vice-Chairman of NRM then or as the Speaker of the House then? And if your answer is the latter, what makes you not comfortable in us institutionalising benefits to all speakers from thereof?

MR MWESIGE: Well, you will recall that when the NRM came to power in the first years, we did not have a Vice-President. We had a President and Vice-Chairman of the NRM who was also the second in command of government and then we had a Prime Minister for operational purposes. Really, the Vice-Chairman of NRM was the Vice-President.

In the latter years of NRM towards 1995, the President appointed a Vice-President and he ceased performing the roles of a Vice-President and started working as Chairman of NRC.

As far as I am concerned, Article 82 clearly spells out the benefits, enjoins Parliament to prescribe the benefits of a Speaker. That is what Article 82 says and there is no doubt that a Speaker and Deputy Speaker should have benefits commensurate to their status.

My only problem is that I do not think this Bill is the right home for prescribing the benefits of the Speaker because we have the Administration of Parliament Act, which can be amended to prescribe the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. I would not think that this would be the right home; the Parliamentary Commission can study it and introduce a Bill in this House, which we would all support.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, maybe we may have to clarify this issue a little bit further and without prejudice of course, to what the sector minister will have to say about this because I too am Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

Hon. Nandala said that at least for the judiciary when the judges retire they get a handshake. I want to assure him that we have got a very serious problem in that sector also because the handshake is simply by way of a nominal pension to a judge who really retires and it is not commensurate with the job one undertakes in that particular capacity.

That sector is also in the queue for these benefits and I believe that the minister would have to come out very clearly and guide us in terms of her programme as far as these other areas are concerned. The Minister of Local Government has said for instance in the case of leadership of this Parliament; what are we actually doing about the Administration of Justice Act, what are we doing on the law on specified officers, what are we doing in terms of the Administration of Justice and so forth? I think we need a clear statement from her to guide the debate so that we do not actually keep on repeating this issue of why aren’t you doing this and that?

When this matter came up, I think the focus - I do not know what could have happened during the debate. I was not in the House then because when you look at the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, which we are repealing, you look at section 18 of that particular Act that we are repealing, it says: “Application of Sections 1, 2 and 3 - for the avoidance of doubt - Section 1: salaries, allowances and other benefits of the President; 2) salaries, allowances and other benefits of the Vice President and 3) benefits of a President ceasing to hold office as the case maybe apply only to a President or Vice-President under the 1995 Constitution.” That seems to have tied up the process of broader legalisation. However -

THE SPEAKER: And wasn’t it discriminatory?

MR RUHINDI: My view, Mr Speaker, and boldly I will have to state and agree, I do not know what you have in mind but I agree that certainly it was discriminatory. I do not know what could have been the purpose at that time. Even now that we are repealing it, there is nothing that would stop this House from making it broader and intrinsically and the lawyers in the House will certainly agree with me that it is only in criminal cases that we have to guard against retroactive or retrospective legislation but in a case like this one, for as long as we have got available resources and we can commit ourselves to that kind of objective, we can actually undertake it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney-General. There is a law we made on pension of security organisations: ISO, ESO, that type. We made it retrospective up to 1986 yet we were making the law in 2001 or 2002. This is not bad.

MR RUHINDI: In conclusion, and I really leave this to the Members of the House whether it could be possible for the minister to give us a clear programme on other legislative measures she has so that we do not kill this here, we should finalise it and we get a clear programme from the sector minister as to what she has to do in respect of the other areas. Thank you.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker, when I was responding to the observation of the committee, I informed the House that the principles for developing retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are already in advanced stages. We are asking for the Certificate of Financial Implications and we will proceed to Cabinet to look at those principles. I indicated how far we had gone - even as early as next week -(Interjections)- allow me to inform you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MRS MBAGUTA SEZI: Mr Speaker, the principles are ready for Cabinet to consider. On our part as government, we would like to see the Speaker and Deputy Speaker retirement benefits separated from the administration of Parliament and that is how far we have gone. On the past leaders -

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you very much. The clarification I am seeking - because we do not want to legislate from the pockets of the Executive, this is a separate institution of government - how much would it cost to have a law for former Speakers of Parliament? How much would it cost this country because so far there are only two, all the others are dead? How much would it cost that it should take forever to get the Certificate of Financial Implications? How much would having a law to accommodate two Speakers cost this economy compared to the price of the helicopters we are buying? (Laughter)

MRS SEZI: For us, we do not exclude the deceased Speakers, Deputy Speakers and the Chairman. So as we develop those principles, if we are guided we can pass them on to the Parliamentary Commission after we have discussed it in Cabinet but it is inclusive of even those who passed away, their spouses and their children. We want to have a law that is separate from the emoluments of the President.

On the past leaders, we already have past leaders like the former President Binaisa who is paid under the members’ remuneration and who is catered for by the Ministry of Public Service under terminal benefits. The former Vice-President, Adrisi Mustafa, is also paid by the Ministry of Public Service under the same rule. What we are undertaking is now to see that those past leaders are covered by a law that facilitates their spouses and their dependants or the children so that they are covered. I want to appeal to Parliament, Mr Speaker, to allow us to proceed because we are already at an advanced stage. 

I also want to clarify that our position is not individuals. For us, as ministry and as government we are developing these benefits for institutions. So it does not matter where the President or the Speaker will come from. We are developing a framework for the institutions and not for individuals at the moment.

As a ministry we would like to have a fallback position where we have a framework where the leaders in the Legislature and the Executive have benefits that are defined and that are known so that they are not worked on when they pass away or when they resign. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should believe the minister. There is even an assurance and I want to inform you that the formula for paying pension to the Judiciary is set. The formula is there for the Judiciary; it is very clear. Isn’t that the case? That was determined sometime back. The formula is there so they know; it is only, I think, the Parliament which is remaining. But since she is saying so, can’t you believe her for two weeks? 

MRS RUTH KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not very sure whether we are in a hurry to pass this law because nobody is retiring, dying or anything like that. 

Secondly, I just need clarification. When it comes to the person who was Vice-President and Speaker at the same time, is that person going to get both benefits or is he going to be given an opportunity to choose which one is more lucrative than the other? 

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, if we are allowed to develop these principles and bring them up in terms of policy, those hazy areas that are being requested for would be clarified for this House, for the different categories. 

What she is talking about is an individual. Once we have developed the framework for the institution then the individual would be looked at and factored in and then we shall see how we bring up the benefits for that particular individual. Once we bring the principle we shall have clarified that position and we will move on. And I am ready to bring the Speaker and Deputy Speakers’ Bill; it is a matter of time. 

5.06
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really intend to make my submission and I hope that I will benefit from the number of clarifications that are going to be made by the chairperson and the minister after the end of this submission.

But before I do that, let me just say that I hope the minister is conscious that the timing of her Bill is bad. It is bad in the light of the problems facing the pension sector as for now. She said recently that over 3,000 pensioners would not get their pension. I hope that she is going to work in earnest to ensure that they get their pension shortly; otherwise we will have people really stoning us over these matters.

The other thing that has come up, before I make my submission, is the question of the former Vice-Chairperson of the NRC/NRM who was both Vice-President and Speaker. I think that the Minister of Local Government should have helped this House by also saying that since the Vice-President post was not in existence, and there was no oath he had earlier sworn, really we should put this under the Speakers and the Deputy Speakers’ emolument because he was not sworn in as Vice-President. (Applause) The Minister of Local Government would help us.

I have also not heard from the minister - I wish the honourable minister would listen to me because I really want a response from her. She talks about an upcoming Bill that will deal with past speakers but she has not educated me on whether the Presidents’ Bill will take care of, for instance, the emoluments of past leaders and former presidents of this country who died. Are you going to pay them in arrears? They were entitled in one way or the other. I would like to be helped.

Mr Speaker, let me now revert to my submission the way I had initially planned it to be. First of all, I want to agree with the committee and say that the Bill in its proposed state, where it talks about emoluments of former presidents beginning from 1995 and the 1995 Constitution, is a Bill, a law which if enacted, has eyes. I think the Bill is guilty of attempting to rewrite our history.

Initially, we noted that this was discriminatory in the previous law, which we are now repealing. Honestly, it would be unfair for this law to be passed in this state as though Uganda began with 1995. There are distinguished sons and daughters of this country who worked well before 1995 -(Interjections)- whether you like them or not they served this country and this country benefited. 

We will do well to be reminded that President Idi Amin - all those other things that have been said about him - did his part to serve his country. Today we are selling parastatals that he put in place. If he had not worked hard we would not be talking about the Bugolobi Complex, for instance. So he made his contribution at his time and we cannot make a law, which has eyes on Idi Amin or Milton Obote, the father of this nation -(Interjections)- I know that some people develop a cold when we talk about Dr Apollo Milton Obote as the father of this nation. They develop a cold but he is the father of this nation and we will have to swallow it and stop making laws that begin with us in 1995. 

When you make a law that begins in 1995 you are just making a law for President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Aren’t we ashamed that everyday we want to rewrite our own history? When do we pick up our history and make it something that we will learn from and try to draw lessons from rather than every other time trying to pretend that we do not have a history? We have a history as this country and so I would like to agree with the committee that we should make amendments at the Committee Stage that take us back to our history and allow us to cater for all former presidents and not ignore their contribution.

I would like to comment on the issue of benefits for spouses, for children especially in regard to treatment. It is common knowledge in this country that dependants of the presidency even for cough are treated abroad and I hope the law will have a cap to it that says that as long as the treatment is available in Uganda, they will be treated in Uganda. This is because we cannot afford to fail to look at the maternity unit in Mulago hospital and then ferry every child of the president to deliver in Germany, it is unfair! The taxpayers bear the brunt of these excesses in the Presidency.

Mr Speaker, while you advise that we should trust the minister and believe in her on the issue of speakers, I do appreciate the dilemma you are in. First of all, you are the Speaker and we are speaking about the speaker’s office and then you have to help us. But will you just bear with us as we tell the minister that their pace is terrible, the way some of these issues move from Cabinet to this House is terrible! When I came in this House in 2001, I went straight to Public Service and Local Government Sessional Committee and in that committee we talked about constructing a house for the vice-president. Up to today, when we have shifted to saying, “Let us give them Shs 300 million to buy houses”, that was it. It has taken seven years of discussing and debating and wondering whether you needed an official residence, then finally we realised that we were all defeated and now we say, “Let us give them Shs 300 million”.

Because I am one person who believes that for you to qualify to be a vice-president or prime minister, you must have your own house and we should not tax the taxpayers more to buy houses for distinguished people who have a hefty salary and who can move on without a handout of a free house. But when it comes to the speakers, Mr Speaker, you will let us ask the minister to go back because we consider this is a small portion of this Bill. Let her go back and bring us that provision, a comprehensive provision. 

This is because the issues of talking about benefits for presidents, for Members of Parliament, for everybody are such a sticky thing that you do not want to do it every other day. So can the honourable minister please go back, since she has said this thing is in the final stages, and bring even the final thing? Convince us, bring it here even tomorrow and then we proceed. We will give you whatever you want and then we go out when we have done a final job. That is my position and that is my plea.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the position as reflected by the contribution, is that you should amend this law by inserting another section for the speaker and deputy speaker. Because all the same whether you bring another law or this one, it will be Parliament that will have passed the law. You may think about it, make an amendment - and this is what I have collected from the views of the Members. Perhaps you need time to think about it?

5.15
THE MINISTER OF SATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta Sezi): In developing these principals we considered the separation of powers so we developed this Bill and it has been with us. We had started developing principals for the speaker and deputy speaker. In terms of administration I want to implore that we have separate laws for the speaker and deputy speaker and the previous speakers. We should make the amendment of the presidential emoluments, which cover only the president and the vice-president so that we have separate laws for implementation. As for the past leaders I have already informed you that former president Binaisa is catered for.

5.17
THE MINSTER OF INFORMATION AND GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Given the debate and given your guidance I would like to request that you do give us time and we go back and consult and we come back next week.

THE SPEAKER: So shall I put this one off to what: Tuesday, Wednesday next week? 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: To Thursday next week.

THE SPEAKER: So this law is on hold up to Thursday next week.

MS ALASO: I hope that the Leader of Government Business has taken note also of the issues to do with former presidents and vice-presidents before 1995. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMITTEE ON ETHNIC MINORITIES IN UGANDA

5.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. Allow me present a report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities on the ethnic minority groups in Uganda.  

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, but can you summarise it since this is a 22 page report?

MS KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, I was going to do that. This report was circulated some time back because it has been on hold for the last three years.   Members had it and we had an opportunity to once again pass it over to the Members. I, therefore, request that I make an executive summary. 

THE SPEAKER: Very good. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Introduction

The Committee on Equal Opportunities under its mandate noted that while the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda recognises some communities as ethnic minority groups and while the same Constitution protects their rights, their cultural diversity and further provides for affirmative action of marginalised and special groups, no affirmative action has been taken to ensure equal treatment and participation of ethnic minorities in the national policies and development programmes. To worsen the situation, the ethnic minority groups are classified nowhere as vulnerable. 

Background

Uganda is a multi ethnic state of 65 indigenous communities as per the third schedule of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended on the 15th February 2006. Ten of these legally recognised ethnic groups are not included in other national statistics and under the same amended Constitution, six other ethnic minority tribes are not listed in the official tribes of Uganda. And out of the 65 legally recognised ethnic groups, 11 groups constitute approximately the population number of 25,000 to 100,000 people while 19 groups constitute less than 25,000 people. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the committee further received a petition from the ethnic minority groups in Uganda calling upon government to address their plight. 

Often ethnic minorities cut across because they are socially marginalised and at such economically vulnerable as well. They are confined to low status livelihood activities that guarantee low and invaluable incomes and are often the weakest members of society because sources of their vulnerability interact and reinforce each other. They are chronically poor.

It is from the above background that the committee set out to the districts of Bundibugyo, Kisoro, Busia and Kaabong as areas of study to interact with the Batwa, Ik and Bahehe ethnic minority communities. 

The committee interacted with:
    (i) The Batwa who reside in both Bundibugyo and Kisoro districts and all stakeholders;
    (ii) The Ik in Kaabong and all stakeholders; and 
    (iii) The Bahehe and their representatives in Busia District and all stakeholders.

The objectives of the study

The purpose of the Committee on Equal Opportunities field study was to:
    (i) Familiarise with the issues of the ethnic minority groups in Uganda.
    (ii) To ascertain whether the minorities are largely excluded from the social, economic, political and cultural life of the Ugandan population.
    (iii) To ascertain whether the minority groups suffer intergenerational growth discrimination from neighbouring communities and tribes and to what extent.
    (iv) To assess whether the level of marginalisation and vulnerability necessitated the urgent intervention of government.

Methodology

The committee followed the under listed method of work: 
    (i) Consultative meetings and discussions with various stakeholders and the information gathered was used to generate a series of recommendations and action plan.
    (ii) Observation and spot assessment of the extent of the marginalisation of ethnic minority groups.
    (iii) Analysis of the information gathered.
    (iv) In Kampala District, for example, the committee met and received information from various organisations as spelt out in this report. Members I seek for your indulgence but you read through them.

The committee made reference to the following documents:
    (i) The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
    (ii) The petition, which was submitted to Parliament by ethnic minority groups.
    (iii) The report by the United Organisation of the Batwa in Uganda.
    (iv) Report of the Batwa of Uganda by the African International Christian Ministry.
    (v) The Rules of Procedure of Parliament and other relevant documents that were availed to the committee.

General Findings

While meeting with the stakeholders in the three districts visited, a number of findings, observations and recommendations were arrived at as contained in this report. 

    1. Lack of a requisite legislation and regulatory framework to define who constitutes ethnic “ethnic minority groups” in Uganda.
    2. Lack of an inclusive legislative and regulatory system that not only caters for the interests of the marginalised ethnic minority groups but also provides guarantee that their legitimate interests and rights are sufficiently protected.
    3. Segregation and derogatory treatment. In the district of Bundibugyo, for example, it was reported that the Batwa were used as centres of tourist attraction.
    4. Exclusion of ethnic minorities from participating in the national and regional development and in decision making processes.
    5. To an extent the committee established that ethnic minorities’ interests are not represented and are consequently unable to participate and influence development processes.
    6.  Ethnic minorities are usually excluded from social, economic and cultural national development programmes and in most cases they are victims of main stream development policies usually not tailored to meet their specific needs.
    7. Exclusion from social services; ethnic minorities have not benefited from the large array of social programmes. Social services such as health and education are few and far between among ethnic minorities communities.
    8. Cultural and linguistic exclusion. Despite deep rooted traditions and cultural beliefs among the ethnic minorities and despite the peaceful co-existence with other communities, the committee found out that more than often, minorities are excluded on the basis of linguistic similarities.
    9. There is the danger of extinction of the minorities (by the dominant groups).
    10. Identity and recognition. There is no universally accepted definition of the ethnic minorities. For example in Uganda, distinct groups are usually classified according to linguistic similarities.
    11. Failure to recognise and define ethnic minorities is partially responsible for their discrimination, isolation and exclusion.
    12. Economic exclusion. Land alienation is a serious economic issue for the minorities as they are often victims of displacement.
    13. Many minority families are unable to meet their basic needs because they lack access to land and there are no resettlement programs. As a result, these minorities live in absolute poverty.
    14. The committee established that the overriding threat facing the minority groups is the risk of continuously being driven from their habitats and in some cases, their ancestral land, which is the source of their livelihood, heritage, subsistence system and often, their source of identity as a people.
    15. In most cases, the minorities are excluded from government programmes, as earlier said. The committee is of the view that government should find channels of economic and social transformation of ethnic minorities as in some circumstances, skills of minorities are perceived not to be marketable.
    16. There are a number of NGOs working within minority communities in addition to the interventions made by the district local governments. As a result, at times there is duplication of work and activities.
    17. Gender and minorities. While minorities face social, economic, cultural and at times political exclusion, women are doubly affected.
    18. Lastly, on the committee findings, security. Minorities face security problems for their lives and property as they are always faced with other neighbouring communities.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the committee therefore came up with the following recommendations as per the findings and observations:

1. 	That government should develop and adopt an affirmative action plan and policy for minority communities.
2. 	The government should develop and adopt a comprehensive affirmative action plan in order to transform minority communities economically, socially and politically. This will help to develop indicators, which will be used to measure their concerns.
3. 	There is urgent need to strengthen national legislation on minority rights.
4. 	The government needs to develop policies and legislation on ethnic minority groups and ratify the relevant international protocols. The government should also ratify and implement the UNESCO Convention on Promotion and Protection of Cultural Expression.
5. 	The historical habitat groups should be shared out with the minority communities. These include incomes, land and ancestral land habitants of the minority groups.
6.	 Restitution and compensation. The committee recommends that government should resolve the historical injustices created to some communities like the Batwa and Ik among others, which lost land, by restitution and compensation. The revenues and resources generated from the areas of the marginalised communities should be shared out.
7. 	The Equal Opportunities Commission should be put in place without any further delay to carry out its mandate to address issues of the marginalised.
8. 	The government should carry out a systematic mapping of ancestral habitants of different ethnic groups.
9. 	The committee strongly recommends that government should put in place a comprehensive mechanism to determine who constitutes the ethnic minority groups as some groups are not enshrined in the Constitution. There is an annexure attached to show those groups that are not enshrined in the Constitution; that is those that are not listed.

The committee wishes to conclude that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states that every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of the ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity. The findings of the Equal Opportunities Committee have been drafted into a series of recommendations that take the sentiments of the above statement into account. 

The indigenous people’s rights to occupy and own land is not only a result of traditional occupation and use but is also outlined in Article 24 of the 1998 Land Act, as amended. All ethnic groups within Uganda have a right to be recognised as existing and separate from other Ugandan tribes and ethnicities. 

Due to historical circumstances, minority groups have become assimilated into or marginalised by majority ethnic groups. It is government’s duty to ensure that these ethnic minority groups are recognised as existent entities and fully aware of the rights available to them as citizens of this country.

The general and specific observations made in this report as well as recommendations drawn from this study are a solid basis for this Parliament to re-examine equal rights legislation in order to ensure that ethnic minority groups are taken into account. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for the report and for taking us through a 22-page report within a very short time. Thank you very much.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, without prejudice about what the sector minister is going to say about this report; first I must thank the chairperson and the committee for a very good report. I think it is high time we came out openly and talked boldly about marginalised groups in our society. 

A few months ago, I was in Banjul and presenting the Uganda Human Rights Report to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights. One of the key issues I had a tough time with was the issue of the Batwa. They have done a very good report. It is a very big report and I wish at an appropriate time to share it with the committee chairperson and the committee.

Interestingly, maybe unfortunately, I do not know whether it is a question of language. When I look through some of the observations and findings in the report, I find them extremely strong that if they are true the way they sound; I would expect the chairperson and indeed the committee to have reported some of these matters to the Police for appropriate action.

When you say segregation and derogatory treatment, the district of Bundibugyo for example, it was reported that the Batwa were used as centres of tourist attraction. Sectarianism is still an offence as per the Penal Code. I want to know, Madam Chairperson, what you did in respect of such glaring alleged offences. 

Be that as it may, my reading and understanding of the Batwa society is that actually, they are the Hollywood of Uganda. In ten minutes a Mutwa will compose for you a song and that is for you and you are ten in a whole group. We do not know how to tap some of these talents. Where they are being paraded as a tourist attraction, they could facilitate our tourism industry. We should be looking at it in my view. I really do not know, but yes, such areas need empowerment.

The chairperson really needs to explain to us whether the language she is using is actually what is on the ground. Exclusion; that actually indicates a deliberate effort; is it a question of them being marginalised by history or by circumstances and as such they need empowerment or are they deliberately excluded, segregated against and so on so forth? I want the record to be very clear on this matter and I wish to share with the chairperson at an appropriate time what I know about some of these ethnic minorities. Thank you so much.

5.40
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I am also grateful for this report. This report should serve broadly as an eye-opener. Let us not run into the danger of specificity. The problem we had in the past is that an element was seen and that element was dealt with specifically. What I mean is that when you look at our Constitution, in the third schedule, Uganda Indigenous Communities, No. 24, at that time there was an urge to look at the plight of people of Rwandese origin or Banyarwanda as we call them in Uganda.

There was a law specifically barring people from referring to them. Then at the same time, they were included in the schedule as Banyarwanda. It was very strange, so strange that you find Banyarwanda in Uganda and you go to Rwanda and there are no Banyarwanda. This is because in Rwanda you have Batutsi, you have Batwa, you have Bahutu, not specifically Banyarwanda. But now in Uganda, you have Banyarwanda because there was something at the back of the minds of the people who wanted to craft that one. Now we are here again looking -(Interjection)- you can, why not?

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kyanjo for giving way, but certainly I do not thank him for having wrong perceptions about the situation in Rwanda as related to the situation in Uganda.

I come from Kabale. Kabale town is just 12 miles from Katuna border and just 30 miles to Kigali. So, we are more or less related. When you talk of Batutsi, Bahutu and Batwa in summation, they are Banyarwanda. But these are just castes just as we have dialects among the Bakiga, just as we have Bahima, Basiigi and Bahororo. You know these are just castes in Rwanda. But the summation of the three castes constitutes Banyarwanda as a people. This is the same wording that we use, nomenclature that we use in Uganda. So, to equate the Banyarwanda nomenclature in Uganda as it is used with the caste arrangement in Rwanda is just lack of understanding of the way these people are defined. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us get the point of order first.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The hon. Member for Kabale has given the information and I am just giving a point of order because from the information he is giving, he seems not to be informed. Is he in order to confuse this House that in Rwanda there are no Banyarwanda but rather Batutsi, Bahutu, Batwa and so on? Actually they are three. It is common knowledge that those are not tribes as the honourable member has said. These are just ethnic groups differentiated by colonialism because the tribe is one. They are Banyarwanda because there is no tribe called Bahutu or Batutsi in Rwanda. 

For your information, I want to tell you that some parts of Uganda were Rwanda and the colonialists took part of Rwanda and annexed it to Uganda. Therefore, some people who used to belong to Rwanda refused to be called any other tribe apart from Banyarwanda. Like for instance the Bafumbira themselves – there is no tribe called Bafumbira. It is because they just created it but they are called Banyarwanda. Mr Speaker, is he in order to confuse this House that there are three tribes in Rwanda? That there is no tribe called the Banyarwanda in Rwanda? I thank you. 

 THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know. Are you asking whether it is in order for somebody not to be informed? Is that the point? I think you wanted to pass information to the honourable member and so I cannot rule on that because I do not have the information but then I can be helped by getting the information. That was his understanding. For instance, is there a person called “the Indian”? 

MR MUTULUUZA: I beg your indulgence - 

THE SPEAKER: One is called an Indian because of a nationality. But don’t they have different tribes in India? So I think the people you are talking about are proud to be called by their nationality rather than by their minority divisions and that is why they prefer to be Banyarwanda without classifying them into Batutsi or Batwa as the case may be. I do not know but are there tribes in Rwanda? 

MR MUTULUUZA: There is one tribe and it is called Banyarwanda and therefore the Member should not confuse this august House that there are several tribes including Batutsi and Bahutu in Rwanda. No.

THE SPEAKER: Has the hon. Kyanjo finished – because he was holding the Floor? Okay, procedure.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. The document we are having is talking about a very pertinent issue and we members eagerly want to respond to this. Looking at the thickness of the document, would it not be procedurally right if members could sleep over this document, thick as it is, to internalise what is in it and we give ourselves ample time to get the details? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, did you get the document today? What do we do? We have two reports to debate; there is one of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which he presented the other day and we did not debate and we have had one from hon. Hanifa Kawooya. The best we can do is work tomorrow. We can come and start business at 10.00 a.m.  We will not finish this. Let us be fair to each other. The report has just been read and some people want to internalise it so you cannot say we can finish – you want to agree – 

MR KYANJO: I would like to agree with your guidance but cap it with the fact that I was going to talk about marginalisation in general and condemning this report for coming here and saying we are going to debate ethnicity -    

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will do that. I will give you the opportunity. What we shall do tomorrow is to only handle hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s report. It is a Public Accounts Committee report; we will dispose of it because it was presented and we never considered it. We should have considered it today but we have not and then we came in with this one. So, tomorrow we shall deal with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s report and on Tuesday when we reconvene, we will deal with hon. Hanifa Kawooya’s report. Take time, go study it and then you –

MR KYANJO: I have had an outstanding complaint all through that on Friday we come here, we normally start at 10.30; a few hours into the debate it is time for Juma prayers and that is - 

THE SPEAKER: No; by 1 O’clock I will have concluded – we even have the Imam Sebaggala so by 1 O’clock we shall conclude so that you go. But tomorrow we will handle hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s report and on Tuesday we handle your report.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you. I want to inform you and the House that my vice will handle it because I will not be around. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you.

MS ALASO: Today is a Thursday and we used to have questions for oral answer on this day. We have quite a number of questions for oral answer that have not been responded to and it is my prayer that I actually have some questions going to the Minister of Finance herself who is saying they will be handled next year. I am praying that next Thursday, we find space for questions for oral answer as is the traditional business of this House.

Secondly, I am concerned about issues to do with pension. There has been a lot lately in the media other than in this House. You hear that 3,000 pensioners will not be paid, that pension payment has been suspended, and all those things concern us. It is my request that the Minister of Public Service makes a statement on the status of pension payments, on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, on Tuesday. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m., prompt. 

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 23 October 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)
