Tuesday, 25 October 2011

Parliament met 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I begin my communication, I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from the South Sudan National Assembly who are here to follow our proceedings. (Applause) Yesterday met several ladies from the South Sudan federal and legislative assemblies. You are welcome.

Secondly, in the gallery we have headteachers from Kole District and I think they are 47 and represented by hon. Ebil Fred and hon. Aceng Ruth. You are welcome. (Applause) I think the Ministry of Education needs to do something –(Laughter)- there are only three ladies!

Hon. Members, I want to welcome you back from the recess and as you recall, we broke off on the 16th of September. I hope you have had a good rest and time to work with our voters and do some political surgery in your constituencies. 

The First Meeting of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament was devoted to two items: The State of the Nation Address and the Budget, and I want to thank you for successfully concluding those items. 

The second meeting, which is starting today, is the one which handles Bills and I expect that by the close of business today, we shall have some business for the various committees to start handling. I, therefore, urge the committees to seriously embark on the work that will be committed to them and to complete it in time in compliance with Rule 125 of our Rules of Procedure. This is in recognition that it is the committees that generate work for this House and when they do not meet, there is no business and Parliament is made redundant. 

I also want to take this opportunity to clear a matter that has been in the public domain about the Business Committee of Parliament. Hon. Members, as I have said before, there have been two businesses brought to this House by the Executive; State of the Nation Address which was accomplished and the Budget that was also accomplished. 

I have also intimated to the Executive both here in the plenary and in writing that they had not included in the State of the Nation Address the legislative programme for this Parliament. Again my comments on this are in the Hansard. 

But just for clarity, I would like to make it clear that the Business Committee sits after the chairpersons of the various committees come, having been called by the Speaker to give an update on work which is in their committees. It cannot be called in a vacuum. To this extent, the Executive is expected when they have Bills, to present one copy here for the first reading and 380 copies to the Clerk to Parliament for distribution to the Members. 

If they are loan requests, similarly, they are supposed to be brought here; one copy for the first reading and the others for distribution to the relevant committees. It is after the committees have considered the business that the Business Committee is called and all the 22 chairpersons are individually asked to give a report on the state of readiness of their committees so that priorities are set for the programme of Parliament. 

Therefore, it is not enough to merely mention what is intended to come without laying Bills for first reading or loan requests for transmission to the committees. And if the Executive has urgent matters, they are expected to inform the Speaker so that the matters are placed on the Order Paper. 

I also wanted to inform Members that during the recess, I invoked my powers under Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure and appointed the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rules and Privileges, which had been vacant before we went for recess because I considered it necessary to have a substantive chair to undertake that work. I appointed hon. Fox Odoi to chair that committee and I believe that the committee is working. 

I similarly invoked my powers under Rule 7 to appoint hon. Ssekitoleko as the substantive Vice-Chair of the Committee on Science and Technology to assist the chair so that work can go on. If you see them on the Floor of the House, they will be coming in that regard. 

I also wish, hon. Members, to report that last week, I led a very high power delegation to the Confederation of Switzerland where a number of successes for Uganda were achieved. I was elected to the Executive Committee of the Inter Parliamentary Union for a four-year term -(Applause)- to oversee the administration of the Inter Parliamentary Union, advise the council on matters of affiliation and re-affiliation of members. 

In this regard, yesterday I advised the South Sudan Assembly to put in their application and assured them that as I am going to be on the Executive Committee, I will support their application and sponsor it for them. 

I also wish to report that we did a major marketing exercise for the country in preparation for the 126th Inter Parliamentary Union meeting to take place here in March. By the time we left, over 500 of the delegates had confirmed their willingness and happiness to come to Uganda and I think that that is also another achievement. (Applause) 500 had formally written to commit themselves, but we have six months in which to get the others. 

I wish to further report that I also signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Inter Parliamentary Union to develop capacity of Members on MDGs four and five, to develop an action plan to support the implementation of the national roadmap for accelerating the reduction of maternal mortality. 

Hon. Members, I also take this opportunity to inform you that the governing council of the IPU which approved the hosting of the 126th Assembly reaffirmed this. This conference is timely because it is going to be Parliament of Uganda’s contribution to the golden jubilee celebration of the Republic of Uganda. That is why we fought hard to have it next year.

Hon. Members, I would also like to inform you that our long-standing clerk, Mr Aeneas Tandekwire, has after 26 years left the service of this institution. He started work in 1972 soon after the University of Dar-es-Salaam; he rose through the ranks and he has been in service for over 39 years, but 26 of them have been here in Parliament.

He served with the Speakers of the Fourth Parliament, the Fifth Parliament, the Sixth Parliament, the Seventh Parliament and the the Eighth Parliament. He is a seasoned administrator and a guru in parliamentary practice and procedure. We wish him well and his services will be missed. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I register our appreciation for the good work he rendered to the Civil Service, to Parliament and the nation at large. We wish him a happy and successful retirement. 

I would like to assure Parliament that the rich and wide experience of Mr Tandekwire will be tapped whenever need arises, and we are happy for his services. But I also take this opportunity to inform Members that a decision has been taken that in order to avoid a vacuum, in the absence of a substantive clerk, Mr Kaija, Deputy Clerk Administrative Services and Mr Wabwire, Deputy Clerk Legislative Services will continue in their respective offices running Parliament. A substantive clerk will then be appointed in accordance with Article 87 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I request hon. Members and staff of the Parliamentary Service to accord these two clerks the necessary cooperation. 

Hon. Members, I also wish to notify the Members of the Appointments Committee that we are scheduled to meet on the 7 November 2011 starting at 9.00 a.m. to consider various nominations. The letters are coming, but I wanted to alert you.

Hon. Members, I also wish to assure Members that I am concluding the structure of the terms of reference for the adhoc committee which we discussed and agreed on last week and the composition together with the terms of reference which will be done on Thursday this week. Thank you very much (Applause).  

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure on the last issue you have raised. I want to know, in respect to resolutions Parliament made and passed. I want to know, who is the current Leader of Government Business? Secondly, I want to know how far the Leader of Government Business has gone in the implementation of some of the resolutions of Parliament which required the Executive to take action. 

THE SPEAKER: What I can say, is that I have procedurally transmitted the resolutions to the Head of State for his action. For me I have done my work. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and we want to thank you for doing your work. But we really need to find out; in the circumstance that you do not get a response from the Head of State, do we invoke our Rules of Procedure? What do we do? 

There are a number of changes; for example, we are aware that three ministers who are also under trial by the anti-corruption court on CHOGM, stepped aside and some of them handed over their offices; for example, hon. John Nasasira, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Rukutana, among others.  We read in the media that hon. Nasasira handed over office to hon. Bahati David, whom I expected to be seated in front here –(Interjections)– it is just prudent that we operate with our Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. 

This House took a decision on a number of ministers and they stepped a side – which is really good. But we need to be officially informed about that so that we can operate within our Rules of Procedure.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament, who has served for a long period, to continue talking about the Rules of Procedure without quoting them? And is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament, who knows about the Constitution, to ignore Article 28 of the Constitution of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: What does it say?

MS KABAALE: Article 28 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states –(Interjections)– I am going to read. Article 28 is about the right to a fair hearing. If you want me to read, I will read part “28 (c)”: “A person will be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his or her defence”. Thank you very much. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I stand here –(Interjections)– the Speaker has allowed me to speak. I am standing here basing my argument on Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure which I am going to read.

“Procedure in case not provided for and precedents. In case of any doubt and for any question or procedure not provided for in these Rules; the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practices of the House, the Constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth Parliaments in so far as they may be applicable in Uganda’s Parliament.”

Last week, Parliament - and the whole country - were totally concerned about how Members of Parliament were debating. Parliament was recalled because of a subject that was very important to the people of Uganda; oil. In the spirit of the country and development of our nation -(Interjections)- this Parliament made a resolution. I have in the case -(Interjections)- on what rule? 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Order! 

MS RUSOKE BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Member of Parliament to doubt your potential after you have ably communicated and you are awaiting response or action? Thank you. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.(Interjections) I was saying – Members, allow me to speak -

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR OKOT-OGONG: We are speaking for this country -(Interjections)- and I am aware -(Applause)- I have a report here - Hon. Members drinking and wining with the suspects, and I am going to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Order! order! 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, my conscience is very clear. (Interjections) I can be demonised, but I am doing the right thing -(Interjections)- and the nation will absolve me.  I want to lay on Table that our nation -(Interjections)- has been defiled. I have a picture of Members who confide -(Interjections)- and made the decision and they were drinking, wining and they are Muchomo MPs. I lay it on Table for the nation.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what is that? Let me see it. Order Members. Hon. Members, I do not recollect hearing the resolution that no one will associate with a person whose name has been mentioned in something -(Applause)- We have a canteen in this building for all the Members of this House. Are you suggesting that some Members will be expelled from going to the canteen, which is our facility here? Do not overstretch things. (Applause)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Hon. Members, let us listen to each other. That is when we are going to make meaningful debate. But if we are going to continue shouting at each other, I do not think we are going to move on well. (Interjections) Well, I happen to have grown up in a civilised family not like Tinkasiimire’s. So, he can do whatever he wants to do. 

But Madam Speaker, what I want to bring out is a procedural point. You have ruled that this Parliament took a position and passed resolutions, and those resolutions – you have taken the step to inform the Executive and you are waiting for a reply from the Executive. Is it procedurally right to continue discussing a matter which we pronounced ourselves on as you have taken the decision?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have informed you that I have transmitted the resolutions to the Head of State and I am waiting for his action. (Applause) I have also informed you that on Thursday, I am setting up the adhoc committee to start work. (Applause) Let us wait for the adhoc committee to do its work.

3.10
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to take this opportunity to welcome you back from recess. I wish to thank and congratulate the honourable Speaker upon that achievement; the great achievement for the people of Uganda in the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Madam Speaker, we want to congratulate you and thank you for having marketed our county in the whole world. We saw you do it and we shall continue giving you a hand to ensure that our country is lifted high. 

I am not standing here to oppose the decision you are about to make -(Interjections)- and the information –(Interjections)- I am not opposing the information the Speaker has given to the House that the adhoc committee is to be named on Thursday. The issue at hand is Resolution 9(c) which stated that Government ministers named: Hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Sam Kutesa, and hon. Onek, step aside from the office with immediate effect pending investigation - findings from the ad hoc Committee of Parliament.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. You have clearly guided this House and according to our Rule 73, your decision upon any matter cannot be open to appeal and cannot be received by the House except upon a substantive motion made after a notice.

Madam Speaker, you already indicated that you submitted all the resolutions to the Head of State and that you are waiting for a feedback. So, is it in order for the Chief Whip of the Opposition to attempt to open debate on an issue you have guided upon and decided?

MS WINIFRED KIZZA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for realising that the pre-current speaker does not have the intentions of moving us to where we want to be. I was just reading a Resolution of Parliament. So, how can someone say I went out of order by reading such a resolution? This is a resolution passed by this Parliament and it says - we unanimously passed this resolution and I just want us to remind ourselves of what we passed as a House. 

This resolution was passed on Tuesday, 11 October 2011 – this is not Wikleaks; it is a resolution passed by you, Members of Parliament, and please allow me to read it. It says thus: “Government ministers named: hon. Amam Mbabazi, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Hillary Onek, during the debate, step aside from their offices with immediate effect pending investigations…”

Madam Speaker, this is the issue at hand. I imagine that it would be appropriate, even when the committee is going to be named, that committee should know that it is going to work on a clean ground that is free of intimidation, fear and one that is levelled for them to work with an atmosphere that is not like the one I am beginning to witness. That is what the Members are asking for, Madam Speaker. I doubt whether this really calls for the Executive to first ask the honourable ministers to put themselves aside as the committee begins the work. That is what I thought.

MR ALEPER: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of guidance. When the debate about the oil sector started, there were mixed feelings. The debate went on with a lot of emotions. In the circumstances, I would like to implore my colleagues to give respect to any Member who stands to say something. I am saying this because when the people of Uganda voted, they knew that we are people who can listen to each other while in Parliament. But it is amazing that colleagues are just rising with nobody listening to them. If we continue like this, what shall we walk out with?

Madam Speaker, you guided this House very well, that we will be setting up the adhoc committee. You also guided that you have done your part by sending a report to the Head of State and that in the meantime, you are waiting for a response. In the circumstances, what more debate is this House doing after your wise guidance? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, on the 10th October, we delayed the sitting for about an hour. The reason was that the motion was directed at the Executive. I suspended the House twice to ensure the Executive was here for this reason. So, as far as we are concerned, we have done our work. We have given them the resolutions. Let us wait for what the Head of State is going to say. Let us set up that adhoc committee on Thursday and start work. Next item, please. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

PUBLIC MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (MR JAMES BABA): Madam Speaker, may I too congratulate you on the recent accomplishment on the delegation you led last week. I would also like to welcome the honourable members from recess. Lastly, may I congratulate and thank Mr Aeneas Tandekwire for a very distinguished service to this House for over three decades?

Madam Speaker, I now beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Public Management Bill, 2011,” be read for the first time. The Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implication, which I now lay on Table. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is hereby committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back within 45 days.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had caught your eye, but I thought that the minister was still proceeding on the matter on the Floor. I only got to realise that he stood to move on another matter.

Anyway, why I am rising is that – I have been in this Parliament and this Parliament is governed by the Constitution and - with your permission –(Interjection)- will you protect me from the loser, hon. Kamba, who is imposing himself in this House, and allow me proceed with my submission. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this House is governed by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Furthermore, this House is governed by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. This House was properly constituted. We passed resolutions as Parliament. (Interjection) We see communication dated – 

THE SPEAKER: What is that you are reading? Honourable Member, are you seeking to re-open debate on that matter?

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am seeking to draw your attention to the fact that one of the resolutions had a time limit of seven days. 

THE SPEAKER: Which one is that?

MR SSEKIKUBO: This is resolution No.5 and it reads: “An account of all revenues so far received by Government from the oil industry be made to Parliament within seven days showing how much has been received, from who, for which areas and where it is kept, and in particular the following revenues…”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I draw your attention to item No.6. The Minister of Finance is coming to report on that. It is on the Order Paper. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. But the point I really wanted to come up with is that we have our rules. If a matter is rejected by this House –(Interjections)- We should move by the rules to reverse this. 

THE SPEAKER: I have put the matter on the Order Paper today. It is No.6. The Minister of Finance is coming to report here. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

BANK OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT 2009/2010

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to lay on Table the Bank of Uganda Annual Report for the year 2009/2010. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that report is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BANK OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT 2010/2011

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on table the Bank of Uganda Annual Report for the year 2010/2011. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The report is remitted to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2001 TOGETHER WITH THE OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on Table reports on Uganda Development Bank financial statements together with the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following years:

Year ending 31st December 2001. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2002. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2003. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2004. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2005. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2006. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2007. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2008. (Applause)
Year ended 31st December 2009. (Applause)
And year ended 31st December 2010. (Applause)

I also beg to lay a Bank of Uganda Annual Report for the year 2009/2010 - Bank of Uganda accounts for year ended 30 June 2000.

Bank of Uganda accounts for year ended 30 June 2001 together with a report and opinion therein by the Auditor-General.

Bank of Uganda financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2002. 

Bank of Uganda accounts for year ended 30 June 2003.

I beg Madam Speaker and hon. Members, to lay on Table accounts for Bank of Uganda together with the reports and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2004; year ended 30 June 2005; year ended 30 June 2006; year ended 30 June 2007; and year ended 30 June 2008; and this is the Bank of Uganda financial statement for that period. 

Finally, a Bank of Uganda financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2009. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Members, he has tabled the reports of the Auditor General and they are remitted to a relevant committee for perusal, and they should urgently report to Parliament.

PETITION SEEKING FOR THE INTERVETION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVIEW THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY CITY BUS SERVICES REGULATIONS 2011 AND INQUIRE INTO THE VALIDITY OR LEGALITY OF THE AGREEMENT APPOINTING EASY BUS AS AGENT TO OPERATE THE BUS SERVICES IN KAMPALA METROPOLITAN AREA BY THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY FORMERLY KAMPALA CITY COUNCIL

3.33
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): May it please you Madam Speaker and hon. Members of this august House, to receive a petition from the leaders of the districts of Mukono and Wakiso, seeking for the intervention of Parliament to review the Traffic and Road Safety City Bus Services Regulations 2011, and inquire into the validity/legality of the concession awarded by Kampala Capital City Authority to Pioneer Easy Bus Limited to provide passenger bus transportation services within the greater Kampala metropolitan area under a public and private partnership. This petition is signed by 82 councillors, chairmen, mayors and MPs of the districts of Wakiso and Mukono. I wish to read the prayers contained therein. 

1.	The humble petitioners do pray that this honourable House intervenes in the matter as laid down in the title, and review or cause the review of the Traffic and Road Safety City Bus Service Regulations 2011.

2.	Probe into the validity/ legality of the concession agreement between Kampala Capital City Authority and Pioneer Easy Bus Limited.

3.	Deal with any matter in connection therewith. We do so pray.

THE SPEAKER: The petition will be sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for urgent perusal and they will come back to us.

MS NAMBOOZE: I beg to lay the petition on Table.

RESPONSE BY THE HON. MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON TRANSFER OF CAPITAL GAINS TAX AND NON-TAX REVENUE TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNT AS A FOLLOW-UP ON PRAYER NUMBER FIVE OF THE RESOLUTIONS ON THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO PASSED BY PARLIAMENT ON THE 11TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2011.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, a while ago you informed this august House that you communicated to the Chief Executive the resolutions of Parliament. We now have the Minister of Finance responding to one of them. I am seeking guidance from you, I know there are colleagues who have rehearsed in making noise and they have come here today to distinguish themselves in heckling.

THE SPEAKER: No, concentrate on your submission.

MS NYAKECHO: Hon. Ssemujju Nganda should be aware of our Rules of Procedure by now and I will read for him. “Contents of speeches: It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or make personal illusions.” Is it in order, therefore, Madam Speaker, for the hon. Member to say that the Members of this august are making a lot of noise? I request that he withdraws and apologises.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I think it is not necessary to preface your submission. Just go to the point without insulting colleagues.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I want to apologise to those who have been shouting. I am seeking guidance because you have informed this House and the Minister for the Presidency stood here to tell this House that there will be a response and asked this House to wait. The Minister of Finance wants to respond to one of them now. I am wondering -(Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank hon. Member for giving way. I had an opportunity where you rightfully sent some of us to London and our report is coming very soon. 

I would want to quickly inform the honourable members and particularly the honourable colleague on the Floor that what we are debating is not just an issue of Parliament; it is an issue that has not just captured the entire citizens of this country’s attention, but even those who wish us good beyond these boarders.

What we decided here last week has been highly respected and taken very seriously by those who are not seated in this House, but are part of this country. Madam Speaker, what I see here is that Members have decided to do what is known to most of us, and that is contempt of Parliament. The resolution of Parliament was very clear; that the ministers step aside. It is my concern, when I see hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Hillary Onek –(Interruption)

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, we are all Members of this Parliament. Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to say that honourable Members of Parliament are in contempt of a Parliament in which we seat? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the resolutions were many. Some were ad infinitum, some were for 30 days, and one was for seven days. She is responding to the one of seven days. How could she have reported when the House was away? The House resumed today and she has come to report. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, hon. Karuhanga, for the information. The guidance I was seeking from you, Madam Speaker, is that one of the resolutions was for immediate effect, which meant that today, we would not have hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi seated on the front bench. The response is for the resolution of the seven days; what happens to the resolution requiring hon. Amama Mbabazi to immediately step aside? 

THE SPEAKER: I have already ruled on that. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Below, I detail the information on the accounting treatment of funds received in relation to capital gains tax and non-tax revenues. 

Oil capital gains tax revenue 

On 4 August 2010, $121,477,500 capital gains tax was credited to the URA Tax Collection Account No. 003410158400000 which is a URA holding account in the Bank of Uganda, from Heritage Oil and Gases Limited. 

On 7 April 2011, $313,447,500 Capital Gains Tax was credited to the same URA Tax Collection Account No. 003410158400000 from which the Bank of Uganda debited $20 for administration costs from Tullow Oil Plc. 

On 11 April 2011, $40,500,000 stamp duty was credited to the same URA tax collection account No. 003410158400000 from which the Bank of Uganda debited $20 for administration costs from Tullow Oil Plc. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the total accumulated capital gains tax plus stamp duty credited to the URA Tax Holding Account was $449,424,960 as of 11 April 2011. On 6 July 2011, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development instructed the Bank of Uganda to transfer a total of $444,424,960 from the URA’s tax collection Account No.003410158400000 to the Government of Uganda Oil Revenue US Dollar Account No.003300328400001. The entries were effected on the following day, 7 July 2011. This left a nil balance on the URA tax collection account and a credit balance of $449,424,960 on the oil revenue account, which is a dedicated account for oil receipts. 

Madam Speaker, putting these funds in a dedicated Government Consolidated Fund Account was and is aimed at providing transparency and reporting of revenues arising out of oil transactions. On 21 July 2011, these funds amounting to $449,424,960 were converted into shillings amounting to Shs 1,161,736,556,120. These funds were credited to the Shilling Government Consolidated Account No.003300328000004 which is part of the Government Consolidated Fund Account. I wish to lay on Table the bank statements and payment advices for the capital gains tax. 

I now move to the oil related non-tax revenues. I would just like to point out at this time that all these revenues are not related to production of oil, which has not started. All these revenues are related to transactions of April. All non-tax revenue from oil operations is collected by the line ministry in line with the financial regulations of Uganda. These include signature bonuses, training fees, annual surface rental, data purchase and permit fees. 

On collection, the funds are credited to the Ministry Of Energy and Mineral Development Account No.17016800001 in the Bank of Uganda. These are subsequently transferred to the Government Consolidated Fund Account in the Bank of Uganda that transfers the non-oil tax revenue transfers to the Consolidated Fund Account since 2006/2007 and are as follows:

Financial year 2006/2007 – $429,225; financial year 2007/2008 - $798,684; financial year 2008/2009 - $568,645; financial year 2009/2010 - $833, 250.5; and financial year 2010/ 2011 - $611,076. This totals to $3,240,881.4
 
Given the limited time, we have provided information from financial year 2006/2007 to financial year 2010/2011. However, all related non-tax revenue collections commenced in financial year 2001/2002.

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and that of the Members of Parliament that we be given time to finalise and submit the remaining information for the financial years 2001/2002 up to 2005/2006. This exercise is ongoing and involves reconciliation of documents between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Bank of Uganda and the Treasury. The details relating to the breakdown of each block and each oil company will also be provided at the same time as the above information.  

I wish to lay on Table the Bank of Uganda statements and payment advices for non-tax revenues for the period, financial year 2006/2007 to financial year 2010/2011.  (Applause)

Royalties

No royalty from oil has been collected as oil production has not commenced. Royalties only relate to the actual production of oil. 

State Participation

Similarly, for State participation, I wish to report that while the Production Sharing Agreement (PSA) provides for State participation between 15 percent and 20 percent, the participation starts upon commencement of production. This means the government has not yet started participating. (Applause)

Penalties for Late Payment

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, penalties are for payment when oil production commences. Therefore, there were no late payments with regard to non-tax revenue.  

Capital Gains Tax

Regarding capital gains tax, the taxes were paid within the statutory period. 

Expenditure

In the current budget, financial year 2011/2012, Government allocated Shs 828 billion for the financing of the hydro power infrastructure at Karuma. This Parliament duly appropriated this amount. I wish to reiterate that the financing of Karuma Hydro Power Plant will ultimately use all the capital gains tax collected among other financing sources. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Members, this was part of our resolution. I don’t know whether it meets our requirements? 

3.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have difficulties in appreciating the minister’s statement and I will give reasons as to why, if she could have the courtesy of listening to me. 

Looking at the minister’s statement on page 1, paragraph five, on the 6 July 2001, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development instructed Bank of Uganda to transfer a total of $449 million from URA Tax Collection Account to Government of Uganda Oil Revenue US Dollar Account. The entries were effected the following day leaving a nil balance on the tax collection account and a credit balance of $449 million on the oil revenue account, which is a dedicated account for oil proceeds. 

She goes ahead under paragraph eight and says that on the 21st of July, these funds amounting to $449 million were converted. I would like the minister to clarify between the 7th and 21st July - the 14 days – on which account was this money?

Two, why did it take 14 days to have the money converted from dollars to Uganda shillings on the Consolidated Account? 

Three, as we were debating this motion - actually a week and a half ago - we were provided with two statements; the first statement was the one on the 13th of October written on No.1; the second statement we were provided with was actually No.3; now there is a third one which she is just bringing to our attention now. Where has it come from? 

We were provided –(Interjections)- hon. Byabagambi, these are not roads; these are statements and stop shouting at us, please. We are seeking clarification. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, really –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: You see, Madam Speaker, I feel offended to have hon. Byabagambi shouting really, and every Member, including the honourable member who talked to us before, cited a rule where we should respect each other. Shouting at each other doesn’t help anybody’s case; it doesn’t. Let us behave like there hasn’t been a rehearsal. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, when I asked hon. Katuntu which one he was referring to because he had mentioned “one” and “three” and he had not mentioned the second one, and yet he had ably answered the second one, he then all of a sudden went wild, and imputed ill motives about me that I was shouting at him. Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to impute ill motives that I was shouting at him when I am a gentleman? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister wanted clarification; explain the documents you are talking about. 

MR KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Certainly, our rules provide that if you are seeking clarification or information, you seek the eye of the Speaker, then I take leave of the Floor and you take it. Those are our rules, which I thought he would do, but he chose to do it the way he did. Anyway, we now have a document which we don’t know where it has come from, and I will seek clarification from the minister.

Secondly, when you look at Resolution No.5, it does say, “An account of all revenues so far received by Government from the oil industry, be made available to Parliament...” But when you look at the response of the minister, it doesn’t give this account. What I am looking at is, for example, on page 2, paragraph (b) (iii) where she says, “Financial year 2006/2007 - $429,000”. From who, from which company, which block and in respect of what revenue?

She goes to the second year 2007/2008 and she also gives a block figure. She goes on until she reaches financial year 2010/2011. There are details - in fact, all the details are now missing other than the block figures. I am also aware that actually, there had been some farming in and out of other companies before Heritage and Tullow. Was there any capital gains tax paid by this company?

All these details were the ones that were envisaged in resolution number five. As it is, it does not answer the requirements of the resolution. We ask this in good faith, why doesn’t the minister give the details? Why are you hiding the details? What we want is, which company paid these revenues and for what? Instead, you have just said in financial year 2008/2009, we received this much. Is that accounting for the revenues received? So, my view is that this response falls short of what is desired by resolution number five.

4.05
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The people of Aruu County, who I represent, asked me to make the following two queries. In the minister’s statement on page two –(Interjections)- if the Woman MP of Kanungu would bother to read, I am quoting the minister. “Given the limited time, we have provided information for fiscal year 2006-2011. However, oil-related non-tax revenue collection commenced in 2001.” Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I seek your indulgence that we be given time to finalise and submit the remaining information for the period of 2001-2006. 

“This exercise is ongoing and requires reconciliation of documents between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Bank of Uganda and the Treasury. The details relating to the breakdown of each block and each oil company will also be provided at the same time the above information is given.” 

In fact, the information you are pledging to give in future is what we want now. (Laughter) That is the essence of the request by Members of Parliament under resolution five.

In the years 2006-2011, you raised 8.4 billion Uganda shillings. You know when these figures are brought in dollars, some of us who grew up in the village may not understand. The Minister of Finance has just presented to Parliament that from 2006 to 2011, they raised Shs 8.4 billion. Just a quick reminder is that our national budget for the whole financial year last year was Shs 9 trillion and we are talking of raising money in amounts, which tend to cover more than 30 percent. I am just quoting the first quarter.

I think this Parliament, whether you are from either side of the House; NRM or FDC, should stand up and insist that a comprehensive statement be brought to this House from 2001 when they started collecting oil revenue because coincidentally, the period between 2001 and 2006 are all years of elections. We had elections in 2001 and 2006, and today the minister is coming before Parliament and saying we still do not have the other information and we need time to go to the kitchen and prepare and bring it to you.

I think this Parliament should stand up to the occasion and say we need the comprehensive report before we can even attempt to start analysing the recent ones, which you seem to have at your finger tips.

Secondly, you are saying these revenues include signature bonuses, training fees, annual surface rentals, data purchase and permit fees. We want to know specifically how much you got from each of the items mentioned because the complaint before this Parliament is that ministers were cracking deals with those oil companies. That is the general complaint. We are complaining that those who were negotiating on behalf of the Uganda Government have not been doing so genuinely. So, we want to know how much money we have got from signature bonuses so that we can compare with the revenues other countries have been getting from such bonuses. So, we should not have even graced this report by debating what you have presented to Parliament. 

But that notwithstanding, lastly, you know I studied Economics at University at a Bachelors level. I  never used to understand - I did not like Economics so much when they talked about inflation and say demand, supply and then there are so many kinds of curves; king curve, oligopoly and all those kinds of things. (Laughter)

But today, I understand. After this statement, I now understand that inflation is too much money chasing few products. You have got money from oil revenue; non-tax revenue, money you did not plan for, and then you pump this money into the economy. So, we have so much money in circulation, not accompanied by production, and chasing the same products. So, the moment Aruu County has Shs 10 billion, even the price of an egg, which is Shs 100 would go to Shs 1,000.

So, instead of running all around the world getting consultants of inflation, this is the immediate cause of inflation. You got oil revenue and bought helicopters. You got oil revenue and pumped it into campaigns. So, we have so much money in circulation that the purchasing power of the Ugandan shilling has really gone down. I am now happy that during the last Independence Day celebrations, my voters were selling one sack of beans and buying four kilos of sugar or meat. I told them that explains how good the current Government you voted for is.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, I think you wanted clarification and a comprehensive statement from the minister. The minister -

MR ODONGA OTTO: Oh! sorry. You know I have been away and I am getting excited. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is this. Can the minister tell us when - and I am talking as the chairperson of Government Assurances Committee - can the minister tell us when she is bringing a comprehensive report on all the finances relating to oil from the year 2001 to date? Thank you.

4.12
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to recognise the efforts of the minister in bringing something on the Table because it is an effort made. I really want to thank you. I also want you to take our advice.

This statement is not equivalent to the demand as it was laid down; the expectations of the voters who brought us here. There is a lot of guess work left in this statement – we are left to complete the puzzle. And if we allow this to happen, it can be completed in different ways. 

For instance, I would like to know details when the minister states on page three that, “The figures of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development of $4,415,029 which was reported to Parliament is based on a ten-year period, whereas the ones in this letter is based on the last five years. Hon. Members, through you, Madam Speaker, Bank of Uganda is still working to retrieve the data for the earlier years.”

Madam Speaker, I just imagine that the minister is also in a dilemma – she is the finance minister, but does not have the full information. When she says, “It is yet to be retrieved” - from where? As Ugandans are watching us to bring Government to account for every penny, we cannot afford to leave such a statement to go unchallenged. I would like –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, hon. Anywar, for giving way. This is the information I want to give: This statement is half-empty. (Laughter) Sorry, half-full. It is dated October 19 2010 and yet today is October 2011. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Nambooze, you should not mislead the House. There is probably an error on the date, but the heading is: “Motion for the Resolution of Parliament on regularisation of the Oil Sector: Explanation of Transfers of Oil Capital Gains Tax and Non-tax Revenue to the Government Consolidated Account” which we re-did recently. On the date being wrong, do not take me back to last year because I was not the Speaker then. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, colleague. Madam Speaker, I was advancing this point that even the minister, as she presents this statement, does not have the full information. I suggest that she goes back and consults her team and collects all the necessary information and brings it to Parliament so that we can appreciate her position. The second issue is on page two – 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We must appreciate that the minister has responded. We must also appreciate that financial statements when scrutinized may require additional information. I suggest that this information be submitted to the relevant committee where the minister can respond to many issues that the Members may wish to have clarified. This way, she will be allowed time to come with her technical officers to explain in detail if they so wish. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it was the House that demanded for this accountability and so, I think there is no problem in it going to the committee. However, she must first bring it to the House.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second point I would like to advance is on page two of the Minister’s statement. There is reference made, as per our demand, on the training fees –(Hon. Kakooza rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kakooza speaks, I would like to let you know that women Members of the Sudan National Assembly are here. I had mentioned about them earlier. You are welcome. We also have students from Kampala Secondary School, represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give this information to the House and it could help us in our debate. Last year, when we were passing the Income Tax Law, Section 89, and I want to read it verbatim: “This Parliament did authorise all the revenue collections to Bank of Uganda” – and I think the statements given by the Minister of Finance came from Bank of Uganda. If this information is brought by the Ministry of Finance and as you have suggested, Madam Speaker, that on Thursday there will be an ad hoc committee, this information is very necessary to take to the committee, they peruse and I can read the law verbatim: 

“Collection of revenue of the oil: Except in the case of company profit oil, all other revenues... that is capital gains,... prescribed under Section 89A(d) shall be payable to the Uganda Revenue Authority for transfer to the Bank of Uganda for crediting to a petroleum fund of Government.”

I do believe that the Minister of Finance has laid this information which needs much scrutiny by the committee which we are going to establish on Thursday. Thank you very much.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, you guided this House very well because what the minister is presenting to us is a response to our demands. Unfortunately, my brother is seated in such a warm corner that this has skipped his mind, but we are here to find out all the details as needed. 

I was advancing on the issue of training fees that is presented in this document. I happened to go with a team of Members of Parliament to visit the oil wells and we were privileged to have visited one of the only Petroleum Colleges in Kigumba. I am wondering and I will want the details from the minister, whether, the training fees she is talking about - what is the latitude, who are the beneficiaries and could it be part of the Petroleum College which we saw?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Anywar, you are now introducing new matters. We had a full debate here; you had the opportunity to talk about the training college; we are talking about Resolution 5 and the demands we made which were specific.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, as we want more details, for the benefit of this country, because the hope of Ugandans and all of us actually, is in this same money. I am raising this concern because we need to get it right. Probably when she puts it here, it leaves many of us to speculate about what is entailed. Can the minister give us the details of what is involved in the money for training? And all of us are interested because one of the biggest problems we have as a country is that the highest cost we have now is education. So, any effort to unveil and give details of whether this oil money can relieve Ugandan parents, I inclusive, is of great concern. Therefore, it could be for all of us to benefit. What does this training include? If the details are given to us, I would think, we would appreciate the effort.

I want to conclude by saying that the details here are not enough for us to form an opinion, which can move the country forward especially in our demands in Resolution 5. We would still want to advance that the minister furnishes this institution with more details, even if a committee will be put in place. For the purpose of us moving together, we would want to see the minister giving us all these details. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.26
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Finance and I request that hon. Adolf Mwesige gives her a bit of space, she is a bit squeezed and yet we want her to pay attention. (Laughter)

May I request that in future when we get such documents from Government, we have them certified so that it becomes official and nobody brings documents which are not authentic.

Secondly, this country has been on IFMS - this is a computer accounting package and I would like to find out from the minister –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek a point of procedure. The revenues have been explained here by the statement from the minister and I appreciate the enthusiasm of Members to debate these issues and seek clarification and in essence, the kind of work they are doing needs a more detailed kind of scrutiny. 

In these circumstances, if Members are to get all this information that they do require, the most appropriate procedure and how we have been doing it, is to forward this to the relevant committee, which can scrutinise this statement and all this other information that they do require from the minister. You ruled, Madam Speaker, in that favour -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker and with the greatest of respect to the minister, hon. Banyenzaki, this matter has been on this Floor and this is not the first or second time, and you made a very wise ruling, I must say. By reviving a matter where you have made a ruling, is the hon. Banyenzaki in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I do not know why hon. Banyenzaki is pre-empting my work. I want the Members to ask for clarification, the minister to make a commitment and we shall take this to the committee. Let us hear the clarification. Let them raise the issues they want clarified.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, most obliged.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague for giving way. Hon. Ekanya has just mentioned that next time, such a report coming to Parliament should be certified so that it reflects the true picture of those very documents, but he is on record and it is in the Hansard that the documents which were being laid here about a week ago - somebody raised it that they are not certified and hon. Ekanya stood up that it does not matter and that they must be accepted in Parliament –(Interjections)- [MR EKANYA: “Clarification.”] – since when did it come to your mind that documents presented here should be certified? (Applause)

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Byabagambi who is my friend. I used very simple English equivalent of UPE. I said, “Next time, documents coming from Government should be certified.” This is really elementary English of UPE standards. (Laughter) I would like to find out from the Minister for Finance why - you are aware that for the last 10 years, we have been operating an IFMS system for our accounts –(Interjections)- Integrated Financial Management System, which is a computerised system used to generate data and accounts records. But you bring a statement to this House today saying that Bank of Uganda is still looking for data and yet to the best of our knowledge, we procured the World Bank loan and these programmes spread in all the districts of Uganda. The accounts of Bank of Uganda are in a computer system and are automatically generated. Why should it take more than even one day to generate? Why should you bring a statement to the House saying that Bank of Uganda needs more time to generate information and yet the information is available by just pressing a button?
           
Secondly, if you look at the statement, Madam Speaker, what the minister has presented here are manual receipts. This one ended! For example, the one of Bank of Uganda; Uganda Administration; Treasury General Account receipts; Standard Chartered Bank Draft – these are manual receipts whose usage by Bank of Uganda and the Government of Uganda stopped some time back. This is 2008 - if you even look at the next one 2007, even the next one 2008, manual receipts regarding international fund transfers stopped. So, who gave you this information, Madam Minister? –(Interjections)- you are really a good minister! 

I really want to urge our Minister for Finance who is well respected, to go back and ask the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the PS to give her the information based on the current system in use, which has –[MR KATUNTU: “Information.”]    

THE SPEAKER: Are you through?

MR KATUNTU: I thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya for yielding the Floor. Upon closer scrutiny of these manual receipts, you will note that it is the same handwriting and the same pen from 2006 to 2007 and they look like they could have even been written the same day -(Interjections)- just look at them. It is not about arguing and that is why we need thorough scrutiny. When you look at them now, they are all in the same handwriting and same pen years after. It looks like somebody sat down one day and started writing these manual receipts –

THE SPEAKER: Please close, Shadow Finance Minister.

MR EKANYA: I have very high regard – 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members!

MR EKANYA: I have very high regard for the Minister for Finance and that is why we really need you to clarify to avoid suspicion because what hon. Katuntu said – I did not want to say it because if you go further, you look at the serial number of the receipts; there is serial number 00623 and another one 00624. The clarification I would like to find out from you is whether the international money transfer system that Bank of Uganda was using was based on only oil and from only this company for the whole year? 

One –(Interjections)- excuse me – this receipt was not used for any transaction, but was for only oil –(Interjections) – Members, you can go to it.

Secondly, hon. Minister, EFT - and hon. Colleague, kindly give me your ears. If today you go to a bank and you demand for an EFT even for money to move within your account; for example, you go to Barclays Bank and you want to move money to Standard Chartered Bank, they will ask you whether you want it instantly or 24 hours. 

So, we want to know from you hon. Minister about the movement of money under the instruction of the Accountant-General from the URA account to the consolidated account. Was the instruction based on an instant, one month or two weeks, because if you just hold foreign currency – hon. Katuntu - just for even 24 hours and you benefit from the exchange rate fluctuation even by 0.01, you are benefitting from $440 billion, which is a lot of money. 

What has been happening - and I can tell you if some people do not know - is that some companies which repatriate their profit - which is allowed under the laws of Uganda - get this money at a cheaper rate and repatriate it while still collecting dollars in the market; and so for you, you think our money is quite there and safe and that is why we are very much concerned, Madam Minister for Finance. Can you clarify? If you look at this receipt – this one No.1, the money was on 7th but it moved on 21st. The second one was on 11th April and the next one was on 7th July. So, kindly, Madam Minister for Finance, go back and bring for us certified documents and clarify those issues, and bring information accounts for all the 10 years.

I hope that the Minister for Finance should also clarify to us our Balance of Payments for exports for four months –(Interjections)- no, this is related. We want to know why you converted this foreign money, which was paid to us in US dollars into Uganda shillings aware that the money is not needed immediately for use because you have, for example, talked about the Karuma Dam construction. I have a lot of information about Karuma. I thank you. 

4.40
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make comments and debate the minister’s statement. Credit should sometimes be given where it is due and it is not really necessary to always express scepticism. 

In the year 2010, I was on this Floor presenting a report on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill then. And those amendments were solely on oil. It was to enable Government collect tax on the pre-production phase activities. We set up a lot of resistance here; some colleagues argued that it was not necessary to pass the amendments because we needed bigger and more comprehensive laws for the sector. However, our justification then was that we need to have a legal framework to empower the taxation agencies to collect revenue. I think we should applaud Government that this money was collected, first and foremost. 

My constituents were calling – they had an impression from the different radio stations and media reports that actually, this money was stolen. The confirmation that I get now and which my constituents will be informed about is that this money is there and it will finance Karuma. (Applause) That is very positive and we should not gloss over these issues and always express scepticism. 

Madam Speaker, the concerns of hon. Otto and others about detailed accounts; this Parliament empowered the Office of the Auditor-General to do its work. When we were making the budget here, I was a strong advocate of that budget. I even went against the Minister of Finance - we have empowered the Office of the Auditor-General to have auditors for every sector and to carry out a forensic audit. They can even tell us whether these receipts were faulty or not. 

We should not be sceptical on everything. The money is there. It was collected and the legal framework was put in place. We should now be asking what other legislative instruments we have to put in place to facilitate our Government to get as much money as possible. 

On this note, I would like to invite Government to think about the idea we proposed here. I do not know whether there was a ruling against it. Currently, when you assess a tax and you have a dispute over it, you pay 30 percent of the tax in dispute and then take your case to the tribunal. We had proposed then, with strong support from the Shadow Minister of Finance, who is a good member of the committee, that oil companies should be treated differently so that if you have a tax in dispute, you should first pay 100 percent before you go to your tribunal for arbitration. This is because the money involved is too big to be kept through that time of arbitration. Government could consider this avenue. But I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement and for assuring us that the money is there and not lost as hereto reported. 

4.45
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleague, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, to thank the honourable Minister of Finance for the statements she has given us on the revenues. We now know clearly what was collected from the capital gains tax and what was collected from the non-tax revenues within the oil sector.

I have two comments. One is on the royalties and the other is on the expenditure. Regarding the royalties, the honourable minister explains that there is no royalty from oil because oil production has not commenced. While I appreciate this and while I understand that we need to wait until our oil is produced, it is important that Government puts in place a policy on royalties from oil, so that the local authorities where these resources are found do not lose out. Whatever revenue is coming out now is because of this asset found in those specific areas. So, let us have the appropriate policy as soon as possible regarding royalties and how they should be shared between the various levels of Local Government and the owners of the land. 

Regarding the expenditure, the Minister of Finance has pointed out that Shs 828 billion was budgeted for Karuma. I understand this and I thank her for this information. But I find it a bit inadequate. Resolution No.6, which we passed, required that the minister also gives us a statement of expenditure by the companies, in terms of the initial investment costs in the sector, and we also gave a timeframe of the same period – seven days. 

Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister whether she could expand on this statement she has given us. Just saying that we have Shs 228 billion for this year’s budget does not give what we want. We would like to balance the full picture of revenue and expenditure and the costs as they have accrued until now. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you gave a partial statement. You have heard the queries of the Members and you admitted in your statement that it is incomplete. When are you going to complete it, because you are still bound by our resolution?

4.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the time given by this august House for our response and we appreciate all the questions and comments from the honourable members, because once you know a question, you can go and look for the answer. 

I would like to answer some of the queries that have been put forward. Someone asked: Where do the accounts come from that I have laid on Table? The accounts come from the Central Bank of Uganda. 

We were asked: Where has this money been? The money had been at all times within the Central Bank of Uganda. We were asked: What capital gains tax was paid on other forms of interest. Capital gains tax is payable on proven quantifiable resources, not just expression of interest. 

The trading fees – some honourable members asked about the training fees. This information will be provided by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, and will be provided to the committee and to Parliament. 

The integrated financial management system; first of all, this is a financial management system; it is not a banking system. The time required to retrieve the supporting documentation, that is, the deposit slips and the swift messages from the correspondent banks which is part of the details this august House is asking for – these are not provided to the integrated financial management system. Our failure to provide hard copies as has been discussed here would have been queried by this House.

On the question as to signing of the same date and same signature; the deposit slips are dated on the banking date, but copies were verified and stamped by the chief accountant. These include the swift messages. The handwriting is of a cashier in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, who has since retired.

Madam Speaker, the message that has come from the honourable members is that they wish to get more supporting documentation. This we pledge to do. Given the volume of documents we retrieve; it is now a period of ten years. We want all these statements to be accompanied by copies of the deposit slips. And the swift messages to confirm receipt of the same.

As the august House has noted, this is a very important source of revenue to Uganda and must be given the corresponding respect vis-à-vis the supporting documentation. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we ask for one month to submit the documents for 2001/02 to 2005/06; both supporting documents and accounting statements. I also wish to apologise for the typing mistake that appeared. I think I was so busy trying to make sure that the numbers were all correct that it skipped our attention. Our apologies, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, certain points were raised; she has answered them. The rest will come when she brings another statement. [Hon. Members: “Karuma”] Karuma? Karuma was protected in this House. That is why I have told her that she has made a partial statement and she should make a comprehensive one and return to this House. That is what I have told her. 

4.52
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the submission by the minister, there are print-outs from Bank of Uganda. I remember when the President was giving a press conference, the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority, Madam Kagina, I think misled the President and said the money was credited on the 7th of July and transferred to the Consolidated Fund on the same day. But we have got a print-out from Bank of Uganda indicating that the money was credited on 7th July, 2011 and transferred to the Consolidated Fund on the 21st of July. So, Kagina misled the President and here the minister has not even answered where the money was, for two weeks. There is a print-out here from Bank of Uganda. (Interjections) Can you clarify to the House where the money was for two weeks? Because this is a print-out from Bank of Uganda with even a stamp?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that document was laid here by Hon. Elijah Okupa during that debate. So, it should form part of our terms of reference for the ad hoc committee, even these other small things we had talked about.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the question I would like to ask the minister; the companies that bid to do Karuma are international firms. The ones that have been shortlisted are a consortium of international firms. The transaction on construction of Karuma is in United States dollars. This money has been protected to be used for paying these companies. The question to the Minister of Finance is: You receive money in United States dollars to use for an activity in United States dollars, why did you convert it into Ugandan shillings madam minister? So that we make losses? 

THE SPEAKER: This matter will also be part of our terms of reference, for the committee to investigate how the money was in the bank for 14 days and did not reach the relevant accounts, and the issue of conversion.

I would like to announce the presence of the children of Irimba Primary School from Budyebo County in Nakasongola represented by hon. Muruli Mukasa. You are welcome. (Applause)

I think that ends that matter. You will come back and report to us, but these matters are going to the committee. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The supplementary information requested for will be submitted to Parliament or to the audit committee for this purpose. I would just like to reiterate that the money went into Bank of Uganda and has been in Bank of Uganda as you can see from the documents laid on Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION TO SAVE AND RETAIN BILLS THAT WERE TABLED IN THE EIGHTH PARLIAMENT

4.56
MAJ. SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, 

“WHEREAS Article 77 of the Constitution establishes the Parliament of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution provides for the functions of Parliament among others to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AWARE THAT Article 91(1) provides that the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT Article 77(3) of the Constitution provides that the term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after a general election;
 
NOTING THAT Article 96 provides that Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiration of its term as prescribed by Article 77 of the Constitution -

FURTHER NOTING that the Eighth Parliament was resolved in May 2011 upon the expiration of its term of five years and a new Parliament was sworn in, in the month of May 2011;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT the Rules of Procedure are silent on what happens to Bills in Parliament when Parliament is dissolved. The practice has been that when Parliament is dissolved, all Bills pending elapse. The reasons advanced are that the views of the previous Parliament should not bind the successor Parliament; and that Members of Parliament are representatives of the people and if the electorate has lost trust in those representatives, the successor Parliament should not carry on with the views of those Members; 

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that much as there are strong arguments advanced for the lapse of Parliament, Bills upon dissolution of Parliament, these arguments should be applied with exception to Bills before Parliament. Before a Bill is tabled in Parliament for first reading, it has been subjected to so many processes including consultations. A lot of time and funds are committed to these Bills at these stages, let alone the cost of publishing and gazetting these Bills.

We also know that the practice in most Parliaments is to save the Bills of the previous Parliament. It is for these reasons that this Parliament should find it fit and proper that the Bills of the Eighth Parliament are saved and considered by the relevant committees.

NOW THEREFORE this motion is moved;

THAT this Parliament saves and retains the following Bills presented in the Eighth Parliament - 

1.   The Anti-money Laundering Bill, 2009
2. 	The Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007
3. 	The Regional Governments Bill, 2009
4. 	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007
5. 	The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008
6. 	The Implementation of the Government Assurances Bill, 2008
7. 	The Industrial Property Bill, 2009
8. 	The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009
9. 	The Chattels Securities Bill, 2009
10. 	The Companies Bill, 2009
11. 	The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009
12. 	The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010
13. 	The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010
14. 	The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010
15. 	The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010
16. 	The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010
17. 	The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006
18. 	The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010
19. 	The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010
20. 	The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010
21. 	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010
22. 	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011
23. 	The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2011 and
24. 	The Agentisation of the Meteorology Department Bill, 2011.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I rise to second the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded, but you should now justify.

5.04
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker – (Interruptions)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I had no intentions of interrupting the seconder of the motion, much as the mover has also not yet justified it, but I rise to express my fears. In the first place, majority of the Members of the Ninth Parliament are actually new. This is the first time I am seeing – now we are moving to save these Bills at a time when we do not know up to what extent the Eighth Parliament prevailed over them.

My idea would be that having recognised that these very important Bills need further consideration, the current ministers - those that are holding the various portfolios connected to these Bills, ought to lay them for the first reading so that the Ninth Parliament is kept abreast with the trends. I am saying this because if we are now saving them, it means we have to consider the amount of work that had been done by the Eighth Parliament, yet most Members do not know what happened to these Bills in the previous Parliament. That is why I would like to suggest that the Bills be presented afresh for the first reading for consideration by the current Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are jumping the gun. Let us first accept that we need the Bills. We shall send them back to the respective committees. The reports that were done by the Eighth Parliament will be working documents for the committees of this Parliament.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, the most important phrase in this motion is the word “saving.” This means we are retrieving them or allowing to be in the present what should have been in the past. The reasons are clearly given. Like my colleague has just said, most of the Members in this Parliament are new and I plead guilty to that fact; but that does not mean that we do not appreciate the dynamics that are inherent in this motion.

What we are saying is, since a lot of resources have been wasted on these Bills – some of these Bills are very important. Actually, most of them are just commonsense Bills that their importance cannot be over-emphasised. Therefore, I think it would save this country a lot of resources and time to save these Bills and allow this Ninth Parliament to continue with them. That is why I rose to second and support the motion. I also call upon Members to look at it carefully. Thank you.

5.06
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, except that I have just noticed that some of the Bills have been left out. For example, there was a Bill on the Private Health Institutions drafted in 2006, which I moved, together with hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi. I would like to suggest that we add that Bill onto the list. 

However, I also would like to suggest that we could provide space for any other Bills that might have been left out. I am saying this because the mover of the motion was able to add a Bill she had forgotten. This will save us from leaving out some of the important Bills. But also, you know that this has been the practice. Towards the end of the term of Parliament, we have always been moving motions to save such Bills, though in the last Parliament we never did that.

The motion is self-explanatory. I support the idea of having these Bills brought back for debate. But we shall need your guidance, Madam Speaker, on those Bills that were almost being tabled for the second reading after the committees had already handled them. I would think that it would be wise for the respective committees of the Ninth Parliament to just start on them afresh. For example, I have a Bill in the Committee of Social Services regarding HIV/AIDS. A committee report on this Bill had been written and was ready to be tabled on the Floor. Despite that, I still think it would be better for us to start on it afresh; there are a lot of issues that might require a review by the current committee. So, instead of just debating a report in which we have not participated – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable members; that is not what the motion is saying. The first thing is to establish whether we still need these Bills or not. If the answer is yes, then we send them back to the respective committees of the Ninth Parliament. If there are reports that were written by the Eighth Parliament, they will be used as working documents. The Bills will then come back for a second reading. And lastly, your Bill is already listed as number 15.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I want to say is that the process of having Bills brought into this House is through readings. When they are read for the first time, they are committed to the respective committees, and so we will not have them until the respective committees report back. So, how is this House looking at these Bills? Are they with us here? They can only get onto the Floor of Parliament through a reading with the chair committing them to the respective committees. Now that we do not have them, they cannot be re-introduced into this House through a motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, I have done research in the Lok Sabha of India and in the House of Assembly of Canada, and established that this is the procedure they use. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, why I am seeking this clarification – the Parliament of Uganda has had a practice and the practice has been that at the end of every session, if there is still more business in the committee, then the House saves those Bills for the next session. That has been our practice. And now it seems we are moving away from that practice. That is what we have been doing; that business is saved before the session ends such that the next sessional committees handle those Bills because they have been saved. Now, there was nothing that was saved and yet we are saying, we are going to save. What are we saving?

5.12
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. We are cognisant that no term of Parliament is an annex of the former term. We recognise that a lot of funds and energy were put in coming up with these Bills. We are even cognisant that the terms of office may elapse, but the spirit in which the Bills are brought and the need that is there for them to come up still lives. For that matter, I would like to second that we adopt this and then go on. We can get the other details that the honourable members require later through a process of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: And let me also clarify, hon. Members that if you look at our Rules of Procedure, there is no provision that says that work will lapse with a session. From rule 1 up to the end, it is not there. 

5.13
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These Bills we are talking about were read for the first time in the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. It was not the Parliament of Kenya. It was not a parliament of some foreign country, but it was the Parliament of this country. It was a Parliament elected by the people of this country. It is the same country; it is the same Parliament in which you are seated. Even the buildings are the same. Even the seats are the same and even the Rules of Procedure. 

So, I strongly support this very important motion. (Applause) I believe, if in the past our parliaments made some mistakes, this is the right time to correct these mistakes by way of an important precedent. 

Madam Speaker, I support the motion, but I need your guidance. There are two approaches to introducing Bills in Parliament. One, through Cabinet and the other is through ordinary Members of Parliament. 

I wish to remind you that sometime back, in the Eighth Parliament, we passed some resolutions on introduction of Private Members’ Bills. I moved one of those resolutions, which were passed. I had moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. The Bill was entitled, “The Persons With Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2011”. That resolution authorised the Clerk to Parliament to recall publication of the Bill. I understood the Clerk to Parliament withdrew the publication. That resolution also requested the Minister of Finance to provide a certificate of financial implication. 

So, Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that, if you do not mind, you save my resolution as well - the resolution which authorised this Parliament to introduce that Bill, “The Persons With Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2011”. 

I beg to amend the motion. Thank you so much. (Applause) 	

5.17
PROF. BALTAZAR ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion and the spirit in which this motion has been moved. When you look at the list of these Bills, they are very important. In particular, I am looking at the Regional Governments Bill, which should have been passed in 2006. We are still waiting – it should come as soon as possible and we finish. 

Some of these Bills, I am sure, had already been considered by the committees then, and there are reports. I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture. There was a report already made on the Plant Variety Protection Bill. What we would do is to have the Members of the committee look through the report, internalise it, and come and present it. We would then reduce the time that we would have used in consultation, and so on and so forth.

What I would also propose is that apart from having these Bills which are very important, the Executive, through the Leader of Government Business – there are other matters which should also come up very fast - The Biotechnology Bill is long overdue, and we need it because there are many scientific discoveries which are lying idle in our research institutions, but because there is no enabling law, these scientific discoveries cannot be released. 

Therefore, I urge the Executive to be pro-active and bring these matters so that we conclude on them, and so that we also get on record that we have done a lot of business, because when you look at these Bills, someone might think that the last Parliament did not do as expected yet there could have been other circumstances that led them not to conclude these Bills. 

I thank you.

5.19
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you. Previous speakers have talked positively about this motion and I wish to support and say that this motion be carried. However, I have a special request. One time, you told us that we shall have time to revise our rules and I wish that at that time, we could amend our rules to the effect that Bills passed by previous Parliaments should be carried over to the incoming Parliament so that we do not have to labour to discuss such motions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I indicated in my communication, I have appointed the chair of the rules committee. He has heard. I hope you can address it in your committee.

5.20
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that our country has gone through several situations that have been very critical. Some of them socio-economic and political have continued unabated because there were no enabling laws. So, the coming into force of Bills such as these ones will really help us to contain the situation that we live in. Therefore, I fully support the motion. Thank you.

5.21
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to support the motion because we are aware there are very many concerns that are still important that come from the Eighth Parliament. May I propose, therefore, that we go into the details of what is not included in these 23 Bills we have here that could have been left and are not on the list, and we also include them in this search.

Secondly, I hope I am not being diversionary, but I remember in some of our committee reports in the Eighth Parliament, there were some committees that were give a mandate to produce some reports and those reports never came to this Floor of Parliament. 

As we think of the Bills that are pending, I think it would be important for us, which committees did not present very important reports.

I will give an example; I now sit on the committee of PAC. I have discovered that when we are talking about the markets of Nakasero and Kisekka in connection with Mr Basajjabalaba, it is very much similar to what we did on the Committee on Local Government and Public Accounts in the Eighth Parliament, and I do not remember us debating that report.

There is a lot of work carried forward that remained undone, and now a new committee is looking at that work and yet the information is sitting and sleeping in an old committee that did not present a report on this Floor of Parliament.  I think we need to look at the work of those committees, which never came to this Floor of Parliament, and also carry it forward.

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right and I am proposing that after we have finished with the Bills, we shall have a session on the reports and we call the chairpersons of the committees.

5.23
MR BARNARBAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): I rise to support the motion, because when I entered the Ninth Parliament, I swore to uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Article 178(13) says that regional governments would commence on 1 July 2006, implying that this law about regional governments is overdue and, therefore, anybody standing up to oppose should be reminded of their constitutional obligations.
 
There are also other very important Bills like the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. We have seen corrupt people taking money to forex bureaus to clean it. They are taking the money to money lending companies to clean it because we do not have this Anti-Money Laundering law.
 
There are also other important laws like the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. I hear this notion that we are going to lose the donor money. This law is overdue; the spirit of my ancestors tells me that they lived without these things and, therefore, I am enjoining them in this Ninth Parliament to say that I will pass this Bill and when it comes on the Floor of the House, I will support it and vote for it.
 
5.25
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I am rising to support this motion of retaining the 23 Bills as they have been read out. There is that common saying that time is money. We have also been talking about the concept of productivity all along, and here we are with an olive branch thrown to us.

The Eighth Parliament, in terms of productivity, was able to pass 22 Bills into laws and it was mentioned that that was very low. Here we are with an opportunity, with work in progress of about 24 Bills. By the end of the five years of this Parliament, I believe we should able to double what the previous Parliament was able to do.
 
5.27
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I also rise to thank the honourable member for presenting this motion, and I would also like to support the motion. I just want to seek clarification, because I remember in the last Parliament, there was a Government White Paper on the visitation committee reports that analysed the problems in our universities, especially Makerere. 

This White Paper was presented to the social services committee which analysed it. It involved a lot of work. I remember the report was actually completed by the committee, but it was not given the opportunity to present it on the Floor.

The reason I am raising this is because, according to the Bills we are going to look at, and the good reports that had been done by the previous Parliament, is it possible that such a report can also be worked on by the current committee so that it can be presented on the Floor? 

It is intended to come up with a number of policies in the education sector. I feel we should not miss this report.
 
THE SPEAKER: I want to assure the Members that after we have finished with the Bills, we shall deal with reports. We shall sit with the chairpersons and then bring the motion.

DR EPETAIT: The common position is that these Bills are extremely necessary. We were only trying to see whether the process would not be in breach of our rules, but you have guided us. What I am seeking clarification on is Bill No.17. To the best of my recollection, the Pharmacy profession and the Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006, the Committee on Social Services handled it; a report was made before Parliament.

The report said that the Bill be referred back to the ministry for re-drafting because when we looked at the whole Bill, it actually fell short of the intended objective of regulating the pharmacy profession and pharmacy practice.

A committee made a report referring the Bill back for re-drafting to the Ministry, but now, if we saved it as it is, I do not know whether we would not be doing double work, because the committee handled it.
 
Secondly, there is that Bill No.2 and The Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2009.

My colleague from Mbarara District had already alluded to the fact that some committees actually never delivered.

That particular Bill was handed over to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and I made a lot of complaints here saying that it could be better handled by the Social Services Committee. We closed Parliament without –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Dr Epetait, for yielding the Floor. I just want to inform this House that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has finalised. We interacted with all stakeholders. Members were facilitated to go to Kenya - where it is working - and to Tanzania and South Africa. So, the report is ready and I pray that if we are given first priority to present, we are more than set. 

THE SPEAKER: But you need to bring other Members on board. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you. We had repeated complaints here about the slow pace with which the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was moving on that Bill, but I am happy with the information that some work was done. Otherwise, I was about to suggest that we push it to the social services committee for faster delivery of results. That is what I am trying to seek clarification on. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, I think let us deal with the response and then we shall again go and check on the status, because, like for the Companies Act, it was on the third reading. 

5.32
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really wish to state that we needed to have passed this Bill yesterday and there are other Bills which are not here, but I want to beg for your indulgence and this House, that it is very important that we do justice. Our Rule 125(1) is very clear and it says, “Subject to the Constitution, no Bill introduced in the House shall be with the committee for consideration for more than 45 days.” How are we going to consider these Bills? Have they stayed less than 45 days or have they stayed more than 45 days?

Madam Speaker, during the debate of the Bills, the Commonwealth practice, the IPU practice and this country’s practice, involves consultation, and the Members of Parliament interact with the people whose lives the Bills will affect. With all due respect, 60 percent of those Members who participated in consultation and comprehended and wrote a report, lost the elections. We now have about 60 percent new Members. 

The Bills under our rules and the Budget Act, requires to be brought with a certificate of financial implication. It is not just a formality that the Bills come here with that certificate. 

Within this Parliament, we passed an Act for regulating the pensions sector. As we speak, that Act has not been put in operation and yet there is a deadline. So, I was approached by the leadership of the National Social Security Fund that if we do not put the law in practice - and the next Bill which is coming is on liberalisation - we shall have our entire fund in the social security sector wiped out because they are supposed to compete on the open market.  

Madam Speaker, I thank God that you are very senior in this country. You remember we allowed privatisation and liberalisation of the telecom sector before the regulatory regime in place. We allowed the MTN to come in place, we allowed Celtel to come in place and by the time the Uganda Telecom started operations, its market had been taken over and we are likely to face the same with the NSSF because of this House passing Bills when Government brings certificates of operationalisation or financial implication and at the end of the day, there is no money to operationalise and to set up the necessary institutions. And, therefore, there is nothing bad. The Minister of Finance, under your leadership, can bring all these Bills for first reading with comprehensive certificates of financial implication so that we know how much the country is going to enact for each Bill, and how much it will cost to operationalise. I want to beg of you, Madam Speaker, that we stick to the rules; we stick to the Constitution and do justice for this country. I beg to move. 	 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we are breaching the Constitution in any way, really. Our Rules of Procedure are silent on what happens to Bills when the Parliament ends. Hon. Odoi is here, you can address him on the 45 days, and those are the standing rules at the moment. Let us deal with the principles. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. Since we recognise that our Rules of Procedure are silent and some of the Bills that we seek to save are private Members’ Bills; and the difficulty encountered by private Members in obtaining certificates of financial implication, it is prudent that we save these Bills and this motion be allowed, and I will invite you, Madam Speaker, to rely on Rule 7 which gives you the discretion to apply in cases of this nature, and I beg Members to support this motion.

5.38
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. On behalf of the people of Obongi whom I represent, I second the motion. The principle is good; the question of continuity from yesterday to today urges us to save and retain the Bills because some of them have become even more relevant to solve the current problems of Uganda. My only problem is how to put the honourable Members of Parliament who have joined the Ninth Parliament, together with those who were there in the Eighth Parliament, on the same page. I expected that the mover of the motion should have helped us – (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, hon. Colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that many of us who were not in this Parliament are very sagacious in the things of this world. It is not as if we were not keenly following events which were going on in this Parliament. So, to suggest that Bills which were brought in this Parliament were unknown to most of the people who have just come to this Parliament is fallacious, to say the least. 

I further want to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that there is absolutely no fear whatsoever that some of the Bills may have expired, because when you talk about saving a situation, you save the Bills from where they are. So, unless I am persuaded that most of these or all of these Bills had already expired beyond the 45 days, I think we saved them from where they are and, therefore, we are perfectly in order and I am buttressed in this argument that we are actually setting a precedent in this House because there is no provision - nothing like this had happened in this Parliament and you have correctly directed this House by referring and relying on Rule 7, which says that in the event of silence on this matter, you shall refer to Rule 7. Thank you very much. 

MR FUNGAROO. Thank you for the information, hon. Colleague, but it would have been good if you had paid more attention to seeing the spirit in which I was making my statement. For example, if I could ask you: At what stage was Bill No.1, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, here at the time we closed the Eighth Parliament? Can you tell the Members here? 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Fungaroo.

MR FUNGAROO:  My request, Madam Speaker, is that just like hon. Amuriat did here when he laid a number of reports - these are things which people are aware of, but why did he bring them to our attention? It is for the good of my colleagues with some of whom we are already discussing some of these Bills, because there are some new developments that have taken place, especially on money laundering and financial fraud using new techniques. 

I expected the mover of the motion to summarise in tabular form, indicating where we were, with detailed information, so that we can either go to the library and read on our own, or go to the researchers, and when we go to the committee stage, we do not go with blank minds, we go with information, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, I support the spirit of the motion and I request that more information be provided to us for the sake of the new Members, and new problems to be added as we move to debate these issues.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want us to be prisoners of a vacuum. That is why we are moving this motion. Yes, Attorney-General - 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi):   Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for this very good and important innovation. (Applause) I work in the ministry in which the First Parliamentary Counsel drafts and prepares these Bills and I know the challenges that we have been going through. Hon. Katuntu knows very well that, of course, the procedure he is re-echoing is the practice we have been following, and we know the challenges we have had with it. At one point, I had a problem with a ministry failing to produce Shs 1.1 million to have a reprint to bring here a Bill for first reading on re-introduction. So, to me this is a very good method and we should support it and have it reproduced in our Rules of Procedure for future purposes.

When we talk about financial implications, hon. Ekanya, I agree with you. But let us remember that these ministries which are in charge of these Bills did not also lapse. (Laughter) You can say that Parliament lapsed, but did these ministries responsible for these Bills lapse?  They are sitting in their offices; certainly they must have taken care of them in their budgetary measures. So, we cannot actually use budgetary implications as an excuse at this stage.
 
However, I wish to add that Rule 125 - about the 45 days that requires to bring a report for debate here, and that has been cited here. In my opinion, we do not read it wholly because it says, should you not be in a position to comply within 45 days, come here and explain to us and then we can grant an extension. Should you come back again and we feel that an extension is not justified, we proceed with the Bill.  So, Madam Speaker, I would wish for Members to follow that rule to the letter.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is support for this motion and I would, therefore, want to put the question that this motion be approved by this House.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall come back and indicate the stages at which it is and send them to the relevant committees. We are not going to be prisoners of a vacuum; no way. (Mr Alex Ndeezi rose_) Hon. Ndeezi, I just wanted to assure you that your Bill is No.20; it is there.
 
Hon. Members, I would like to thank you for today’s work. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 October, 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 

