Thursday, 29 October, 2009

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I wonder why many of you are not here. I do not know what has happened. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers of Nansana Primary School. You are most welcome to Parliament. Thank you for dressing well in your uniform. (Applause)
 
2.46
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of serious concern. For a long time, there has been public outcry, particularly in Kampala District where Police invade crowded areas and arrest people, especially youth; and predominantly the male youth, on account of being idle and disorderly. Often, they are on the way moving from work or home. Many are sent to Nsangi Police Station, no matter where they are arrested from. Some are arrested in Nakulabye, Lungujja, Kasubi and other parts of Kampala. But they are taken to Nsangi Police and held in Nsangi Prison. 

While there, they are forced to do hard labour; they are hired out to individual farms, and are subjected to harsh conditions, including torture and starvation. For the record, Samson Kalibala was arrested in Kitonzi, just a few hundred yards from my home, and taken to Old Kampala Police Station, from where he was transferred to Nsangi. From Nsangi, he would be taken to people’s farms in Kabasanda, and to do construction work. It is not clear whose farms these are. He was held for two months until I intervened and he was let out on a cash bail of Shs 200,000. 

Peter Katongole was also arrested in Nakulabye, went through the same process; found himself in Nsangi, and on Kabasanda farms. Unfortunately, Peter succumbed to the harsh conditions and died. When he was arrested, he was a normal healthy young man; but after the arrest, he succumbed to the prison conditions and died. I will lay on Table a photograph of Peter Katongole Brown, who was arrested in Nakulabye and died in Nsangi Prison. He was dumped in a nearby hospital which buried him in the local grounds. With my intervention, we exhumed Peter Brown’s body and took it to his home in Gayaza where we buried him. 

Isaac Mukiibi is another one; Rajab Kakooza Ibrahim; Stephen Luswata; and many others, whom I cannot mention for lack of time. They have suffered in the same spot. 

A spot check right now at Nsangi Police and the nearby prisons will show you a list of many young people who have been ferried from different areas of Kampala and the rest of the country, and taken for hard labour on people’s farms, though not convicted or sentenced. 

Mr Speaker, I have several questions for Government; is it normal for a suspect to be held outside the area of jurisdiction from where he is suspected to have committed the crime? In this case, you are suspected to have committed a crime in Nakulabye and you go through your area of jurisdiction of Old Kampala; the holding prison is Luzira, but the prisoners are taken to Nsangi. Is that normal; isn’t it an abuse of suspects’ rights to be subjected to hard labour before court convicts him and sentences him to hard labour?

Where does money from the hired labour of these suspects go; who will account for that money? Is the crime of being idle and disorderly a designated source of revenue for this country? Income is derived from the hard labour offered by these youths. Incidentally, I have not seen an old man, old woman or even a girl being arrested for this crime. It is only the young men that are arrested. 

Incidentally, for high profile personalities, they are given non-cash bail. People like hon. Lukwago, Kiiza Besigye, Hussein Kyanjo, Beatrice Anywar and myself, we are all out on non-cash bail. But the vulnerable - the poorer section of our country - pay between Shs 150,000 to Shs 2 million in bail. The question I want to ask – 

THE SPEAKER: I had given you five minutes, now you are going to ten.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, these are very important things and they affect your constituency 

THE SPEAKER: Blackmail. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: As I wind up; why is justice selectively administered? They make it so expensive for the poor and much cheaper for those who are better off. 

Finally, what is Government going to do to ensure equity in administration of justice, and to correct these harsh conditions in the prisons. Incidentally, the young people arrested for being idle and disorderly are usually people that have no jobs; because everybody knows about the high unemployment rate in this country. These are normally youth who did not go to school because their parents could not pay their fees. So, these are victims of the system, and they are now paying for the very system that creates them. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a photograph of Mr Katongole Brown, who died in Police custody in Nsangi Police and I wish to mention that this photograph was taken only a few days before he was arrested for being idle and disorderly. As you can see, he was a very healthy young man at a wedding. 

2.55
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to say something before the Chief Whip comes in. With respect to violation of human rights, a number of my people in the Democratic Party have been subjected to a lot of torture. A case in point is the LC V councillor for Rakai, representing Kyotera Town Council, Mr Henry Mulindwa. He was arrested after the riots we had recently; was charged in Masaka Court and got court bail. Some people came from Kampala and arrested him. We did not know were he was taken until we traced him and found out that he was in Kireka.

I spoke to the Government Chief Whip about this issue. I spoke to the Police authorities and I even visited him in Kireka. I asked them why he was brought all the way from Rakai to Kireka, a place we all know is not established by law. As far as we know, Kireka Detention Camp is not established by law. 

It took three weeks; it was only last week on Tuesday - in fact, I was not here, I was with hon. Migereko in Ghana - I was told that this guy was discharged without any charges or even being brought before court. 

So, the question of violation of human rights, especially as far as the Members of the Opposition are concerned is worsening. We in the Opposition would like to cooperate with Government, but you cannot cooperate with a regime that tortures and intimidates the citizens. I have always said it here that we took up arms and found the previous regimes because of violation of human rights. It was not about the economy or anything else. Other than putting people on the fence, let the Government Chief Whip explain why the LC V councillor was detained for three weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have no doubt about the account you have given, but the subject we are dealing with, which I thought you were going to contribute to was arresting people alleged to be idle and disorderly in Kampala. But this is a different topic from the one of the hon. Kamya.

3.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Beti Kamya has raised very serious issues. Ordinarily, it would be better that a question is formally put to the minister responsible so that a fairly comprehensive answer is provided.
 
What I can say for now is that we have taken note of all the allegations that you have raised. We shall provide all this information to the Minister for Internal Affairs who is going to study them so that an appropriate response can be provided. We consider the issues you have raised to be very serious and –(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. Shortly after the 2006 elections, the President of this country directed that all arrests on account of one being idle and disorderly should be stopped forthwith. And in a series of meetings we had with the Inspector General of Government, he reiterated the same issue, that it is the Government’s position not to arrest anybody on charges of being idle and disorderly. 

I have heard the President on several occasions, in public forums, making statements to the effect that these offences were brought here by the colonialists and so on, and that they have no place in modern Uganda. 

So, the clarification I want to seek is, as the minister is going out to pass on information to the relevant minister, I wonder whether the Government Chief Whip is aware of this –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, is this offence in our statute books? Is it in the Penal Code? If it is in the Penal Code, don’t you think that the proper course to take is to move an amendment to delete this law from the statute books?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember I raised the same matter on this floor; it also came up in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and the Attorney General assured us that they were going to work it out to enforce the directive of the President. I know the directive of the President would not override the existing law. The law as it stands now, the Penal Code provides for the offence of being idle and disorderly. But a directive from the President would be implemented by way of an amendment, and there was an amendment from the Attorney-General. 

What I want to know, before the Government Chief Whip relays the information to the relevant Government – this is one way of killing the matter; taking this information to the minister might see it die from there with no action being taken. So, can’t the minister commit himself on the Floor of this House that they are going to enforce that directive as made by the President, by working it out with the Attorney-General to amend the law? What is so difficult for the minister to commit himself?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members; what I can do personally as a lawyer, is to advise you to be proactive by bringing a motion or a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Penal Code Act. That will be easy for you; Government having declared it. We will amend it rather than depend on administrative orders.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, you have guided us appropriately. I would like to say that we shall work with hon. Lukwago to make sure that this is realised. As for presenting this information to the Minister of Internal Affairs, I would like to say that I will do that. I will try to follow it up so that this matter can be studied, and if anybody is found –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: While you are consulting, people’s rights and lives are in danger. So, we need it to be handled expeditiously with a timeline.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, this matter requires carrying out thorough investigations. I would like to give an undertaking that the Minister of Internal Affairs will, next week on Thursday, provide appropriate response to the allegations and issues that have been raised. I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I think when it comes to issues of violation of human rights, we should all have a united position by joining hands together. I am wondering whether my sister, Beti Kamya, and hon. Mathius Nsubuga have tried to use the institution of Uganda Human Rights Commission, because I am aware that it helps. 

And I am saying this because much as you have a right to raise these issues here, and maybe allowed by the Speaker, you, in addition to exercising this political responsibility as a Member of Parliament - I am wondering whether waiting for a week or two for a minister to come and make a statement here – have you tried to use the constitutional body called Uganda Human Rights Commission?

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister for that important question, and thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to gladly inform you that some of us have, not once and not twice, worked closely with Uganda Human Rights Commission. In public, they will tell you they are going to work on the matter; but honestly, in private, they will say their hands are tied. That is why you find these anomalies along the way, but with them doing little. That is why we normally bring these issues to this House. 

Otherwise, we have worked with all those bodies, including NGOs, in regard to this matter, together with international bodies like Human Rights Watch, some of whose officers are common guests to this Parliament. So, I would like to assure the hon. Minister that despite the fact that we have done all that, no positive results have been seen. And as we talk, that is taking place. 

Anyway, one strange thing is that some of them have been taken with their property, especially boda bodas, which in the end – if you go around Kampala, you will see a lot of activities regarding what you call training of cadres. The issue is that some of them have been under duress to go for that training, with motorcycles confiscated by Police officers. This is very true. For example, Katwe and Kabalaga Police stations are full of these boda bodas. And for you to regain it, you must go for that training, after which, the trainee takes an undertaking that he/she would be a supporter of the Movement; it is a whole mess.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end this subject; we should honestly end this subject.

MS KAMYA: Just one second, Mr Speaker. In response to Hon. Omara Atubo’s question, whose sincerity I wish to appreciate, I would like to inform this House that a man called Haruna Byamukama who was shot at in Bulange-Mengo on 15 February 2006, had his matter taken to the Uganda Human Rights Commission in June of that year. However, up to now, Haruna Byamukama is still languishing in his home in Kabarole, while the assailant is free on the streets. He has never been compensated. 

As hon. Kyanjo, has said, we have filed so many cases. I am sure we shall file this one too, but it is not likely that we shall get a lot of support. As you know, there have been 11 annual reports from the Uganda Human Rights Commission full of people who have reported their human rights violation cases. However, they have never been compensated. So, there is little hope there, Mr Speaker.

3.09
MS ANNE AURU (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point if national importance; a matter that has affected my constituents. Last weekend, on the 23 October, at 2.20 a.m., unknown arsonists went to Erepi Teacher’s College and set the institute’s library ablaze, burning over 90,000 text books. Erepi TTC was founded in 1994 when Hon. Moses Apiliga was the minister for supplies. The library had books that had been accumulated over all this period. 

Not only was the institute’s library burnt, one of the tutor’s house was also set ablaze with this teacher narrowly escaping death. It was fortunate that the State Minister for Agriculture, hon. Bagiire was in Moyo District that time monitoring the NAADS Programme, and I was able to visit Erepi with him. 

Anyway what is more important is that Erepi Teachers’ College is the one that provides teachers to schools, especially in Moyo and Adjuman districts. But now with the absence of text books, the students have virtually nothing to refer to or to study.

I am reporting this matter so that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes to the aid of Erepi Teachers’ College by providing not only the books, but also constructing the library that was destroyed by the fire. 

As we talk, students and tutors are traumatised. The college is not fenced – I think it is important the minister visits that college, as soon as possible, in addition to making sure it gets new text books with both the tutors and students being provided with psycho-social counselling services. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving that report. I have duly taken note of what she has reported. It is unfortunate that we had not received that sad report. But I would like to say that we shall take action and see how to address the situation. Thank you very much.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 77/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.13
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, the question reads: “Is the Minister aware that primary school teachers in rural UPE schools in Northern Uganda, reside in dilapidated and substandard grass-thatched structures, which ultimately affects their morale and performance? If so, what plans are in place to ensure that reasonable accommodation is provided to rural primary teachers?”

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, the Hon. Dennis Hamson Obua asked the question whether the Ministry of Education is aware that primary school teachers in rural UPE schools in Northern Uganda reside in dilapidated and substandard grass-thatched structures, which ultimately affects their morale and performance? And if so, what plans are in place to ensure that reasonable accommodation is provided to rural primary teachers?

The first response, Mr Speaker and honourable members, is that yes, we are aware of the plight of teachers, actually not only in Northern Uganda, but throughout the country. The situation in most areas is that bad. 

But for Northern Uganda, I would like to say that during the protracted insurgence in that region, much of the education infrastructure was totally destroyed. Currently, the Government of Uganda is rehabilitating schools and other educational institutions. Teachers’ accommodation is one of the priority facilities to be rehabilitated and constructed in that region. 

The government has the following projects or programmes that will, among other things, cover rural teachers’ housing needs in the short, medium and long-term periods. This financial year, we have allocated Shs 29.39 billion, under PRDP, for primary school facilities. Among the facilities to be covered are teachers’ houses; there is also Shs 16.42 billion under SFG, which is also aimed at improving primary school facilities.


Mr Speaker, there are other programmes under the Prime Minister’s Office, to address the plight of primary schools in that region generally. These are the NUSAF and CROWN, a Netherlands Government programme, which is ongoing, though it has experienced some small problems, which we are sorting out. And once all those endeavours have been realised, the plight of school teachers in Northern Uganda, and indeed in the whole country, will be thoroughly addressed. I thank you very much.

3.14
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I have one supplementary question to the hon. Minister. May I know from the hon. Minister whether the Shs 29.93 billion under PRDP is under the Ministry of Education and Sports, and strictly earmarked and conditioned for the construction of teachers’ houses? And is it with you or OPM? Thank you.


MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, that money is a sum under the Prime Minister’s Office, but to be disbursed through the Ministry of Education and Sports, specifically for school facilities, including teachers’ houses and other facilities like classrooms, rehabilitation of existing structures, furniture and pit latrines. It is a lump sum to cover so many activities under the Prime Minister’s Office, but through the Ministry of Education and Sports.

3.19
MR BEN WACHA (INDEPENDENT, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister aware that the arrangements for PRDP’s disbursement of funds is based on priorities set by each district? What happens if one district does not prioritise school facilities?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am very much aware of that, but given the importance school facilities call for, I have a letter that we sent to all Local Government accounting officers, advising them - as you know, we can only advise them on how to prioritise this amount of money, to make sure that it goes to the priorities as I have enumerated here. The Prime Minister’s Office is monitoring the programme. With this advice, we expect that they will comply and address the plight of school facilities as we have advised them.  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this letter on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

QUESTION 83/1/08 TO THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY

3.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “In June 2008, two Government officials made two very disturbing statements. Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, Minister of Local Government said that NRM would not leave power even if it was defeated in an election. Deputy Commissioner, Gulu, Mr Odongo Milton, told the Youth in the North that, “No NRM cards! No jobs!” Can the honourable minister inform the House that:
    (i) The two above statements represent the official policy and position of government.
    (ii) Why up to now, has there been neither a public statement from Government nor rebuke or reprimand of the officials concerned if what they said was not correct?”  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister. But before you come in, in the V.I.P gallery today, we have members of the Committee on Equal Opportunities from the Parliament of the Republic of Kenya. They are here to share experiences with our Parliament and other stakeholders. The delegation is made up of Hon. Mohammed Abdi Affey, the Chairperson; Hon. Joseph Lekuton, Vice-Chairperson; Hon. Maison  Leshoomo; Hon. Fred Kapondi; Hon. Francis Chachu Ganya; Hon. Luka Kigen; and Rose Mudibo, the Secretary to the delegation. You are most welcome. (Applause)

3.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Mr Speaker, my response to question 83 is as follows. Honourable Otafiire made this statement as an individual; if at all he was not misquoted. However, honourable members know very well the Constitutional channels through which power is attained; that is, through regular, free and fair elections. The NRM Government has organised many free and fair elections and will continue with the process of democratizing this country. (Applause) His statement does not, therefore, represent official policy and position of Government.

On the 6 June 2008, while addressing students of Lango Students Association Community in Unyama, the Deputy Resident District Commissioner Gulu, Mr Odongo Milton, was quoted to have said, “No NRM card! No job!” The Deputy Resident District Commissioner was misquoted, probably because the Daily Monitor reporter, Ms Cissy Makumbi, did not understand the local Luo language that was being used during the function. (Laughter)

The Deputy RDC in fact told the students that the Public Service is for all Ugandans, irrespective of political affiliation, tribe, religion, or sex. 

He further told them that the NRM Government is like God who gives rain and sunshine to everybody’s garden, whether you pray or not. The students on their own asked the Deputy RDC for two things: They asked to be registered as NRM members, and they also asked to undergo a three weeks cadre training course during their holidays. 

The Deputy RDC advised the students to register with their sub-county and district NRM chairpersons, and acquire NRM cards, since it is their constitutional right to choose a party to belong to, and give correct information to voters in villages, in order for them to vote positively in the local council elections of 2011, because teachers are highly respected in the villages. 

The Deputy RDC has a duty to mobilise the population and sensitise them for development and, therefore, the Deputy RDC cannot be rebuked or reprimanded because he was misquoted.

3.25
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for attempting to answer the question. I raised this question after very serious consideration. It is a very serious matter and I expected a very serious answer. 

After the fall of Idi Amin, a group of Ugandans became known as Amin’s men. We do not want to go back to the same situation where a group of Ugandans will in future be called somebody’s men or women. (Interjections) 

I have two supplementaries: Is the minister aware that the situation on the ground is much worse than what is contained in the question, in the sense that all contracts, particularly for service provision, are given in a partisan manner. If someone does not belong to the NRM, he or she does not get any contract. Is the Minister aware about this?

Secondly, is the Minister aware that contracts in the districts are given with the influence or on the directive of RDCs?

3.27
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I want to ask the honourable minister to make a categorical statement whether it is the function of Resident District Commissioners to go campaigning for the National Resistance Movement.   

3.28
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you. Hon. Okello-Okello, this matter that you have raised was a matter concerning the Deputy RDC of Gulu district. We are very much aware that the leadership in Gulu District is not NRM. 

We are also aware that for contracts, there is a contracts committee in each district that awards contracts. I am just wondering how the RDC could be brought into this formula, and how the RDC overrules a district which is headed by a person who is not even NRM. I am not aware of these happenings, and I do not think it will happen. 

Secondly, I am being asked whether the RDC’s role is to campaign for the government in power. I think the role of RDCs is very clear. It is in the Constitution and it is in the Local Government Act. Their job is to mobilise. Now, if you are mobilising, you must be talking about Government programmes; mobilising people and sensitising them so that they get involved in Government programmes, which are for their own welfare. I do not know how you can connect that to the NRM. Actually, you should have said for the government; that would have been better. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you for giving way hon. Minister. You are aware that under the Constitution, RDCs are civil servants. And you are aware that they are supposed to be non-partisan. The question is, in campaigning for the party, NRM specifically, are they not violating the law? 

Secondly, are they supposed to hold party cards and go out saying they are NRM when their duties - as you are aware, they are in charge of security for everybody and not only for a particular group in the district? Are you aware that they use that position of head of security in the area against the opponents of the NRM? 

MR ALEX PENYTOO: Thank you. Is the Minister aware of the qualifications of that Deputy RDC? Is the Minister also aware that the RDC cannot speak and write good English? Thank you. (Laughter) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, is the Minister aware that at one time, a Deputy RDC of Lira, in the process of mobilising the population, chased me with a gun and I ran up to the DPC’s office. (Laughter) I ran for my dear life to the office of the District Police Commander. This Deputy RDC was bold enough to chase me with his pistol and he almost killed me in the presence of the DPC. All this was done because I was mobilising in the direction of multi-party, and he was mobilising in the direction of the Movement. This government of yours, which is free and fair in as far as politics is concerned, instead promoted that Deputy RDC to full RDC and posted him to Kasese. Is the Minister aware that even now, this Deputy RDC who chased me with a gun is a minister in Government? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, no question has been put. You see, the problem with the way you ask questions is that those kinds of questions can just be shot down because someone can just say, “I am not aware” and that will be a perfect answer. The way you ask them will warrant such a response and one sits down. 

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think sometimes the Constitution of Uganda, and indeed other laws can provide for something yet in reality a different thing happens. It is not sufficient for the hon. Minister to come and start reading to us what is provided in the Constitution because we know that is what it is. Our complaint is that despite what is provided for in the Constitution that you are reading, something different is happening. For example, only yesterday, RDCs were holding a meeting in State House. You just need to look at the front page of the New Vision of today. These RDCs that you are saying are public servants and who are supposed to be mobilising are celebrating using the NRM sign, a clearly partisan sign, and this is on the front page of the New Vision. What we are saying is that the law is good; it prohibits them to do certain things; but that is what they are doing hon. Minister. 

I will give you another example; there is a notorious RDC called Balyaino Gulume, the one who is supposed to be in Tororo. In all elections in Eastern Uganda, he has been involved. He moves around with a gun terrorising the population. He has done this in my constituency and in many other places. So, it is not about you being aware. You are aware but you are just defending something that is not correct. [Mr Kyanjo: “Information”] I will take the information.

THE SPEAKER: No, there were supposed to be supplementary questions, but you have started making contributions. So, will the Minister answer the questions? 

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very much aware that RDCs are public officers, and for that matter, I will continue to quote what the Constitution provides. (Interjection) Yes, because it is going to help me explain the queries that you are putting across. 

Article 203(3) says, “The functions of a Resident District Commissioner are: To monitor the implementation of Central and Local Government services in the district; to act as Chairperson of the District Security Committee of the district; and to carry out such other functions as may be assigned by the President or prescribed by Parliament by law.” 

Now, in doing this job, some of you believe or think the RDCs are campaigning for NRM. I wish you could say for Government, because if you are monitoring Government programmes, you will definitely be talking about what is provided by the government in power. 

I am also very much aware that the RDC is the chairman of security, and he is supposed to be non-partisan. They should be allowed to do their job. My problem is that when hon. Cecilia Ogwal asks me about an incident, which might have happened some years back, I would definitely say I am not aware; but also add that if you are chased by a person with a gun, no matter who that person is, you should be able to take this case to the authorities to deal with it. This is because if you wait for a question to be answered in Parliament and you ask me ­­-(Laughter)- I would not be able to tell you what actually happened.

I am also aware that the deputy RDC of Gulu has his qualifications. If he does not write well, I am not aware of his not writing well, I know that he sends reports.

Now to hon. Katuntu, I want to tell him that sometimes we greet by waving our palms and that is a sign of a party in Uganda. Would you say that we are promoting UPC if we keep waving? (Laughter) Yes. So, if you are so happy and excited, you can do the thumbs-up. (Laughter) Yes, and that is what happened. 

I am not aware of Mr Gulume, the RDC of Tororo, terrorising people with a gun. If he has been doing so, I call upon you to take him to the authorities so that he is charged accordingly because his job is not to terrorise people with a gun. He is a deputy RDC for Tororo.

MR KATUNTU: The reason why we bring some of these things to the attention of the minister is for the minister or Government to take corrective or remedial measures. For the minister to come and tell us that if he has been doing it, then you go and take it to a different place - really, that is an insult to us! 

I expected the minister to say that if that has happened, let us investigate. She should come up with a report and ask me to give her full details. But for her to send me - to which authorities does the minister want me to go and report to, when I have just reported to the Minister in Charge of the Presidency? 

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I want to state here that as a minister responsible for the RDCs –(Mrs Ogwal rose_)- can I finish this sentence? 

THE SPEAKER: I think you can ask a supplementary question not clarification. Ask a question.

MRS OGWAL: It is related. The minister said if I was chased by the deputy RDC at the time, I should have taken the matter to the authorities. Yes, I did! First, I ran to the office of the District Police Commander and took refuge there, and made statements.

Number two; I went to court and the deputy RDC was found to be guilty of the offence. When he was found guilty, instead of the government taking disciplinary action and relieving the man of his duties, he was rewarded with a promotion and posted to another station. That is the clarification I want the minister to know. If you want to have the case file and the details, I can avail them to Parliament. Thank you.

MR NYEKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister in Charge of the Presidency has been answering questions saying that she is not aware of the activities of RDCs like the one who chases people with guns in Eastern Uganda. Can we, therefore, take it from there that actually, her office is not in charge at all? Are you aware that you are inefficient? 

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order because I am very much aware that I am in charge of my office. I have served in that office for more than four years and I am also aware that the RDCs are all under my care, and I know the honourable member knows my capacity. Is the honourable member in order to stand here and impute that I am not in charge of my office?

THE SPEAKER: I think we can go to the next question. 

QUESTION 85 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

3.44
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these questions are questions, they are not debates. These are the things we have today; but you should be careful about the way you ask a question. This is because somebody says in just one sentence that, “I am not aware” and that is a point.

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Question 85.

MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development the following questions:
“(i) What is the land tenure reform project in the Ministry of Lands?
(ii) What does it do and what has it achieved in the past five years?”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Lands.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, this question has just been brought to our attention this morning. There was no formal communication and, therefore, I beg that we be given time to answer this question.

THE SPEAKER: Then next Thursday, you will answer the question.

MS EKWAU: Get me right, Mr Speaker, just for records. It is not true that this question was brought this morning. This question was written on the 7 October 2008 and was addressed to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and signed by a staff of Parliament, a clerk called Mr Tumukwasibwe Robert. So, it is not true that the -  

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not you the person raising the question. I think he is talking about the Office of the Clerk, which should have submitted the question.

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I have a signature here belonging to an official from the Ministry of Lands acknowledging that the letter was received. So, it is not true that the question was processed this morning. I thank you.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I am saying that it was not brought to the notice of the minister, not the ministry. I wish to apologise for not being able to answer the question, but I am aware that we shall be able to answer the question competently, and if you give us next week, we shall – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Thursday next week.

MR ATUBO: Thank you.

QUESTION 86 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

3.48
Mr ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Question 86.

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development the following questions:
“Would the minister inform the House - 
(i)Why Government has failed to implement or enforce the Rent Restriction Act Cap 231, Laws of Uganda 2000, whose primary objective is to regulate rent payable by tenants in respect of commercial and dwelling premises in Kampala and other urban areas?

(ii) Whether Government has plans to come up with other alternative policy measures to protect tenants occupying commercial structures within the central business district of Kampala against unconscionable rent charges that are being hiked by property owners from time to time?

3.49
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, again this was never brought to the notice of –(Laughter)- the minister, but we shall be ready to answer this question next week. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: This question should be the first question on that day, hers and his.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009
3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi Mbaguta): On Tuesday, 20 October 2009, we requested that we go and conduct further consultations on the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009.”

Consultations are ongoing and have not been completed. Mr Speaker, I wish to request that we are given more time so that I come on the Floor of Parliament in the first week of December and we conclude issues of costing of the elements that were raised in the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we last discussed this matter, the hon. Minister of Public Service said that there was some work that had been done in regard to the emoluments of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. That it was in the final stages. How come now the minister is saying the process has begun and she will be ready in December?

The reason we gave her up to this Thursday was because she had advised the House that some work had already been done. Is she now retreating from her earlier statement? If there is work done, December is too far. Why don’t we give her just next week? After all, she said she had done some work?

MS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I want to maintain the record that the principles for the benefits and emoluments of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are in an advanced stage. The cost implications must be cleared by the Ministry of Finance as per procedure, and I have to take the principles to Cabinet as soon as the Ministry of Finance gives us a certificate. That is why I am requesting for that period to allow Cabinet to discuss the paper, and I come with a complete package of those elements that you raised in the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we give her three weeks? Okay, come back after three weeks.

MR EKEMU: But I believe the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are still in Office up to the end of this Parliament so –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, we are dealing with the institution, not individuals.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, three weeks is not sufficient enough because I have one week to go to the Ministry of Finance for the certificate of financial implications after which I will take the principles to Cabinet and the Cabinet minutes must be confirmed. That is why I am requesting that during the first week, which is the end of November, we come out with the Bill. There is also the issue of drafting the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Okay

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE PAYMENT OF PENSION 
AND GRATUITIES USING THE STRAIGHT THROUGH PROCESSING (STP) ARRANGEMENTS

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Sezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker, hon. Alaso wanted to know why we are talking a lot about pension and I would like to make this statement on the payment of pension and gratuities, particularly using the Straight Through Processing (STP) arrangement because this process has removed 3,300 pensioners. 

Last Thursday, during the debate about the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice -President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009, I was asked to make a statement to the House about the issues of pension payment, especially following the introduction of the Straight Trough Processing for pensions. I, therefore, make this statement to clarify how my ministry is paying the pension and gratuities, and implementing the Straight Through Processing with the pension payments.

The Straight Through Processing was adopted in July 2009 where government implemented the process on salaries. While for the pension and gratuity claims, Straight Trough procedure was introduced with effect from October 2009.

The Straight Trough Processing system is an electronically-enabled and mediated system that remits payments directly to the beneficiaries’ bank accounts using the Electronic Fund Transfer grid. The attendant changes require that all the pensioners’ bank information, that is the bank account numbers and the titles, is consistent with the pensions payroll information held by the Ministry of Public Service. With the Straight Through Processing, bank information specification is also the same. 

At this juncture, I want to clarify the most recent case that we had where the pensioner was spelling his bank account with Eria ending with “a” while the record we have in the Ministry of Public Service was ending with “ya.” The two, in our view, are not the same. We are trying to make sure that the money goes to the right account. It will, therefore, not be possible to pay the pensioners and other beneficiaries whose bank information does not satisfy these requirements until when they would have updated the bank account information with the Ministry of Public Service, so that the bank accounts and the information we have in the ministry is not inconsistent for purposes of payment. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to update you on the progress made so far, since the removal of the 3,300. In order to facilitate the smooth implementation of the Straight Through Processing of pension claims, an inter- ministerial task force consisting of officers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Public Service, was constituted to work out the modalities for implementation. 

Thereafter, the Ministry of Public Service issued a circular with the Straight Through Processing implementation guidelines to inform the Public Service about the new arrangement. In effecting this maiden payment through the Straight Through Processing payment system for the month of October 2009, 3,300 beneficiaries could not access the monthly pension payroll. This is out of 45,459 persons on the pension’s payroll. I addressed a press conference on the issue and the ministry published the names of the invalid accounts of the 3,300 affected individuals in The New Vision newspaper. The ministry also displayed the lists on the notice board of the Ministry of Public Service. 

In addition, a help-desk with a telephone and fax number contacts were given and we also created an extra space for receiving the amendments so that these cases can be expeditiously handled by our staff to effect the changes. I am glad to inform you that the members who have been affected have responded very quickly as individuals and on record we have 1,093 beneficiaries who have updated their records. Their names have been restored on the payroll and their October pensions arrears will be paid next month. 

In conclusion, I wish to assure this august House that the Ministry of Public Service and Government in general is committed to improving the system of paying pensions to the senior citizens who retired from the Public Service of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Alaso you are the one – 

3.39
MS ALICE ALSO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, for this statement. I would like to find out from the hon. Minister when she talks about 3,300 beneficiaries who could not access their monthly pension because of inconsistency in information; I want to find out from her - because the ministry is first of all Public Service and then pensions. I am sure that putting them together was deliberate to the effect that you would have to have accurate information as a public servant, and then that accurate information is what is translated into processing your pension. Therefore, I want to know from the minister why it continues to be the practice of the Ministry of Public Service, when they are paying out pensions, to require that they recreate the information – you know there is a way when you grow old, I think that system somehow gets so tired. You have exhausted your abilities in a distinguished service to this country. Maybe you have lost your sight, the ability to write, your ability to do so many things – you are not agile enough anymore; and so, if you spell your name without “y” now that you are an old man, why doesn’t the Ministry of Public Service pick from the information that is already available to them? Moreover, it has been the argument of this House that it is not necessary anymore to ask my father, a retired pensioner, to look for his appointment - for when he began teaching in the early 1960s - so that he comes. First of all, the old man cannot find his appointment letter or confirmation letter. So, why do you want to recreate information, which actually subjects it to inconsistency, when your ministry should have all this information under its roof? Isn’t it deliberate to first of all delay processing of this money and to make sure that some pensioners actually die and leave the benefits to the Government of Uganda? Because it is true, pensioners have died and left all their money unpaid, and we do not know who eats these monies in the Ministry of Public Service or in the Government of Uganda. 

Secondly, I would like the minister to explain double listings. Whenever the ministry releases information to do with pension payment, when you look at the newspapers, you find names appearing twice or thrice and some of us are worried that these double listings are also deliberate to create an impression that you are actually paying more pensioners when you are not paying them. I want that explanation.

Now that the minister is talking of a Straight Through Processing something -(Laughter)- there have been allegations that earlier on, under the electronic transfer system, there were officers in the Ministry of Public Service who actually follow these old men and women and tell them, “You see, the lump sum money you have got was sent by accident,” - yes, if they have sent Shs 16 million as a lump sum, these officers are alleged to be going there to say, “Only Shs 6 million was yours. You return the Shs 10 million to the ministry. The ministry is on my neck because I paid you irregularly?” So, what are you doing to sensitise the pensioners, because they are being taken advantage of. I can produce for you an old man who was really taken advantage of and when he tried to get to the Police, it was very late; the money was already gone; and he did not get to know these officers’ names, but at least he can bear testimony to this. So, can the hon. Minister at least help the pensioners to tell them that once money gets into their account, it is fully their entitlement? 

Lastly, let the ministry tell us when they plan to pay out people’s lump sums because we understand this payment is also on suspension. Even if you have information that is consistent, the ministry is not paying out the lump sums and the old people need their lump sums before they actually die. Thank you very much.

4.05
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a pensioner and the question of paying pensioners is a very serious matter. There are Ugandans who work for this country so dedicatedly and honestly, but instead of appreciating what they did, we are now punishing them. Quite a number of them have died without getting their money. Just last year or the year before, one died at the ministry while waiting for pension. 

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the minister’s effort, but to say that you hold press conferences in Kampala and that you put things in the papers knowing very well that the majority of pensioners do not have access to the notice board in the ministry and that they do not have access to newspapers, I think leaves a lot to be desired. The ministry should devise means and ways of getting down to the pensioners. For example, in Kitgum, I have given pensioners a desk in my office where they work, but the information that we are getting here now has not yet reached them. So, they are just left in the dark.

Secondly, some of these pensioners depend entirely on what they get from the ministry, but in some cases, the money is so miserable that really a responsible Government should not except an individual, even if that individual were alone, to survive on such kind of money, even if it were for a week. Can the ministry and the government consider the plight of the pensioners? These are senior citizens who really worked well for this country, because in their time, there was no corruption. They did not build houses or invest any money to take care of their lives after retirement. They expected to live on pension. Can the country do something about it? I thank you. 

4.07 
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the minister in waiting in charge of public service –(Laughter)– and I am waiting for May 2011 to be in charge. I just have a few comments to make. 

Madam Minister, there is a problem of gratuities. There has been some improvement as far as access to pensions is concerned, but many of the senior citizens have not got their gratuities. Others date way back in 1992 up to now, and they have not got their gratuities, and they keep approaching my office seeking to know what is happening. So, I want an answer from you. 

The second point is about the administration of pension activities. If you go to every district in Uganda, you will find some people who claim to be highly connected to the Ministry of Public Service and they even have offices. They even make announcements on radio, “If you want your pension to be processed very fast, please come to this office.” My question is, has the government system broken down? We have got a government system right from the ministries up here to the districts; have those systems broken down to the extent that some pension bureaus have to be set up to help the pensioners process their pension much faster than the government system? Isn’t there a way through which your ministry can stop this kind of practice? These people that go there pay some money and after processing their pensions and gratuities, they also have to part with some percentages, and I think this is not correct. 

Finally, about the new payment system; if I were directly in charge, before beginning with this system of Straight Through Processing, I would first ensure that almost all the pensioners have got the information, and the problems you are facing currently would not have arisen at all. I thank you so much. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want clarification, because I know that pensions are normally calculated basing on the salary you earn, and I know how much the purchasing power has changed over the years. I do not know how the ministry is dealing with the value of money today vis-à-vis the value of money that these pensioners had at the time they were working. I am asking this because some of the pensioners who have approached me have told me that when they come to Kampala, they spend more money than the eventual cheque they get, and it is really inconsiderate, because sometimes we, the leaders, have to facilitate these people to get a cheque which is not even worth the value. So, can I be assured that there is a mechanism of tagging the money they get to the purchasing power of the money, since the value of money keeps changing? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Article 254(2) of the Constitution provides that, “The pension payable to any person shall be exempt from tax and shall be subject to periodic review…” This is a command. It is not discretionary, but it is a command of the Constitution that pension has to be reviewed periodically and that should take care of it. 

4.12
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I want to know from your presentation who is responsible for the correction of the names and the synchronisation of these names with your new codes. I am asking this because as my colleagues have enumerated, it is quite difficult for an elderly pensioner who probably had already become blind and is unable to move on his own in town to re-verify his or her name and I think to shift this burden again to that elderly pensioner is unfair. Who is actually responsible for this synchronisation?

Secondly, the Straight Trough Processing programme has its own problems. It is an electronic process that sometimes acts promptly before or soon thereafter. What I mean is that if there is a process in line and power goes off as is characteristic in this country, there is a possibility - and I have seen a pensioner bringing slips to me that are inconsistent and saying, “They told me power went off, and they said they had paid, when they actually had not”. I will need to investigate this and see what you are going to do about it.
 
This electronic process has wizards who have studied it pretty well and they deduct monies although in decimals but cumulatively, they take a lot of money from each individual’s account. Would you also take extra time to take some case studies of selected individuals? You will discover that these deductions are being taken every other time?

The other one is also an allegation, which needs to be investigated that some cunning individuals in this republic have learnt of the dead pensioners and have instead recreated new individuals in the names of the dead. They bring them before your Ministry and they say “This one was paralysed, he lost the sense of speech, he cannot write but he is the one”. So they get the money of the dead and by the time the legitimate owners who are managing the estates come to prove this -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Kyanjo for giving way. Before you talk of the way this EFT works and where the money goes, we have the Electronic Signatures Bill here in Parliament. Unless we pass it, money will continue disappearing on people’s accounts because of some wizards who know the computer very well especially in ministries that have big amounts on their accounts like the Ministry of Health, even Public Service, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Works. People will continue taking money using computers and you have no law that you can use to get them unless you have that Electronic Signatures Bill, which is still within Parliament. Thank you

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Member, for that important information and I will conclude by asking the honourable minister to follow up this matter of purported pensioners when in actual fact the real pensioners died long ago. 

The broader appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs is that we have cried every time here. This burden is on the country because there is no national identity card. Please, help us with the expedition of the national identity card project, it is under our committee but our hands are tied. Every time we advance, they bring a new shift. Now they told us that the ID process has been handed over to the Electoral Commission. We are really worried about this. Thank you.

4.18
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for Public Service for the introduction of the swift electronic transfer system. We hope that it will bring improvements into the process of people accessing their resources. I would like to inquire how far the integration of the UPDF pension scheme has gone given the fact that originally UPDF pensioners used to get their pensions direct from Bombo.

There has been an on going process - all the files were transferred from Bombo to Public Service. We are faced with a scenario of so many retired men and women who are crying out there for their pension because of the slow and delayed integration process.

Putting that aside, local governments had staff who they were supposed to cater for as far as pension is concerned. This is becoming a continuous burden because all the conditional grants, which the central government sends to some of the local governments eventually, end up mostly clearing pension arrears and payments within the local governments. Isn’t there a way we can consider - after all they all worked for this country - can we also have these pensioners within the local government jurisdictions integrated into the national pension system?

Lastly, you introduced the computerised system whereby everybody who is about to clock 60 years of retirement and pension has a notification on their payslip six months before he or she retires that, “You will be retiring in the next so and so months”. Why is it that after one retiring with all the notification within the six months, there are delays in processing their pension? There is notification and those former salaried employees are already identified in your computer system; why then is there a delay after one has been struck off the regular salary payment, to then being transferred to the pension system? What is the problem in transferring somebody who has been a worker as a teacher? 

I have colleagues who are teachers and actually they are already being notified but the hassle they are going through to make sure that they go through the pension process is terrible. What is the problem, Madam Minister?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The guidance I want to seek from the chair is that you recall that during the general debate and subsequent debate during the approval of the budget for the Ministry of Public Service, fundamental questions were asked. Because the time was not enough for us to conclusively handle everything concerning the pension, the minister promised during that time that at an appropriate time, she would come up with a comprehensive report about the issues regarding pension in the country.

You remember hon. Kawanga asked, “Why should a person who has retired at 60 years be asked about some funny documents, which could have gotten lost and the Ministry has been paying him and must be having part of the records because the pensioner has a record within the Ministry?” 

All these questions should have been answered then but because we had a time limit, the Minister promised that at an appropriate time, she would come up later to answer. When I look at this statement, it is about using the Straight-Through Processing Arrangements and I would have loved to ask bigger questions concerning the entire administration of the pension system, which is not the subject of this statement. May I ask for your guidance, Mr Speaker, through your office whether the minister is going to give us a comprehensive report about some of the issues we asked so that we may comprehensively debate the pension issue or whether the responsible committee of Parliament is going to conduct some public hearings so that we become part of the solution other than becoming spectators?

Mr Speaker, I just want some guidance. How best could we proceed so that we can get over this issue? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister can answer that.

MS MBAGUTA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we shall come up with a comprehensive statement on the pensions because some of the issues that you have asked are big. We can come up with one.

But if I were to also respond to the issues that have been raised, maybe some of the concerns may be -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, it looks to me, from the minister’s response that she will want to give us a detailed statement later. But I also see from Members that there are still issues that need to be raised concerning this very statement.

THE SPEAKER: No. I just called her not to respond to issues that have been raised during this debate but to the inquiry that was made by hon. Dombo. When do you expect that? Is it in a week’s time or so?

MS MBAGUTA: Mr Speaker, can we be given two weeks? 

THE SPEAKER: Two weeks? Okay.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. Madam Minister, do you remember that you also promised me a statement in two weeks about six months ago? (Laughter)

MS MBAGUTA: Mr Speaker, I did provide that statement for hon. Ben Wacha. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe in his absence. Okay, let us take these two weeks. Within two weeks he will have to look into this too. But two weeks is the record. This debate should have been only 30 minutes but it is now over an hour. If a point has been raised by a colleague and I give you an opportunity, just think of a new point.

4.26
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to find out something from the honourable minister. Following her statement that pension for all people who qualify to get, why is it not uniform throughout the country and yet these people have the same qualifications and they offer the same service? Is it just because others are under the central government and others are under local government and the money which is being provided to local governments as unconditional grants, where they are supposed to draw money to pay for pension, is sometimes not even enough for salaries? So you find that most of the local governments do not pay. When it takes a long time and there is no payment, then central government says, “Let us pay for you some arrears up to this period,” meaning that local governments are supposed to take over and pay. But in all instances, most of the local governments have totally failed to pay pension for the senior citizens who qualify, had the same qualifications and rendered the same service as those being paid by central government -

THE SPEAKER: You are advocating for centralising the process!

MR BUKENI: Since the system they are introducing is the same even for the payments being directly sent say to primary school teachers who are getting this money directly on their account, why don’t we also have a central point where all pensioners are paid directly so that the issue of money being sent to districts so that these people can also get pension directly from the centre is dealt with? 

The other issue is payment of gratuity. What is ironical is that somebody who retired in 1992 has not been paid but somebody who retired yesterday has been paid. What is the problem? There are people, some of whose papers I have been following - there is one who retired in 1984 and he has never been paid but somebody who retired recently has been paid. We had requested the Ministry of Public Service - because of the shortage of funds we know you may not pay all of them - but we would like to see a list of people who are supposed to be paid gratuity so that when you have money, we know who is going to be paid next. But when you have somebody who retired long ago not being paid and somebody who retired recently being paid, it becomes a problem and we fail to know what to tell our people.

The last issue is the issue of particulars from pensioners. Some pensioners are really very old; they have become children and they are no longer - really I do not mean to use the word “sensible”. They cannot write; they cannot even look at their documents. All this is being done for them. My concern for one of the pensioners is that his name was deleted more than once in a year, in fact more than once in six months. His name was deleted towards Christmas and we brought his particulars. But by March, his name had been deleted again. This is a very old person. When we bring the particulars, you start paying him from that month and you do not even pay his arrears. 

There is a problem that we hope this new system will solve. We also want to know about these others who have not been benefiting and whom we should provide for so that we pay them straight like you are paying salaries. 

4.31
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to get a few clarifications from the minister. One is on the updating of records for pensioners. What has confused many pensioners is exactly what is required of them. Is there a way the minister can for instance publish in the print media the requirements that you should fulfil if you want your records to be straightened? Most of the time the pensioners travel to Kampala; they do not even go to the districts where they belong. They have to travel to Kampala to get these records updated. 

Secondly, hon. Minister, isn’t there a way the Ministry of Public Service can find automatic access to the pension payroll because they know exactly when I was employed? Your records show that I was employed on this date so when I clock 60 years, my name should be deleted from the regular payroll and should now go automatically to the pension records.

Even getting records from the relevant ministries where these officials worked before they retired is becoming very difficult. If you are a teacher, you have to access records first from the Ministry of Education. If you do not go to get your records from there, you will not access the payroll of public service. Is there a way public service can coordinate other ministries even through the Office of the Prime Minister so that the life of pensioners is made easy? When they go to the Health Ministry, they are tossed left and right, they are not given the right information and that is what delays most of them from accessing the payroll of the pensioners.

4.33
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Mine is a simple one but just before I came to Parliament I was working with the revenue department of National Water and EFT as a system had many problems that we rectified after two years. I am wondering why of all people this new system is being experimented on pensioners who are weak and cannot reach their banks, the Bank of Uganda and then the ministry. There are so many people involved in this system so I am just wondering why it is experimented on pensioners. 

Secondly, for every system there are people who head that system. Money is sent in banks and it is not claimed and actually you may not know whether the money sent is actually benefiting the pensioners. So is there a systems audit on this system itself? Just like for every ten to 20 pensioners you pay, you go out and check up on the pensioner himself knowing that these are almost disabled people, whether they are living in Gulu, Kitgum or Masaka. Is there a systems audit to know whether these people are getting the money? Banks may take advantage of this system just like they have done for EFT and for you as a minister you may not be able to know that this money that is sent every month to different banks is not being claimed by pensioners in the different banks. That was my inquiry.

4.37
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): The other issue I want to put to the attention of the minister is the way the Public Service offices are managed especially concerning files management. It remains a very big challenge.

There is need for the minister to have interest in improving the filing system of the ministry in a bid to save our people. There is an office named room 56 and another, room 80. The way you oscillate between the offices - they tell you, “Your file is in the other office”; you check there and they tell you that, “It left this office”. People are suffering and like the MP for Dokolo was saying, if somebody has travelled from Dokolo and he/she is tossed between those two offices moving up and down and going without anything, it remains a challenge.

It is my considered opinion that maybe the minister should come up with a method that when you are leaving this office, you should be handed a certain card or a certain document indicating that you have been cleared as far as this office is concerned such that you know where to go the next time you appear other than tossing people left and right.

The second issue is to do with widows and orphans. Although the Office of the Administrator-General is supposed to award the letters of administration, when it comes to management of pensions and gratuity, I wonder how it comes in.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, it is not the Administrator-General to issue letters of administration of the estate of a deceased person. These are courts, which are supposed to issue letters of administration and grant of property.

MR MUWUMA: I thank you for the guidance. There are people who are required and requested to open up estates accounts before they can access their pension or gratuity but I got mesmerised when some of the beneficiaries were told that this money is too much that you cannot pick and you cannot run it yourselves and so you will be picking it from the Office of the Administrator-General. That became a confusing matter and we suspected some foul play.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I can also explain that the reason why they refer people to the Administrator-General is because there could be a situation where no member of the family of the deceased takes up responsibility of looking after the estate, then the Administrator- General takes over. That is when they refer one to the administrator’s office so the payment goes through the Administrator-General who can distribute it to the beneficiaries.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and with that guidance, I rest my case.

4.39
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): I think this is a very important point and I am happy that the minister has promised us that in two weeks, she will come up with comprehensive replies to most of the issues we have raised - that will be about the 13th of next month.

I want to ask the minister from your experience after retirement, in how many years should a pensioner expect his retirement benefits on average? That way there will be some level of certainty that if I retire today, I do not have to run to your office for so many years without success.

Secondly, which pensioners and of which year are you currently paying - of 2000, 1994, 1974 or 1959? Because I have pensioners who started working in 1950, in the Karamoja local administration and worked through the 70s and some of them are still asking and they have forgotten about it saying, “It is your government.” They gave in records of 1986 and 1996 - who are you paying now?

Thirdly, do have knowledge of your pensioners, in terms of - like Uganda Revenue Authority has Tax Identification Numbers (TINs). When you go there, you know your TIN. Using that, the computer automatically tells you how much you have paid in taxes. 

Do you have the identification numbers of your pensioners, since you can automatically notify them that in six months they are about to be retired or struck off the payroll? Do you have knowledge of them? If you do, why ask later on for their first appointment and confirmation letters? How many years did you work there? Do you have to ask this? This creates a level of misperception, that you are unwilling to assist those people who have served this country at their moment of need - to receive their deserved benefits. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Achia, and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that sometimes people retire without letters of appointment or even confirmation. It happened in one case where someone was promoted to the rank of commissioner by a minister called Sabuuni. This guy worked and we retired together in 1996. When we were processing our payments, there was no indication that he had ever been appointed. So, they started processing his letter of appointment after retirement. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you wind up.

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Hon. Alaso talked about the names and whether it is deliberate that we do not have the information. I want to inform the House that the 45,000 pensioners have their names correct. We do not control where individuals open bank accounts, and that is what has created inconsistencies. They are supposed to open accounts in the nearest bank of their choice, but when an individual goes to his bank the name is “Mary” while in the Civil Service the name was “Maria”. It is very difficult to know whether the bank account is consistent with the person that we knew. This is the correction we are trying to make. 

There is no way we can go to individual bank accounts to make corrections of their names, and that is why we have had loopholes concerning our pensioners. Also, considering the numbers on the payroll and the number that has been removed, and in the last two weeks, the numbers have been corrected by 1000; I think we are moving in the right direction.

I want to inform Members that we held a press conference, which was aired. As Minister of State for Public Service, I have my contact pensioners who indicate whether they have heard what we have said, and they also have pensioners associations. The pensioners associations cut across the country and they are managed by pensioners. We have one in Gulu and another in Mbarara. They meet regularly to deal with their problems and report back. When we have changes, we invite the leadership of these associations to inform them of the new changes and also for them to highlight some of the problems that they are facing.

I want to appreciate that the pensioners worked very hard. I would not like to say that all our pensioners don’t understand what they are doing. They actually know what they are doing, and they know their terms. There are those who have become much older and we are aware that they use confidants to actually look at their information.

On an annual basis, pensioners must complete a form, and they can do it electronically, to confirm that they are alive. That is how we can clean our payroll, using a certificate of life. They have done it for a very long time. For those who are old, either their grandchildren or their sons come with the information to confirm that they are still alive. If there is silence for a long time, I think as a ministry, we are entitled to actually remove this person if there has been no reporting.

The Pensioners Association does also submit those members who have passed away and we are able to remove them. I want to clarify further that dying does not mean that you actually lose your pension, because you may die when you have actually accessed your pension for maybe eight years, and yet you are supposed to access your pension for fifteen years. We take on the administrator or the spouse as per law, and the pensions continue for the balance of the years, which we pay. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable minister. What I want you to help me understand is that it seems the bulk of disseminating your information to these pensioners is done by the pensioners associations. Over the years, at least when I was in the Public Service and Local Government Committee, I did not come across a structure from the ministry that is facilitated by the so-called “Pensioners Association”. 

Given the fact that you are dealing with old people who cannot travel and who have not got their benefits or pensions, how do you help to ensure that the pensioners associations are not just district headquarters that are not able to put announcements on radio or even get this information over to the pensioners? What support do you give to these pensioners associations?

Secondly, I want to bring to your attention that when you clean up the salary payroll, especially when somebody dies - I will give you an example. At the beginning of this month, we lost a young man from our village who was an Army man. He died on the 15th. When his wife tried to check for his salary at the end of the month, it was not there, and now his benefits are also not being processed. So, how do you deal with those gaps? You are very active in stopping the salaries yet at the same time you find it very difficult to enable people access their pensions.

Lastly, when we talk about inconsistencies, it is not only on bank accounts; that is one sector you are addressing. The other aspect that Members have laboured on is about documents. People have come to your ministry – your ministry has perhaps one of the biggest number of public servants who are very rude to pensioners - and they toss them left and right. Madam Minister, the pensioners endure that and they are still asked for appointment letters and confirmation letters. So, it is not only a question of bank accounts. It is a question of asking us to recreate the entire information. Thank you.

MRS SEZI: Thank you very much, hon. Alaso, for your contribution.

Mr Speaker, I will come with the details regarding the records. In my statement, we shall have further details of the records and we shall elaborate the problem on the issue of documents. However, Parliament may recall that you approved a loan for the Integrated Personnel and Information System (IPPS). It is supposed to start operating in July next financial year, and automatic access will occur.

Hon. Ocula talked about issues of administration. I went through the cash payments to the bank; to the cheque system; and then directly to the bank account; there is tremendous improvement for individuals in accessing their pension.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal wanted to know whether the money has value. Mr Speaker, you guided us. According to the Constitution, pensions must be paid timely and reviewed, to take into account the value of money. 

Hon. Kyanjo wanted to know about the review. Pension is a factor of the last salary that you are paid and the length of service; hon. Okello-Okello knows that. So, you can only review pension when annual salaries have improved. You may recall that in the last financial year, there was no improvement in public servants’ pay and, therefore, there has been no improvement in pension. This is because they are linked. It is pay and pension. You can only improve pension if there has been an improvement in salaries for active public officers. 

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. You have just responded to the issue raised by one of the Members and properly guided by the Speaker, and you are thanking the Speaker for guiding us. However, we want you to let us know the status quo. Have you been considering that Constitutional provision? Has there been periodic review? Have the people in the ministry been disregarding the legal provisions? What is the position and what do you want us to do to help you implement the law as it is provided?

MRS SEZI: We have been reviewing pensions regularly to take into account the value of money, and as I said, as salaries improve, the same financial year the pension improves. 

There is the issue of recreating files. I will make a statement on this when we come with the issues.

On the subject of the UPDF, you are aware that the Ministry of Public Service is a paying institution. The processing is with the Ministry of Defence, and the payments are paid regularly, since the approvals come from the Ministry of Defence.

On the local governments not being availed the money, there was a bailing out of local governments and we are looking at the review of the law when reforming the Pensions Act. In the pensions’ reform, the local governments will be considered at that level. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker and hon. Minister, the information I want to provide is that first, it has been agreed that the issues of local government should be centralised. Ministry of Finance has agreed to take over pensioners from local governments so that they can be dealt with centrally because they are the same pensioners.

Another issue, which has been agreed upon by the Ministry of Finance, is that as Parliament, we approved Shs 200 billion to clear arrears, but we do not know who took the money. Now there is a forensic audit taking place in our ministry to find out who took the Shs 200 billion so that we can know the real people who are supposed to get the money. This is the same thing I wanted to inform the minister about so that she can be on top of things.

THE SPEAKER: Can you wind up please.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by thanking the Members and saying that some of the questions and concerns that have been raised will be incorporated in the next statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the minister for the statement and the promise that you will give us a very comprehensive statement within two weeks to answer all those questions that have not been answered, so that we get informed about this very important issue. I also think you should look into helping these old pensioners instead of making them travel from Kisoro to Kampala to check on their pension. Maybe you can have some officers or agencies within regions or districts to take care of the old pensioners and give them the necessary information.

Honourable members, I regret that we started this sitting today when I was aware we had some inconvenience due to National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s problem with water. The water that is supposed to service Kampala, including Parliament, is not available. I was aware that some of the toilets had been locked because of lack of water. However, because this was the first day - the solution is supposed to be implemented at the weekend or on Monday - I thought we should try and see. Fortunately, you have been able to -(Laughter)- sit and make contributions, although I got some notes from members reminding me of this. 

It was not our wish that we do this, but these are the circumstances under which we are operating in Kampala, including Parliament. Because of this, I do not know whether we should sit tomorrow. I think we knock out tomorrow so that the House will be adjourned to Tuesday. We are assured by the Corporation that there will be good supply of water by then, so we will not feel the inconvenience we have had. Sorry about that. 

I see Hon. Abdu Katuntu wanted to present. I do not know whether we should receive his report today or on Tuesday, because I see the inconvenience you have; I really see it. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. I can see the consensus of the House is Tuesday. Otherwise I am ready, even tomorrow – (Interjections)- But I think we can handle it on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: So, because of the circumstances we are in, I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. I wish you a good weekend.

(The House rose at 4.59 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 3 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

