Wednesday, 27 October 2010

Parliament met at 3.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting but please accept my apologies that we have started late. I regret this. This is because currently, Uganda Parliament is hosting the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Africa Region Conference at Munyonyo. I had to be there to receive them and also to receive His Excellency the President who has just officially opened that conference. That is why I was unable to be with you on time.

I want to congratulate you, hon. Members, who became flag bearers and presidential candidates, and I wish you a successful campaign.

Hon. Members, in the gallery we have Susi Alegi from the European Union delegation; Bart Vodalie from the Belgium Embassy; and Mary from the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Also in the gallery we have pupils and teachers of Iganga Boys Boarding School. They are represented by hon. Milton Muwuma, Member of Parliament, Kigulu South. Please join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome. There are other important visitors; when I get their details, I will introduce them.

Hon. Members, I realise that time is running against us, especially when parliamentary nominations are due on the 26th of next month. However, I wish to draw your attention that we have a constitutional duty under Article 78 of the Constitution to review the special representation of categories of district, women, Persons With Disabilities, workers and youth. They cannot be nominated unless we review their continuation regarding representing their interests. 

This is by Article 78 which provides as follows: “Composition of Parliament. 
1) Parliament shall consist of- 
a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies; 
b) One woman representative for every district; 
c) Such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, Persons With Disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine. 
(2) Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause 1 (b)- for women- and (c) of this article - Other categories we have here - for the purpose of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it”.

Therefore, in the last Parliament we said, yes. Now, before the nomination, we have to say, yes, retain or add. So, it is necessary that we carry out our duties under this Constitution. Therefore, I would request whoever is responsible for elections to bring appropriate motions in one way or the other so that the Electoral Commission can competently nominate any of them.

3.50
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is a constitutional duty you are talking about. But I have a problem. When we are reviewing these people as Parliament, will they be in the House reviewing themselves or we shall exclude them and yet they are Members of Parliament? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: They will be in the House because currently they are legitimately in the House. It is the House as constituted that carries out the review. The review is not for the current Parliament, but for the next Parliament where none of us knows whether we will be there or not. (Laughter)

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER (PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, thank you for drawing our attention to Article 78 of the Constitution. I have already requested the Attorney-General to handle the matter and I know that he is doing it. I request him to do so expeditiously because of what is going on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that concludes the issues I wanted to raise.

Hon. Members, again you remember, a week ago, some concern was raised about a certain consignment at Entebbe, which was not being released and hon. Alaso raised this matter in the House. 

The agencies of Government were required to tell us what was happening. The Minister of Internal Affairs made a statement but I remember at the end of it I said I wanted a communication from Uganda Revenue Authority. Indeed, I have got a letter from the Uganda Revenue Authority and I had directed the Clerk to give you copies and I hope you have got your copies. For the record, let me read this letter.

It is addressed to me dated, 22 October 2010: “Statement regarding importation of two consignments of printed books through Entebbe Airport.

On 2 October 2010, two consignments of identical printed books totalling to 15 packages arrived at Entebbe Airport. The books were imported via DHL and they were consigned to Olive Kobusingye and Dr Fred Golooba Mutebi. See copies of the airway bill attached. One package was consigned to Olive Kobusingye and 15 packages were consigned to Dr Fred Golooba Mutebi. 

On 7 October 2010, a declaration for clearance of the books No.P5935, Annex 1, was lodged by DHL International Limited in the names of Olive Kobusingye for one package of printed books containing 15 books, which was consigned to her. 

Prior to their clearance out of customs, Police expressed interest in the consignment and pursuant to Section 86 of the East African Community Customs Management Act, the consignment was released to the Police on 9 October 2010, Annex 2. Police returned the books on 14th October and the books were released on the same day. The clearing firm, DHL, delivered the books on 15th October. 

On the same day, 7th October, another declaration No.C37649, Annex 3, was lodged to customs by DHL International Limited in the names of Makerere University Council, to clear the second consignment of 15 packages of printed books. On examination of the document, it was observed that the consignment of books declared in the names of Makerere University Council had originally been consigned to Dr Fred Golooba Mutebi, Makerere Institute of Social Research, Makerere Hill Road, Makerere University, Kampala. 

Given the fact that the declaration was in the names of Makerere University Council and not the consignee, Dr Fred Golooba Mutebi, a query was raised requesting for written confirmation of the ownership from Makerere University Council on 11 October 2010, Annex 4. 

It is important to note that in some cases where such a scenario has happened, the intention has been flawed. It is also important to clarify that the books were never seized by URA.

On 13 October 2010, DHL responded requesting for authorisation to amend the importer’s name on the declaration to Dr Frederick Golooba Mutebi as indicated on the airway bill. Permission to amend the declaration was granted on the same day, 13 October 2010. The amendment was done on 15 October 2010. However, the physical and postal addresses in the URA system for a person with similar names were different from what DHL had. DHL verbally informed URA that the consignee was out of the country and could not be reached so as to obtain information for his tax identification number, which is a requirement for importation. DHL later confirmed and the consignment was released on 20 October 2010.

On the same day, 20 October 2010, URA received a letter through DHL from Dr Frederick Golooba Mutebi with information that the books consigned to him would no longer be cleared by himself and requested that they should be cleared by Dr Olive Kobusingye, Annex 4.6. 

Dr Olive Kobusingye also wrote to URA on 20 October 2010, confirming that she was the owner of the books, which were earlier consigned to Dr Frederick Golooba Mutebi of Makerere Institute of Social Research. This is Annex 7.

In response, URA informed Dr Olive Kobusingye that the books had already been cleared in the names of Dr Golooba and released to DHL for delivery, Annex 8.” Signed by Mrs Allen Kagina, URA’s Commissioner General.

That is the information on this matter and the annexes are there. I think this concludes the queries about this particular subject. 

4.04
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We want to thank you for all this effort, but a quick analysis of this document shows that there is some discrepancy. I prefer that we clear this problem effectively. The Commissioner-General should be able to give you the original copies and we look at the details.

If I can show you a quick one; if you look at the amendment sheet, Annex 4, which is clearly stating that - if you look at BOE registration date, it was 7th or 10th October and the query insurance is 11th October. If you remember the issue came up around that time. The Minister of Internal Affairs assured us that there were other things, security and the rest. 

So, I would prefer that the original documents are given because even when you look through the lines, there is a lot of rubbing on this document. Look at the amendment; Golooba’s team is not available; they were asking for Golooba’s team. They are saying, “May allow use of the third party clearance,” which is allowed; but between that, there are three lines, which are rubbed. If you look at it, there are rubbings. So, what are the writings there? And it would be better for us –

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, is this still an issue?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Would Uganda Revenue Authority release the original when they are part of their records? Isn’t what you want a certified copy, and what has been disclosed to me is a true copy of the original? Should we really spend more time on this subject? The books were released.

4.06
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, a lame excuse is better than none. I am in possession of the book. In any case, we had even got it from the neighbouring countries.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to table it?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: No, this is my personal copy. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you get me a copy?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Okay, much obliged.  Let me table this.

THE SPEAKER: But that will be a parliamentary copy, okay?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would want to table -

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would want to donate it as a gift without consideration. The book entitled, “The Correct Line: Uganda under Museveni by Dr Olive Kobusingye”. 

THE SPEAKER: To me?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: To the Speaker of Parliament. (Applause)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: In case anyone wants more copies, you can always get in touch with me.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think to save myself problems, I declare to the IGG that I have been donated a book. (Laughter) Okay, I think we close this matter.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
A) Parliamentary Commission Report for 2006-2009

4.08
MS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Administration of  Parliament Act, 1997, Section 40 requires the Parliamentary Commission to submit to Parliament an annual report detailing the activities and operations of the Parliamentary Commission. On behalf of the commission, I have the pleasure to lay on Table a copy of the report covering 2006 to 2009. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee study the report and advise them.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

B) Uganda Human Rights Commission Report 
(The Report on Disability in Uganda, 2009)

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report by the Uganda Human Rights Commission on the Disability Situation in Uganda, 2009. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament study the report and advise the House. 

PETITION BY DR OTIHENO JOSEPH FOR UNFAIR REFUSAL BY THE UGANDA MEDICAL COUNCIL TO REGISTER HIM AS A MEDICAL PRACTITIONER IN UGANDA

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are all Members of Parliament and the rules are clear on attendance. But hon. Lyomoki only appears in Parliament when he has a petition to present. Is it procedurally right for a Member to come only once in a long time – he does not even know what we have been discussing - to come and take precedence in this House yet we are here to debate the CHOGM report?

THE SPEAKER: Well, that will depend on the evidence available; it will help me to see how many times he has been absent. But as of now, I have no such evidence and I allow him to proceed. 

4.12
MR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers): Mr Speaker, this is a petition by Dr Othieno Joseph for refusal by the Uganda Medical Council to register him as a medical practitioner in Uganda. We are moving it under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The petitioner is a Ugandan medical practitioner who is now practising in Rwanda since 2005. He qualified from Mbarara University of Science and Technology.

Mr Speaker, I will not read the details, but the prayer of the petitioner is that Parliament condemns the continued unjustified refusal of the registrar of the Uganda Medical Council to register the petitioner, and that Uganda Medical Council ends the persecution of the petitioner, which has confined him in the Diaspora by registering him in Uganda as a medical practitioner. 

The petitioner is duty bound and will forever pray for the prayers he has made. He has appended his signature. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lyamoki, do you want to support hon. Nandala- Mafabi that you have not been coming to Parliament?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the petitioner should be clear. In his submission, he stated that this fellow was trained in Mbale University; I do not know whether there is a university called Mbale University in Uganda!

THE SPEAKER: It is Mbarara University. Okay, the Committee on Social Services should undertake to study the matter and then advise Parliament. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, this report was tabled and debate should start. But before that, there was a point which was raised by hon. Hope Mwesigye, who is mentioned in the report. I directed that hon. Hope Mwesigye makes a written statement and gives us a copy so that when we start debating this report, we are in position to consider her case and decide one way or the other. After that, I have seen many responses come from many quarters about this report and I hope that honourable members have got copies of these responses that we have received. 

For instance, the Deputy Head of Public Service, Hilda Musubira gave a long statement and many others have submitted to Parliament and to me; those are their responses to the report. Therefore, when you start debating the report, you should take into account the responses made by the various people mentioned or affected by the report. 

I have not yet received a written report from hon. Hope Mwesigye. I think she can tell us why she has been unable – I understand it has been because of domestic problems that she had of having lost a relative and so forth. But let her say what she wants to say.
 
4.15
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (MRS HOPE MWESIGYE): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, Sir, I got problems last week. I lost a close relative, so I was not able to complete my report. I will be in position to bring my response before next Tuesday, so that we can debate the report that Tuesday. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you can now see what we went through; you can see for yourself. She said we never gave her the opportunity; we insisted that we gave her time. She requested this House to give her time to bring a written response, but she has not done it until now; she is now saying we should give her up to Tuesday next week. 

Mr Speaker, according to our practice here, when reports are presented to Parliament, Members debate them and having finished the debate, those who want to add in something are given a chance to do so. We have even made a transcription of what took place in the committee meetings and it is there for everybody to see; it is even on the Internet. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be fair for us to debate this report? In court, if you do not come in time, they give you opportunity, but if you do not utilise the chances, they determine the case. We have all come here to deal with this report of CHOGM, yet just a few individuals are failing us from dealing with it. I do not think this is fair. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Not very long ago, you have been the Chairman of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. In the Commonwealth, there is a practice that in case of a lacuna in the Rules of Procedure, the Speaker makes a ruling and that becomes part of the culture of the institution of Parliament. 

Here in Uganda, and in most Commonwealth states, Parliament operates under a committee system to help go into the details of any issue and make a report to the House. For all the years you have been a Speaker and a Member of this Parliament, a chairperson of a committee is equated to a Speaker. This is the practice that has stood the taste of time since independence. I am seeing a new method of handling committee reports being introduced by you. Is this going to be the new way of handling committee reports that when a committee tables a report and some people are not satisfied even when they were given an opportunity, they come to defend themselves at this stage? If this is going to be the practice, then the whole essence of a committee report loses meaning.

THE SPEAKER: Let this observation not just be academic; give us specific examples and then I will be able to respond. What has prompted you to raise what you are raising.

MR EKANYA: What has prompted is in front of me here. I have resubmissions from people who were given a fair hearing in the committee. For example, there is a submission from one Engineer Samson Bagonza and others. These people appeared before the committee, but I am surprised that this Parliament under your leadership called them again to make independent submissions, which the Members should consider and yet they were granted opportunity. Doesn’t this dilute the committee system that is part of our constitution? If these were not given a fair hearing, they should have petitioned and their complaints would be addressed to the committee. For us to debate, taking into consideration these re-submissions dilutes the real essence of parliamentary practice.

THE SPEAKER: You should know that committees are helping the House. These are small committees which study a case and then report. The reports are made to the House and it is the House to pronounce itself on the report. We can adopt it 100 percent or adopt it with reservations.

The reports of the committee are not final and they can only become final after they have been received by the House and endorsed. In this particular case that you are talking about, I think you were absent when somebody said that they had not been given opportunity and the House decided that the Member concerned should put his case to us so that we as Parliament  compare it with what is contained in the report and decide. I think we are entitled to do that.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF SPORTS (Charles Bakkabulindi): I think we should be seen to be playing our role. We should separate what we want to achieve from the person we are targeting to get. I get perturbed to see hon. Nandala Mafabi not sympathising with hon. Hope Mwesigye who lost a relative. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Is the hon. Member in order to say that the chairperson of PAC has not sympathised because hon. Hope Mwesigye lost somebody and, therefore, she did not complete her submission, yet this report was tabled more than six months ago? I think this minister should have done all this before because she knew that the report was supposed to be debated. 

THE SPEAKER: What I know is that this House decided to give the opportunity to hon. Hope Mwesigye to make a written submission to us. I think you, as a Member of the committee, should allow other Members to comment.

MR BAKKABULINDI: I want to remind Mutuluuza that the decision to allow hon. Hope Mwesigye to defend herself was done on Tuesday and she lost a relative on Tuesday night. Hon. Hope Mwesigye is not only a Member of Parliament but also a minister who has got other obligations. We are interested in giving a fair hearing to everybody concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Let us start to debate today as we wait for hon. Hope Mwesigye on Tuesday.

MR BAKKABULINDI: I do not want to oppose your ruling Mr Speaker, but I want to be guided. I think most of us do not have the Auditor-General’s report to compare with the committee report. We need it to have a fair debate. How many Members have the Auditor-General’s report? 

MRS OGWAL: I think this House has the right to move that hon. Bakkabulindi should not be heard anymore on this Floor of Parliament because this is a very serious matter. He is implying that some of us do not even have the ability to read documents and yet we know that this PAC report is based on the Auditor General’s report. Before you read the PAC report, one would have read the Auditor-General’s report to understand why his Excellency the President was so concerned that he had to ask for special audit. I think the honourable member should not stand on the Floor again to make any comment on this because we are taking this issue as a national issue; a very important issue and a very serious matter.

On the issue of the document which should have come from Minister Hope Mwesigye, I feel very disappointed that last week I identified myself with hon. Hope Mwesigye as my relative and today she comes to Parliament and she continues to demand for more time. Last week, it was very genuine that hon. Hope Mwesigye be given opportunity to defend herself considering the fact that PAC had already closed their investigations and submitted the document to Parliament. Now we have to re-open the opportunity specifically for her. She has become a disabled child in this Parliament that every time we must give her a chance. Because I know on Tuesday she may come to us again and say her child fell sick and she could not write a report. But I know that Annex 1 carries her view and a very strong view that she is a strong and hardened cadre of the Movement; sort of like mixing the Movement membership with this PAC Report. This PAC Report has nothing to do with her identity as a member of the Movement. We are all very concerned about the misuse of the funds; we are very concerned about the abuse of office in this country. So, let nobody mix up the two issues. So, is this honourable lady in order to waste our time? And hon. Bakkabulindi whose name I cannot even pronounce properly –(Laughter)– is he really in order to be wasting our time?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the committee, but I just wanted to recap for a Member how we got to this point. Because it is apparent now that there is pointing of fingers here and there with some saying, “You are overzealous.” But I want Members to understand where we came from to reach here. First of all, the committee of PAC did not solicit this business of this inquiry. We have a big backlog which our development partners are helping us complete, dating from 2002 to-date. So, we do that hearing everyday. 

Now, this CHOGM inquiry started, and you must appreciate that His Excellency the President raised concerns over how money for CHOGM was being spent. And that was a result of public outcry, Mr Speaker. This House debated the matter of expenditure of CHOGM funds and we even had a specific committee to go and inquire on this. So, why I am raising this is that Members should step backwards and stop looking at PAC as people who had an agenda to go and look for business to investigate some people who were spending public money. No!

Therefore, this brings me to the question of hon. Hope Mwesigye. You see, a number of times the honourable minister was invited and she did not manage to come. And subsequently, we came here; we said we failed to meet the honourable minister. We were very honest about it. And we even said, “Like any other court, we cannot actually hear her because of the allegations she made in Annex 1.” Like every judge you have to disqualify yourself if you are accused of bias. So, we could not meet her. Now, my question to the honourable minister is, if you were indeed ready to meet us on 20 April 2010; you were prepared; you came with your evidence and documents -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Oduman, you are going to something which we already heard and decided. The facts you are raising were raised last time and the House came to the conclusion that there is a need to give opportunity to hon. Hope Mwesigye to make a written statement. So, you do not have to go back to something we have already considered. The question now is, she has said: “Yes, you gave me the opportunity, but I was not able to complete my defence because I had this and that problem.” And that is why I have said, let us go on with the debate but she will bring in her defence, as she says, on Tuesday. I do not think we are going to complete this debate today.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I agree with you that we should proceed with the debate if that is the case. But the question remains to the honourable minister that if indeed she was ready as she said at that time - because she was accusing the committee - how come she does not now have the presentation she wants to make? Why didn’t she come with the presentation she was ready to present to the committee at that time? Where has it gone?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is the House which decided that we get a written defence so that Members get copies and study it. It is we, Members of Parliament, who decided that way. But aren’t we really eating into our time instead of debating? 

4.34
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I feel very sad that I find myself in a situation to debate this report. The report is about the worst that has been produced in this country and I think it will remain a record for a very long time; a record of plundering, looting, stealing and misappropriating public funds. It is about the worst I have ever seen! I will not go into the specifics in terms of naming names and giving figures; I will talk in general terms. 

This report was presented to this House in May. As a national Parliament, we sat on this matter of grave concern to the nation and to the international community for almost six months.

THE SPEAKER: Please bear with me. This report was tabled in May as you say, but it coincided with proroguing of Parliament. When Parliament is prorogued, it does not transact business. Parliament resumed its work in June with a normal schedule as per the Constitution, that is, the State of the Nation Address. After that one there was another constitutional schedule, namely, receiving the budget. And we have been transacting this because these were constitutional programmes that this Parliament had to undertake. So, that is the reason why it could not be debated then. And since we have finished the budget and other programmes, it has now been given priority. Please debate.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not blaming you as the Speaker of this Parliament. All that I am saying is that in spite of the constitutional duty, this Parliament transacted very many other businesses which were much inferior to this. This is the point I am trying to make. So, I really believe that as a Parliament of Uganda, we did not put enough emphasis in debating this report. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairman of PAC, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for the professional manner and style in which he presented this report. He made it so easy for us to follow and understand it. I think we should all praise him for that. (Applause)

Over the weekend, I found time to look, again for the third time, at this report. I have made some conclusions in my mind. The first one is that what we take as Government in Uganda, to me, looks like an organised system of plunder. That is what we mistake for a government. Because there isn’t any government under the sun where ministers can loot to this extent and still keep sitting in the same offices while smiling up to now. It only happens here in Uganda. 

The system we have has got a leader; we have a head of this Government. My long time belief is that a clean leader can never tolerate a corrupt government. This is my firm belief. Where you find the two peacefully coexisting, there is a symbiotic relationship. (Laughter) I believe this is the situation we have. I think we should now refocus our search light elsewhere if we want corruption in Uganda to be addressed and stopped. Because this figure - really if I was the head of this Government, some of these people sitting on the Frontbench would not be there. In any case, Mr Speaker, some of them were discussed by Parliament before and the same names keep on coming to Parliament again and again. For how long will this continue? It is very sad! The buck stops with the President. I think that is where the matter is resting. We can talk here; we can say whatever we want, but these people will remain in the same offices where they committed those crimes, smiling at us as if nothing happened. It will continue. 

I nearly took a wrong decision not to be part of this debate because I thought it was not going to help anybody. But I think the records are very important. This very report should be kept for posterity. We want these people - even the children of their great grandchildren shall be followed. They must vomit this thing. You cannot swallow to this extent and you go away peacefully and your children and your great great grandchildren continue to enjoy. I think it is sad. 

Lastly, last week I was very saddened to hear that Members on the opposite side were all summoned to Entebbe to find a way of confronting this report. Mr Speaker, from the little that trickled out of that meeting, I am happy to say that there were true Ugandans among these Members. I was very happy to hear that there were true Ugandans who said, “Please, don’t talk about the CHOGM report, but our petitions first.” I thank those Members. (Laughter) They are nationalists, and if we continue together in that spirit, we shall do something good for our nation. Otherwise, the country is gone and gone completely! I thank you.

4.49
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must confess that I am not well schooled in biblical studies, but this bit I remember very well. The Holy Gospel according to St Luke says, “Those who are humble will be exalted and those who are exalted will be humbled.” This big report contains a chronology of individuals, sitting separately and in groups, premeditating how to get a big cut out of a national event.

The facts speak for themselves. I am not going to, as my former colleague said, mention individual cases. Everybody can read for herself or himself. 

In my Catholic faith, when you have done wrong, you kneel down and plead with the Almighty. You say: “Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.” (Laughter) Even when these facts contained in this big report are staring us in the face – 

THE SPEAKER: I think what you were saying, “Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa”, is a strange language. What does it mean?

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, you should be guiding me on this. I understand you are schooled in this language. It means, “I have sinned, I have sinned, I have sinned grievously.” That is the little I gathered when I was an altar boy. (Laughter)

We are in a region where sister states are also grappling with the same matter. In neighbouring Kenya, big fish are being caught in the net; they are already appearing in the corruption court. For those who have not heard, I can tell you that a small piece of rocky land was bought at more than 10 times the actual price and the people involved are now answering for that in court. I would have loved for our colleagues who feel aggrieved, instead of labouring here, to present themselves to that court so that they are cleared once and for all. 

Mr Speaker, I am developing cold feet here because a good report regarding Temangalo was shot down in this House on technicalities. This institution of Parliament was usurping the powers which were the preserve of the prosecution of the investigator of the judge and of the jury. I am afraid that we might fall in the same trap. With your wise guidance, when we reach such a critical stage, we may implore, after pronouncing ourselves and adopting the report, that other competent organs of Government should take up this matter so that we are not in the same shoes like those of the Temangalo Report. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

4.50
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin with a quotation: “What is wrong with me having a road to my home? Is this not my Government?” I still remember very vividly a question that was asked during the Global Fund investigation and it was: “Where were you when we were in the bush fighting?” To me this is almost becoming such a similar scenario. Why? The persons involved in this are looking at it as “Our Government” and hence, “We have a responsibility and an obligation to loot this country.” 

Not so long ago, a prominent Member of our country was sent to Luzira Prison for about Shs 110 million, but the colossal sums of money that are being embezzled in this process are being looked at as a by-the-way because this is a regime that people fought for; it is their government and so it is in order for them to have roads to their own bedrooms just because they are part and parcel of a regime that sustains and sticks in this country because of corruption. And, therefore, what is wrong with taking these people to the Anti-Corruption Court? Because there is nothing wrong with them having a road to their bedrooms, does that also mean that there is something wrong with taking them to face the law?  

The impression I get from this report and people claiming that they need additional time to actually defend themselves is an attitude question. That after all, “Who is going to punish me? I was there when the guns were raining; I am still here when we have to steal in order to sustain ourselves.”

Nobody in this country will believe that this happened in our time. The colossal sums of money, for example, how do you account to this country that not so long ago we had CHOGM; we were beautifying this city and we made it a world class city. What accountability is there to show, for example, on your way to Masaka, on your way to Kitintale or wherever? What is there in this city to show that there was a beautification exercise? What is there to show that the road needed to be maintained to an international standard? What is there to show apart from the other picture down there near the gardens? What has been left, Mr Speaker? 

What has remained is the fact that certain hotels where the people involved have almost 50 percent shares are standing and are still reaping. Some of them are shamelessly requesting for extraordinary time, in fact, in mocking God that they need time to continue defending themselves. What a world of shame we are in!

If you take keen interest in this report, you actually ask just a simple question, “Wasn’t the President in his right sense to request for an audit?” And so, it should be the very people who requested for this report to internalise it, to accept it, and in fact, to this country, they owe an apology. Unfortunately, some of them are interested in waving their instincts of eating without shame. And I can assure you that today you may defend yourself in this honourable Parliament, but your conscience is red. It is so red that you are too dirty to cleanse your own image even for generations. 

How do you tell me that you beautified this city not so long ago? Please, I hear some goat ate the trees and grass; I see KCC trying to struggle with replanting of certain things to make the city attractive. Why don’t you consider your make-up before you consider making up the city? What is wrong? 

In this country we talked of having CHOGM cars. The personalities involved in procuring – Oh, my goodness take a Vice President! A Vice President of our country in our times! Scandals like this deserve the decency of your conscience that you resign and vacate those offices. Tell me how when you look at the sums of money that are being embezzled, you actually even sleep and dream, but what do you dream about? A plane? Are you dreaming about the next automated house? Where have you put that money? Can’t you give it to me so that I can take it to save the dying mothers of this country? I thank you. 

4.56
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO: (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to debate one of the most sensitive reports. The reason why I would like to once again thank you is that this is a report implicating our colleagues. And the beauty of it all is that we have to debate the report while they are looking at us from the opposite direction, which makes it fun for me. 

The report implicates hon. Hope Mwesigye for flouting the PPDA Regulations and causing –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. You have ruled that the section that talks about me should not be debated until I am heard. Is he, therefore, in order to start debating contrary to your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, this is a very simple matter. It is you as a House that decided that hon. Hope Mwesigye be given an opportunity to make a statement. So, when you mention her name now, you are dealing with evidence that the committee collected, but which the House considered that required an ad joiner from hon. Hope Mwesigye. So, I think we can debate other issues and wait until Tuesday and then we see what to do.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for your ruling and I will follow that religiously. I would only pray that I get a chance on Tuesday basically to say something on hon. Hope Mwesigye. (Laughter) But in any case, you are already naked and there is nothing you are covering. We shall still wait for Tuesday. 

I am debating a report where the other parties implicated are here. The report implicates hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Secretary-General of NRM, for causing a loss of US$ 1.8 million to this country. It also implicates hon. John Byabagambi for flouting the PPDA procedures and causing this country to lose Shs 1.7 billion. It implicates hon. Isaac Musumba for having authorised the road to Bukenya’s hotel to be graded, but to me that may not be that grievous because it is not a private road; but you have been implicated, anyway. (Laughter)

The report further implicates hon. Sam Kutesa for raising the expectations that this country would make Shs 1.2 billion from the hire of the cars, but the money was not realised and that was like saying, “We are going to get this,” and we do not realise it. It is a little different from the actual stealing of what is already available. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the report implicates hon. Makubuya for making this country lose US$ 1.3 million given away to J&M Hotel. I would only wish that we were told what J&M means because in some circles we already know what it means anyway. It is the initials of some influential people in this country.

And the report implicates hon. Suruma, hon. Fred Omach and hon. Serapio Rukundo. 

This country lost Shs 500 billion and the people responsible for that are comfortably seated in the frontbench and when I look across I do not see remorse in their eyes. It brings me to a philosophical question that kumbe it is possible in this world to steal with a very clean conscience. Because when we were growing up, no matter what size a thief was in the village, the children would surround that thief and put him down just by shouting, “thief, thief” because it hurt the conscience of that giant that even a P.2 kid would just arrest you as you wait for the elders to arrive.  (Laughter) But these days you deep your hands in the coffers of public funds with a clean conscience and then you go home and say, “It was a good deal.”

These people whose names I have mentioned are products of our society. They have not come from Planet Mars and probably there are many other Ugandans who are admiring to get an opportunity they got because that is the general feeling outside there; that if you are a leader, and you are in office, and you come home with nothing, people will say you are a fool. That is a general feeling at the grassroots. So, these people are products of our society. But if I may pose this question: Is the system of government we have adopted in Uganda right? Should we privatise the delivery of all services of Government and if you are privatising it, to whom are we privatising it? 

Last week, I was in South Africa and I was so surprised to find that in Uganda we are saying, “Privatise, privatise.” The companies we are privatising to are parastatals from the other countries. So, in other words we are saying we are just bad managers. Umeme and Eskom are South African government companies. MTN - those are multinationals. 

So, it looks like the philosophy of the system of government we have adopted in Uganda needs to be checked and I wonder at this particular point what the National Planning Authority is doing because there is no way we can have a system of government where all services should be provided by private sector and then these ministers position themselves in those companies and at the end of the day the Shs 500 million walk to a few individuals. We need to rethink. 

We need to get government back into provision of certain services including roads. For every single road tender contract bidding why can we not have Ministry of Works perform those jobs the way we used to do in the 60s the time of the PWDs so that we minimise an opportunity that would give these people to exhibit their greed in broad daylight. 

Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to these ministers to resign, especially hon. Amama Mbabazi. You are the Secretary General of a party –(Interjections)- I hear some Members saying, “Ah.” Do you want me to thank him for misappropriating public funds then you clap your hands? I do not understand where the conscience of the society is. I heard someone there saying loudly, “Ah.” You want me to thank him? Okay, let me do it sarcastically. “Hon. Amama Mbabazi, I want to thank you for causing this country US$ 1.8 million loss.” Okay, clap your hands. (Laughter) I do not know what the hell is going on. 

But without losing it I really want to say, these ministers should resign, especially the Secretary General of the NRM. I do not know what the electorate was doing at that time of the voting even when we knew they were implicated not only once, but in multiple sagas. 

In December last year, I went for a wedding of Gen. Otafiire’s son in Munyonyo and the President was invited as the chief guest, and there were very many distinguished Ugandans there and that was the time the whole country was talking about Temangalo. The President got up on the pavilion and stated this, “Many people have been fighting hon. Amama Mbabazi. I cannot let him down. He has been a revolutionary since those days.” So, this offence to him is not so grave for him to sacrifice his good colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

Now, in a country where we have a presidential system and the President is more influential, we are going to talk and talk, but the only role we can play in this House is to shame these people as their children watch and immediately we get up out of this House, I will again ask you, “Were you not ashamed when I was talking about you? Did you not feel ashamed?” Because it looks that is the only role we can now play, and so let do that diligently. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Mr Speaker and I also thank hon. Odonga-Otto for allowing this information. I want to restate it here that one of the items on our manifesto was about zero tolerance for corruption. I would like to inform hon. Odonga-Otto that even this time round, we are re-committing ourselves to zero tolerance to corruption and it is not true that this side is happy about it. So, when you are raising your issues, please guide them to the specific persons. Those and those alone should carry their burden. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I thank you so much for that information. I hope hon. Sam Kutesa has heard. (Laughter)

There are two books which any person who has hope in leading this country in the future should read because for the others now, we have given up and the good part is that your time is near and I should remind you that no matter how much money you have, you cannot eat a lorry full of matooke, they are just figures in the bank account and we will still eat the same food there; you cannot eat a cow alone. 

So, I am just painting a very rosy picture –(Laughter)- and you will also die and the beauty of it when you die is that you just need one by two metres to keep your remains and you may not be sure that the money you have left is not the one which will also kill your children because some of us are there and we have seen and we shall keep it for posterity. 

But what I want to say by way of conclusion, these books you must read. There is one called, “The Conscience of the Society” jointly published by the Catholic Bishops of Kenya and then there is, “May the State kill?” by Father Tarsicio Agostoni. Mr Speaker, these books will go a long way in helping people of my generation to form a decent world view of Government. 

For those who have abused public funds when in a health centre in Adjumani there is no aspirin; in Pader there are no drips; in Kumi women are walking barefooted; in Jinja the women still have jiggers even in their hands, as if they eat with forks, and people are busy paying taxes but you have positioned yourselves to get public money, the time will come. Do not think that Parliament will talk and you will go home and have a glass of wine; no! We know you; we know the properties you own in your names and we know the properties you own in separate people’s names. Those properties will be confiscated and brought back to the state even in 20 years. So, you have stolen air -(Laughter)- because you cannot eat the entire Shs 500 billion. Yes, the time will come. 

I really want to thank the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee for what you have undergone and for all the attacks that have been made against you. You just have to know that calm waters do not make good navigators. I urge all Ugandans not to vote for all those that have misappropriated public funds in the next election.  

I want to thank the President for having accepted to appear before the Public Accounts Committee - a whole first citizen. I want to ridicule and shame and ask you to shame those ministers who felt so big not to appear before the Public Accounts Committee including the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, and those honourables who we have been told not to talk about. (Laughter) 

Hon. Members, the moment we debate this report, I will say that let the issue end here. You will take it to the DPP but they will just take a portion of the money and give it to those people and the files will disappear. So, the only courts that we now own are the courts of public conscience. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

5.12
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will right away say that this is a moment of truth for us as Members of Parliament. It is a very big test for the Eighth Parliament. What do we want to be remembered for as Members of the Eighth Parliament? Temangalo comes and in a mob justice kind of manner, we throw out the report; now CHOGM is before us. I implore you, Members, to take a decision, however painful it may be to our colleagues here, in the interest of this country. I commend the committee and I commend the Auditor-General and whoever made it possible for us to have this report. The duty is ours now. We took oath and by Article 79, we have a duty to uphold the rule of law in this country. 

When you look at page 11 of the main report, CHOGM expenditures almost doubled from the appropriated budget of Shs 270 billion to over Shs 500 billion. You all know under the Constitution that no single coin should be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund without the sanctioning of this House. It is our primary mandate to ensure that all monies appropriated are authorised by Parliament. When you look at Article 2 of the Constitution, if you do anything, you are said to have abrogated it, to have thrown out the Constitution; in other words, you would have committed treason. The mere act of withdrawing funds from the Consolidated Fund without the authority of Parliament was treason. Government and the entire Executive including the President who presides over Cabinet, all committed treason. The question is, hon. Members, should we also acquiesce to that crime? Should we be seen to be part of the team that committed that crime? (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Lukwago, for giving way for this simple information. Although the committee report says that so much money was expended, all money that was expended during the budget was approved by this House. That is a point of fact. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you so much, hon. Lukwago. Mr Speaker and Members, the moment you approve Shs 10,000 and somebody goes and spends Shs 15,000 creating arrears and he later comes and asks for approval, with prior knowledge that what he spent was criminal –

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Members, for that information. I will tell you, hon. Musumba, the report is here and it talks of Shs 270 billion that was approved. Excess of that was spent without parliamentary approval and this is a fact. However, having said that, there is a limit which as Parliament we should not go to. There are itemised expenditures on page 126 of the report but there is one on page 129 that is really disturbing – vehicle cleaning. There is an amount of Shs 186,765,500 out of the budgeted Shs 195,365,000. This means that you budgeted for Shs 195,365,000 to clean 144 vehicles in a space of four days and from the findings, you failed to account for this money. It is really disturbing. 

Paragraph 4.5 of page 125 has supply of motorcycles. Government procured 80 Police motorcycles at a cost of Shs 5 billion. I have calculated and found that each motorcycle cost Shs 63 million; Oh my God! Hon. Members, surely, should we let these people go scot-free when out on the streets you come out with full force state machinery which you unleash on petty offenders here in my constituency, charged with being idle and disorderly, pick-pocketing or stealing mobile phones? You harshly deal with them; isn’t this hypocrisy of the highest order? 

If civilisation means sitting with people who have committed crimes against humanity, then I am afraid we may do away with it. Several people have died because the funds were squandered. If civilisation is all about dealing with petty offenders harshly and we have those who committed crimes of this nature - what hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello called plunder, plutocracy, kleptomania - and we sit with them here to deliberate and throw away the report, then we had better do away with it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by imploring my colleagues to agree and live up to the challenges that we are facing. The biggest challenge we are facing is thuggery of public funds. Now that we have got the big fish, let them face the music. Let them join Mr Cheeye and other people who went to the gallows before, so that they can also share the prisons with the petty offenders who are languishing there. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.20
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairman and his committee for producing this report. If you observe the mood in the House, you realise that there are very few people who are courageously wishing to debate this report. In Arua, there is a common saying, which goes thus: “The cow does not usually climb a tree, but if you wake up one morning and you find a cow on a tree, know that it has been placed there.” Many reports of this nature have been presented to Parliament and, as previous contributors have said, they have been shot down. Many commissions of inquiry have been instituted in the country – from those that probed the junk choppers to the junk uniforms, to the ghosts in the Police force, and to this one that we are debating.

This report truly implicates very many senior citizens, but there is only one that I find very glaring. I believe, just like hon. Odonga Otto has said and I would like to echo my voice on that, if we resorted to court action, by the time we do recovery, it would be miserable. In this report, I am particularly interested in that part that pins hon. Serapio Rukundo. Three days to CHOGM, the said minister had the audacity to convince and mislead the CHOGM team that the J&M Hotel management had invited him to go and see the nearing to completion of the hotel. He fought hard to see the hotel got advanced Shs 2.2 billion for the completion of the construction when CHOGM was just three days away. Even if they brought the best masons, it is naked truth that by the time CHOGM took place, the walls would not have dried. 

How are we going to correct these issues? Many Ugandans have died. In Busoga, for example, people are dying of jiggers; in other parts of the country, poverty is at its highest level; in Mulago, patients are sleeping on the floor because there are not enough beds, but here money has changed hands and nobody is ready to talk about it.

My only disappointment is that however much we debate this report and make our recommendations, I know nothing will happen; but history will one day humble us. I thank you.

5.25
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, UPE County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is not so far disputed as far as this report is concerned is that H.E. the President of Uganda noticed this scandal and sanctioned an investigation into it. I think we should be able to accept that fact.

Secondly, let us also accept that the process of conducting an investigation into this matter was fair. Whoever doubts the procedure that was used to gather this evidence is just being diversionary. I have taken some time to look at this report and realised that every comment that the committee made is tagged to evidence. So, what else are we supposed to do? What else do we have to add on this if every comment on all these allegations is tagged to some evidence? What else do we need to do here apart from asking the House to uphold the recommendations of this committee by taking action?

The other issue is that after going through the response from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that was signed by the Permanent Secretary, Mr Mugume, I got to realise that there is nothing new in terms of denying these allegations. Actually, what he is saying is that this money was appropriated by Parliament two days to CHOGM; but did that warrant the stealing of that money? Did it warrant that money to be diverted? That is what Mr Mugume says in his defence. I see that as totally unacceptable.

The second one, which makes some sense, is the fact that Ministry of Foreign Affairs says that this was a complex event and that is why mistakes were committed. However, if there are mistakes that were made, why don’t we get those confessions instead of dealing with people who are giving outright denials? 

Mr Speaker, that is what I have been able to say, but I also request that the report be given more time for debate. The committee took about seven months compiling this report and I am told the House might give it only two days for debate. If that is true, what justice shall we have given to this report if the members of the committee took seven months – 

THE SPEAKER: Who told you we are giving this report only today? Is it your wish?

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that statement if it is not true. Thank you, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: As I told you, you are a member of this committee; why don’t you leave others to debate your report?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was looking at our rules and was seeking your indulgence with the view that every Member is free to attend any committee meeting where he or she has interest and in that respect, I did exactly that. However, as you may realise, at the end of the day I was not part of the voting or the signing of the report. In which case, I would seek that I be allowed -

THE SPEAKER: I will investigate that and afterwards, I will let you know. 

5.30
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The motto of our country is, “For God and My Country” and it shows the great importance we attach to our Creator. Indeed, whenever we are sworn in, we either hold a Bible or a Koran as a way of signifying that indeed we are so close to our Creator and that is why our motto is, “For God and My Country”.

Having said that, when you look the CHOGM report, I believe that all of us are in agreement that there was abuse and misuse of public funds. I do not think from either side, whether from the Movement side or from the Opposition side, there is any Member who can stand to be counted as saying that the CHOGM report is irrelevant to the issues we are discussing or there was nothing in as far as misuse or abuse of public funds was concerned.

When you look at the Movement side, there are so many colleagues who would wish to contribute on this very important matter. Given the fact that on our side we have contributed, may I forego some of my time to some Members there who are ready to contribute right now to do so - I will contribute later - so that they can stand up to be counted. I can forego some of my time so that I give opportunity -

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, is the speaker the other side in the names of hon. Sebaggala insinuating that we should leave the House and they debate alone? Is he in order to suggest that we should leave or we should not even look at them debating? We are here and elected to be part of this Parliament, so are you in order to deny us the opportunity to hear your summons?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether I should make any ruling on that because it is so obvious; he is not.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What hon. Kasule has done is what exactly I wanted to hear. Some voices from the other side have started coming up so by the end of my contribution, I think many Members will be ready to contribute to this very important debate. 

I do not whether those who are implicated in this report have Uganda at heart. Look at how much was spent; I will not be particular, but hon. Lukwago pointed out the issue of cleaning and washing vehicles. I want to give him more information in as far as the issue of Shs 195 million which was used to clean the vehicles is concern. We were informed that because these vehicles were carrying very important people, there was no way those vehicles could have been cleaned ordinarily, so it would cost each vehicle Shs 1.5 million a day to be cleaned and that is why the total is almost Shs 200 million. We are also informed that the water which was being used was imported from Switzerland and that is why the cost went to that extent.

When you look at the over Shs 92 billion for CHOGM roads, you really wonder. Everyday the President and all of us are complaining about city roads and yet a lot of money during CHOGM was allocated for city roads. Now it is barely two years and it is as if nothing was done. I am a member of the Committee of National Economy and every week we are borrowing money. I cannot recall any week which has passed without any request from Government to borrow. Are we really serious when we borrow a lot of money yet the CHOGM report has indicated wastage and broad daylight robbery of public funds?  

All of us are religious people - we hold the Koran and the Bible - but can we really convince our voters that indeed we are their leaders who they voted into power so that we can improve on their lives? Our voters are hearing about what is going on; I know that many of us when we go to our constituencies, you feel like shading tears. I do not believe there is any Member of Parliament who goes down there to the voters and nods in approval that “Yes, there is an improvement in as far as my voters are concerned in the various ways.” 

Now, if we sit here in this august House to just lament about public funds that were misused without anything to show - hon. Ssekikubo has talked about zero tolerance to corruption, but let us walk the talk. We cannot say that zero tolerance is item No.1 in our manifesto when we do not walk the talk. What shows? What shows that NRM Government has come up to fight corruption? -(Interjection)- I will take it.

MS BARUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you my brother for giving me the opportunity. I want to inform hon. Sebaggala that indeed NRM is walking the talk because the chairman of the party, who is also the President of this country, ordered that the Auditor-General writes this and that is why we are debating it. Thank you so much.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much. I hope he is not the one who ordered you to keep quiet and I believe, Mr Speaker -(Laughter)- , as my honourable colleague, hon. Rusaniya, said, we have seen very many reports debated in this House, but at the end of the day, nothing is done. So, in order to be convinced that indeed there is zero tolerance to corruption, this is a litmus test. At the end of the day when we spend a lot of time discussing the CHOGM report and we just call it a day without anything being done to those who are implicated, to me it will be a clear indication that indeed in the NRM manifesto, corruption has a green light or is allowed to some.  

Finally, for the city lights project, Shs 19 billion was spent to light up the city. (Interjections)  Yes! The money which was used in CHOGM, the Shs 19 billion, was not given to Kampala City Council; it was a separate project under another ministry. If we are complaining that Kampala City Council cannot light up the city because of their meagre resources and yet we had an opportunity for CHOGM to light up the city using Shs 19 billion, I am posing a question - if the city -(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Sebaggala, for giving way. My reading of page 131 of the report indicates that actually Kampala City Council had requested for only Shs 3.5 billion for street lights, but instead Government was generous enough to say, “We shall advance Shs 18.3 billion for that purpose.” So, the earlier request of Shs 3.5 billion, in the opinion of Government, was ridiculous, so they had to multiply it by three or four times.  Thank you.  

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, with those two remarks, I believe we need to pray because I think it is only prayers that can assist us. It is only prayers that can really enable us to ensure that our country is protected from these kinds of scenarios. Otherwise, we are going to spend a lot of time debating this report and at the end of the day those who are implicated are going to be promoted.  

THE SPEAKER: I think I may ask hon. Lukwago, for purposes of the record, to correct the record in respect to cleaning the vehicles. I have looked at it and I have pointed it out to him. The record here provides as follows: “Vehicle cleaning: An amount of Shs 86,765, 500 out of a budget of Shs 195 million was advanced to a particular company to cater for cleaning vehicles for the event. The amount was not accounted for. The committee could not determine the number of vehicles washed and the number of times they were washed. The activity report was not availed and the committee was told that the service provider did not submit it. Under the circumstances, the accounting officers did not obtain full accountability of the use of that fund. The committee recommends directly the accounting officer to ensure the amount for Shs 80…” 

You see, the impression which was given was that if the accountability was given and the money was - here I think the point is the accountability even though half of it or even less was used. I thought this is something that should be cleared, hon. Lukwago. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The record will bear me out. I read out the budgeted amount of Shs 195 million and then the actual amount which was advanced of Shs 86.7 million and the number of vehicles. Here it indicates that they did not indicate, but I got it from the report - the vehicles which were leased and purchased. The amount I got was 144 and that is how I computed it. Originally, the Vice President had indicated there would be 204 vehicles, but now these are the actual vehicles. I am not so sure about this, but the report indicates the actual vehicles; the number of vehicles purchased or leased. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the figures. Actually, we do not know how much of the Shs 86 million was claimed to have been used because accountability was not given. It is clear from the report. It does not require explanation. It is clear from the report that the committee found out that accountability was not given. Proceed.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, my humble request, as I wind up, to all the ministers implicated, is for them to resign. Secondly, they should not only resign, but also refund the public funds. Short of that, we shall know that the NRM Government gives green light to corruption.  

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker and hon. Sebaggala, you are reading the right statement, which we want to put on record, but the information I would like to give my colleague is that the budget was Shs 195 million, but they were initially advanced Shs 86.7 million and none of this money was returned to the Consolidated Fund. That means that the whole Shs 195 million was taken. In such a scenario, you know what took place. I think hon. Lukwago is right, and the number of cars was 144, but not all of them were washed from there because the presidential cars could not be taken there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, I am just reading what is here. Do not explain again what is in writing. What is in writing is that an amount of Shs 86 million was advanced. The only problem is that it was not accounted for; how much was used and how much was not used. I am reading this so you do not have to explain.

MR SEBAGGALA: In conclusion, when it comes to beautification of the city, I think it is hon. Mwesigye who was responsible. So, on Tuesday when she comes up, I will come back to throw more light where she went wrong. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise here to question the report because I am hon. Jessica Eriyo, Minister of State for Environment and Woman Member for Adjumani District.

When the committee presented their report to this House, I was not around. I was in the field together with the Cabinet Sub-committee on Environment and Natural resources - in the oil fields. I was shocked on the 15th May to read in the Daily Monitor that I was among the ministers to be punished because of the CHOGM spending.

The article entitled, “Uganda CHOGM report demands that top government officials be punished”, partly reads that a number of ministers and Government officials were implicated. Others named are junior ministers Jessica Eriyo and others. The report also states that ministers Eriyo and Oryem be held accountable for neglect of duty after they failed to follow up the two ambulances that were never delivered.

I could not understand what was in this article, and when I followed up the matter with the secretariat to the committee, they told me that there was nothing about it because that matter was cleared.

When I read the Hansard, I did not see anything there because I did not have the full report. I did not see anything about me in the Hansard so I took it for granted. When I received this report, I saw my name on page 99 on the Cabinet sub-committee in charge of transport and so forth.

I would like to object to this accusation and I would like to beg the august House to exonerate me from this report and its recommendations for the following reasons:

First of all, when the report was read, I did not know that I was implicated at all. I was only shocked to read it. Secondly, the committee, if not witch-hunting me, did not invite me at all. I was never invited by this committee at all to answer to these accusations. I, therefore, do not know what hon. Nandala-Mafabi and his committee want from me. (Laughter) Yes. Because of this report, I will never give them anything because they do not deserve anything good, not even a smile from me.

Consequently, my good name has been tarnished because everything was on the website and in the newspapers and even some Members of Parliament here, one of them hon. Moses Apiliga in company of others, went to Moyo on radio and were accusing me there for having stolen CHOGM money and eaten the money of this Government and yet I was innocent. I picked a phone - I was in Kampala - and I called hon. Dr Apiliga. He could not even explain; he simply picked what was in the newspaper and used it against me.

Mr Speaker, you can see the implication of this report on a number of colleagues by looking at my example. My constituency, my family and my friends were very shocked. I first received a call from my husband when I was in Hoima and he was shocked. Everyone was asking him and he said, they said you ate money, but I have not seen the money. Where is it?

I have been disturbed since then until I got this report to read and concluded that sincerely there are people who have bad hearts and are against me as a person.

I would like to report here that there was a Cabinet sub-committee composed of different ministries. My ministry was invited at a certain stage, but we also followed up what was going on in the meetings and preparations in order to offer better services that were demanded of our ministry. Meetings were attended on behalf of our ministry by the three of us in the ministry; hon. Maria Mutagamba, the Minister of Water and Environment; hon. Namuyangu, the Minister of State for Water; and sometimes myself.

I do not know of any sub-committee in charge of transport that I was a member of. I only recall during one of the meetings - actually I attended only three meetings. During one of the meetings, it was reported that the vehicles, which were procured had arrived and that some members should go and verify. There was a technical committee and I was among the few ministers who went to inspect the vehicles at the yard of the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

We inspected and brought back the report of what we found there to the main committee. The responsibility of taking decisions and so forth rested on the committee. I, therefore, do not understand why PAC says I should be held accountable for something that I do not know anything about. (Interjections) Just read the report. The committee members - page 99 –(Interjections)- yes -(Interjections)- members who were implicated –(Interjections)- Well, whether there was no recommendation here in the report or not, Mr Speaker, this is what was reported in the Daily Monitor -(Interjections) 

As a result of the presentation –(Interjections)- and I was never called by the committee to defend myself; in fact -(Interjections)- I actually think that because I was not given any fair hearing, my colleagues were also unfairly implicated by this committee. (Interjections)

In fact, I even questioned the procedure of continuing to debate this report when some of us were not heard.

I, therefore, appeal to you as the Speaker of this House and Members of Parliament of this House, to be exonerated from the recommendations of this committee and that my good name is cleared. (Interjections) The implications -(Interjections)- -(Interruption)-

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I have read this report and the findings I have seen on page 99; hon. Jessica Eriyo is just mentioned as a member of the sub-committee. There is no specific recommendation I have seen in this report, specifically about hon. Jessica Eriyo. Is she in order, -(Interjections)- to rely on newspaper reports to form the basis of this debate -[Ms Eriyo: “To clear my name.”]- when the report talks about a totally different thing? Is hon. Jessica Eriyo in order to turn this august House into a press conference, -(Interjections)- to rebut the allegations in the Daily Monitor? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you need to do is to give information to her that she is not implicated at all.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Jessica Eriyo is mentioned on page 99 as a member of the sub-committee. (Interjections) Yes, on page 101 under the recommendations; that is paragraph 2, first and second bullet. “The committee noted that the decision of the sub-committee was not justified. It was motivated by interest and recommends that the Cabinet sub-committee be held politically responsible for interfering with the procurement process and personal interests.” So, having named –(Interjections)- hon. Jessica Eriyo as a member of the sub-committee, this recommendation clearly covers her. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us be clear in our minds. Are you saying the committee had no fault at all or you are saying, you are not? These are two different things. Let us get clarification on that.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you. On page 99 - actually the report starts on page 98, talking about the transport committee and so forth and so forth. It is talking about the procurement process, goes to the findings and then mentions just a few of us. If the committee was talking about the Cabinet sub-committee that dealt with preparations of the CHOGM meeting itself, then the list should have been longer than this. I do not understand why they put very few names here and my name is amongst them; yet for some of the incidences that happened before, I was not personally present in making those decisions. (Interjections)

I am looking at the implications on my name and if the committee says there is no specific recommendation about me here I, therefore, move that my name be cleared by this Parliament –(Interjections)- and I be exonerated from the recommendations of this committee. (Interjections) I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, apparently, this is a prayer by her to us that finally when we are considering this report, we clear her. We are not deciding that now, are we? We are not, but we have heard her prayer.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- for the record, the findings -(Interjections)- I am giving clarification.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, there have been a number of contributions. There was a contribution that we fully adopt the report. Have we adopted it? No, that stage has not come. I think when you heard hon. Sebaggala, his implication was that we totally adopt the report. That was his submission. Why don’t we get submissions, then we proceed?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to clarify on what the hon. Minister was saying regarding how she was brought on board. She has been brought on board based on the report as indicated on this page you were reading. It says and it states - under findings, “The accounting officer of the Ministry of Works told -(Interjections)- this is the same page she was reading where she is mentioned; page 99. “The accounting officer of the Ministry of Works told the committee that we got a verbal instruction from Minister Nasasira to halt the process citing a directive of the Cabinet sub-committee. The Cabinet sub-committee composed of the following…” That was the report of the accounting officer of the Ministry of Works.

We made conclusions thereafter. We are not making conclusions about hon. Jessica Eriyo; we are making conclusions about the committee. The report does not target hon. Jessica Eriyo. So, that is part of collective responsibility. (Interjections)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I intend to contribute next week, but the minister seems to be accusing my colleague, hon. Moses Apilinga that he depended on press reports to do their politics in Moyo. It is not right. Hon. Moses Apilinga should have been here today. We were with him yesterday. Hon. Jimmy Akena lost his father-in-law in an accident – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Apilinga has been away for months. That I can say. Hon. Apilinga has been away for months without giving any explanation as to why he is not here. That is a fact.
 
MR ODIT: But, Mr Speaker, now that his name has appeared, I will struggle very hard for him to come and respond to this matter  -(Interjections)- either tomorrow or Tuesday. I am sure I will do that. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Apilinga has been away for months without giving any reason why he is away – that is a fact. 

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that the hon. Jessica Eriyo was making a point that she is now named in the report, but she was never invited to appear before the committee. And that the conclusion here and recommendations of the committee are holding her responsible as a member of that committee for interfering with the procurement process with personal interests – (Interjections)- this is a very serious accusation. 

So, I thought this Parliament would take position – (Interjections)– I thought, that like it was done before, she should be given an opportunity to be heard or she should not be in the report. I think that is the critical point she was making.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this thing is going on and on, but the issue is that there was no case against her. But then, when you look at the members of that committee; there was H.E. the Vice President as the chairman – on page 99; the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Ezra Suruma; the Minister of Local Government, hon. Kahinda Otafiire; and Hope Mwesigye, Minister of State for Environment; hon. Jessica Eriyo and so on. In this situation, we are assuming they were dealing with this issue. Should they call all the members of this committee to appear? Suppose you find that the chairman appeared on this matter; was it necessary to call others? This is a problem of representation on this committee. 

But I think the consensus has been that there was nothing against her; this is my understanding. There is nothing against her as an individual. Supposing the chairman is given the opportunity to be heard on the issue, do you still have to call all the members?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But the recommendation reads as follows on page 101: “The committee also concluded that the procurement process was wrongfully concealed in total disregard of the PPDA regulations which require that such cancelations shall be recommended to and approved by the respective contract committees”. Then it recommends that, “The committee noted that the discussion of the sub-committee was not justified; it was motivated by interests and it recommends that the Cabinet sub-committee be held politically responsible for interfering with the procurement process and personal interest”. 

How else can I interpret this except to say that it refers to the individual members of the committee?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think hon. Jessica Eriyo came here to defend the committee. She stood to defend her name and everybody agrees that there is nothing against her. I do not think she should take that role when she was not even the chairperson of that committee. To have her defend the whole committee is putting a very big burden on her yet everybody agrees there is nothing against her, save what was published in the newspaper. 

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to that, I would like to state it very clearly here that I was never involved in the process of procurement of any of the items. I was never involved in the procurement process. 

THE SPEAKER: This should be the last contribution today. 

6.16
MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think our objective today is to analyse CHOGM 2007 and the CHOGM report which has been presented by PAC, and responses which have been made. Unfortunately, today, we have two meanings of CHOGM. There is the correct meaning of the acronym CHOGM, which is Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. But it has not been given another meaning: “Corruption Honourable Organisers Grabbing Money” – (Interjections) - but why are we discussing this issue; why are responses being made? I have been receiving responses. 

We are going to analyse and remove those who are not guilty; but for those who are guilty, what is going to be done with them? I think that is the purpose of our meeting. We are aware that a committee was rightfully put in place and these people who have been mentioned did not understand the laws and regulations involved; probably because they had interests of their own. 

I think some of them thought the CHOGM money was so much that even if you take part of it, nobody would notice it. Our challenge now is – when you read the response from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which actually is on page seven of his introduction, under 1(1), “PAC clearing of October/December 2009: In that paper, I have outlined the institutional structures that organised the CHOGM 2007 events and highlighted the tremendous benefits and relations derived from hosting one of the most successful CHOGMs since the 1960s.” 

I think this is a report where some of those who have been implicated think that everything was successful. They know that we are wasting time talking about it here. I think this is an abuse to the people of Uganda because we thought that we were going to get more benefits than we got. Looking at the amounts involved, I think those implicated should accept to refund.

This event was going to bring us permanent development in this country which we have not got. 

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The exact paragraph that the hon. Member was reading -(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: The rules of giving information are that the person holding the Floor allows you to come on and he allowed him. 

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo reminds me of what Sir Kenneth said about Richard Nixon. The point I am making is that what is on page 7 of the permanent secretary’s response is exactly the same information contained in this report of hon. Nandala Mafabi and his committee of PAC on page 8.

I will read them; “Benefits from hosting CHOGM: Uganda definitely benefited from hosting CHOGM 2007, especially in its positive impact on the economy and international standing. The meeting helped the country to lay an infrastructural foundation which is influential to the development of the country. Hosting of CHOGM 2007, which was a national project, resulted into improvement of capacities in various sectors of the economy that are critical to the economic development of Uganda. There is no doubt that Uganda hosted a very successful CHOGM in Kampala from 23rd to 29th November 2007. While substantial amounts of money were invested by the Government, the public – private sector partnership even invested more, thus generating growth, employment and expanding the revenue base, especially in the hospitality, tourism, telecommunications and security sectors. A Bank of Uganda report which was availed to the committee indicated that CHOGM 2007 was one of the key factors that contributed to 9.4 percent GDP growth in 2007.

The committee noted that the country experienced tremendous growth in these sectors:
1.	Construction of new hotels that is from 1,500 to 6,000 hotel rooms, which makes it an increment of 70 percent.
2.	Tourist sites 
3.	International image building 
4.	Infrastructure such as roads and Entebbe Air port.
5.	Creation of business and employment opportunities. 

The committee commends the efforts of Government in hosting this conference.” 

The point I am making is that the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs directly quoted the PAC report in his response.
 
THE SPEAKER: I think we should leave some of these things.

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is true the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, gave those as part of the achievements and they are laudable. There could have been these achievements, but they are not license to abuse the due process. Did we achieve this in accordance with law or we flouted the rules?

It is one thing to talk about the broad economy by a report from Bank of Uganda while seeking Parliament to keep a blind eye about your own transgressions and personal aggrandisement at the end of the day. I think this Parliament should make a distinction between the two.

MR ANGIRO: I think the information that has been given is clear. I want to refer the honourable minister to analyse the statement I wrote. This was a very important remark and our efforts now should not be on how successful CHOGM was and that is why we are tracing for each of the names mentioned here.

We are attempting to build strong institutions of governance which will enable Government to always give accountability. Let us proceed and analyse this. When you get out there, you are criticised for poor work. 

Among the names that have been mentioned, you will find that our role as Parliament today is noted with concern. Although some of them have been giving their defence; still, from what the committee found out and the Auditor-General pointed out, how do we just shut our eyes? Because, even His Excellency the President had directed that these names which have been mentioned in the CHOGM report be investigated. 

I strongly believe that you have no authority to ask me, through the Speaker, because you are a brainchild of the President, whereby you have just been released. If it was not because the President had supported you, hon. Mbabazi, you would not have been the Secretary General -(Interruption)- I am sorry for that. So, you keep quiet. (Laughter) I want protection, Mr Speaker, from hon. Mbabazi. It is too much. There is only one speaker on the Floor and that is hon. Angiro Gutomoi Charles. So, you have to honour that.

I think when you analyse these responses, obviously when you find those who want to speak without your authority are already guilty and they must be brought to book because that is what our conclusion will be at the end of the day. This money was meant to develop the country, but it has gone to develop some individuals. And why should we allow that to happen? That means we are wasting time discussing it because at the end of the day they will go scot-free. Is that how we are going to run this country? I do not think so. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Members for your contributions. We have come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow and the debate will continue tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 October 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
