Thursday, 27 October 2011

Parliament met at 3.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and apologise for the delay of 25 minutes. We were busy doing a number of things. But since our business today is short, I hope we shall do it expeditiously.

In the gallery, we have young leaders and trainees from the Fredreich Ebert Stiftung Foundation, a platform that supports political dialogue among young people including the youth. There is another big group here; I hope I will be told who they are. Otherwise, you are welcome. Actually, one of our Members, hon. Rwakajara, is a product of this training. When I find out who the other group is, I will let you know. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I	REQUEST TO AUTHORISE 	GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO ID 9.11 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) AND ANOTHER US$ 5.0 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PHASE 11 OF THE NATIONAL EDUCATION SUPPORT PROJECT PLUS CONSTRUCT AND EQUIP A TECHNICAL INSTITUTE AT NAKASEKE

II	REQUEST TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 10 MILLION AND ANOTHER UA 10 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND/BANK (AFDB) AND THE NIGERIA TRUST FUND (NTF) RESPECTIVELY, FOR FINANCING THE IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY AT MULAGO HOSPITAL AND IN THE CITY OF KAMPALA

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Privatisation) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table, for consideration by Parliament, a proposal to borrow UA 46 million, equivalent to $73 million and another UA 10 million, equivalent to $15 million, from the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund, respectively, for the financing and improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital in Kampala. I beg to lay.

In the same vein, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to lay on Table, for consideration by Parliament, a proposal to borrow up to Islamic Dinas 9.11 million, which is an equivalent of US$ 14 million from the Islamic Development Bank plus US$ 5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), for financing Phase II of the technical education project and Nakaseke Technical Institute, respectively. I beg to lay.

3.28
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I am well aware of Parliamentary procedures, but I have felt it prudent to stand at this point and raise some preliminary concerns on the second loan request that the minister made – to borrow $5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development, for the implementation of Phase II of the National Education Support Project plus the construction and equipping of a technical institute at Nakaseke.

I think it would not be fair to let this important issue end up in the committee that will report accordingly. All the technical schools in the country are in a sorry state. What is so special about Nakaseke? In fact, in 2002, the Government promised at least one technical school per sub-county all over Uganda. And today, Government is seeking approval of Parliament for a loan just for Nakaseke District. I know this could be talked about in the committee, but this should meet the strongest preliminary objection from Members of Parliament from the beginning. I am saying this because we all have constituencies that need technical schools. (Applause)

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Government has a plan, not only to build these technical institutions throughout the country - at least one per district - but also up to the sub-counties, with time. We have, in this Parliament, approved loans for – actually last year we approved a loan to build technical institutions throughout the country. 

Why we talk about Nakaseke, is because the loan is in two phases. The first phase is for improving the existing technical colleges, Shema, Kichwamba and Bushenyi. Nakaseke is mentioned because it is a new institution all together.

Government has been sourcing for money and we cannot source for the money in a lumpsum to build all the technical institutions at the same time. So, whichever money is available, we allocate it to a district and other institutions as more money gets availed. Otherwise, the intention is to cover the whole country. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Let me give some little information. If we are borrowing money and not spending what we have, and since, as Parliament, we have the authority to approve loans – unless those who are lending us have said that they cannot lend beyond a certain amount, then can’t we borrow for all the technical institutions in the country? I still would like to appeal to Members that this particular request, which is eyeing a specific area, be stayed until the minister brings a comprehensive list of the technical schools in the key regions, at worst, if they cannot afford to borrow for technical schools in all districts.

3.27
MR LATIF SEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have heard the Minister of State for Finance present the two loan requests. But I would like to rise on a procedural matter. Whenever requests are presented to this House, they are committed to the Committee on National Economy. From what I see, we have already started to debate what would be done after a report from that committee has been presented to this House. My request is that the concerns that Members are raising now, could be many, but I think they could be well addressed through the committee. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to express my concern and to support hon. Odonga Otto. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister that at the moment we are sitting slightly over 100 districts in Uganda. I am very well aware that Northern Uganda has benefited a bit in the area of technical institutes through the various programmes and NGOs. I am aware there is one in Gulu and in other districts. He has just mentioned three technical institutes in Western Uganda. I am aware that there are technical institutes within the central region. Why isn’t Eastern Uganda, and most especially Tororo, considered? And why was Nakaseke considered? What criterion was used?

Madam Speaker, we all have constituencies to serve. For example, Tororo Municipality, has built a structure for a technical institute, but we have failed to finish it for the last four years. (Interruption)

MRS LEMATIA: Madam Speaker, I am speaking on the issue of technical schools in this country, as a commissioner who was responsible for these schools. I want to inform the Member that the Northern region has the least number of technical schools. (Applause) For instance, in the whole of Arua region, we have only two: Arua Technical School and Moyo Technical School. Maracha, where I come from, doesn’t have a technical school. 

MR TANNA: I would like to support hon. Odonga Otto that the minister goes back and looks for more money, rather than giving one out of the very many, and at least come back with one per region. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I know it is not normally our procedure to discuss the loan request here, but I think this debate can inform what the committee is going to handle. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we really appreciate the concerns of the Members. My problem is, we are debating a matter that would otherwise be debated in a committee in detail. The Minister of Education under whom this docket falls has all the relevant information - the number of technical institutions in the country and the plans that are in place to address areas that may have a deficiency in this. I want to beg that this debate be deferred for the committee to handle, and for the report of the committee to be forwarded. I beg to move. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. You say this debate can inform the committee. Hon. Minister, next time you bring such a request, have some detailed information. I was the editor of a Lusoga newspaper called Kodheyo. In the Speaker’s constituency, there is no technical school, and the Speaker cannot go to a committee. So, how do you expect Madam Speaker to go to a committee to discuss those concerns? 

In Tororo County, we have something like a technical school, but kindly, do not bring a loan here naming a district. I really want to request the minister to go back and look at some of these concerns. Look at Kamuli, look at Omoro where the Deputy Speaker comes from and other areas. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the past we have met this kind of situation and we have been able to handle it. Sometimes, we have even ensured that adjustments are made. Let us commit it to the Committee on National Economy, but they should take into account what we have said, and we appeal to the members of the committee to examine it in the interest of the whole country. 

Hon. Members, in the gallery, we have Bugema University Students’ Guild. You are welcome. (Applause) 

CONSTITUTION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday I summoned the Business Committee, which convened this morning, and we jointly came up with the terms of reference and the composition of the committee. So, I would like to read the proposed terms of reference for the committee:

1.	“Investigate claims/allegations of bribery in the oil sector in Uganda, including allegations made against Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, Hon. Sam Kutesa and Hon. Hillary Onek, who were specifically mentioned in the Resolution.

2.	Examine the process of procurement of the companies involved in the oil sector, and in addition, critically examine the agreements executed between the Government of Uganda and companies in the oil industry, including the Memorandum of Understanding executed between Uganda Revenue Authority and Tullow Oil (U) Limited in March 2011 in Uganda.

3.	 Scrutinise all revenues so far received by   Government from the oil industry, showing how much has been received from the various sources, for which areas (blocks), and where deposited, and in particular, the following revenues/transactions:

•	Licence fees
•	Signature bonuses
•	Taxes 
•	Royalties
•	State participation
•	Penalty for late payments
•	Inquire into the transfer of money paid by Tullow Oil from the Uganda Revenue Authority Collection Account to the Consolidated Fund Account, especially the delay in the movement of the money, and the circumstances under which it was changed from the dollar to Uganda shillings account.

4.	Investigate the basis of determination of 	recoverable costs.

5.	Examine the extent of Government adherence to earlier parliamentary resolutions in respect of the regularisation of the oil sector.

6.	Examine any other matters related to the above and make recommendations for the sound management of the oil industry.

7.	Examine the arrangements that have been put in place to address the following:

a.   		Environmental factors
b.		Local content
c.		Impact on the local communities.

8.	Report back to the House within three months.”

Hon. Members, although the rules only give me five members for that committee, we nevertheless considered the volume of work involved and we have named a committee of seven constituted as follows:
1. 	Hon Werikhe Kafabusa        	-     NRM
2. 	Hon. Stephen Tashobya		-     NRM
3. 	Hon. Freedom Kwiyucwiny	-     NRM
4. 	Hon. Julius Junjura	           		-      NRM
5.   	Hon. Hussein Kyanjo          	-     Jeema
6.   	Hon. Cecilia Ogwal		-	FDC
7.  	Hon. Matte Sibalinghana		-  Independent 

3.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, hon. Speaker, for reporting to us the work that was done this morning by the business committee. With due respect to the work that we did in our meeting, I have changed my mind after I had a closer reflection on the resolution that was passed by Parliament.

There are many reports that we have lost on the Floor of the House because of technicalities.

There are people who have survived and removed the noose around their neck purely on technicalities. I do not want to see a situation where this ad hoc committee that we have established composed of men of integrity, to lose whatever they gather on technical grounds. 

I invite us to go back to the resolution that was passed by Parliament. I invite you to look at resolution number nine, which specifically says that Parliament sets up an ad hoc committee to investigate claims and allegations of bribery in the oil sector and report back to Parliament in three months.

We have come up with terms of reference which have expressed our concerns emanating from the debate on 10th and 11th about the entire oil sector. I fear that the terms of reference that we have to conform to resolution number nine, which is very restrictive.

I wish to humbly propose that this House looks at this matter in a pronged approach. The ad hoc committee should specifically focus on resolution number nine, which is clear. It is to investigate into the allegations of bribery.

The rest of the issues that are clearly put in the terms of reference can be handled by another ad hoc committee or a standing committee for the sector.

If we do not take it that way, you will be there, and on that day, I bet it will be shot down on that technicality. They will come up and say, but your resolution is very clear; it is only talking about the allegations of bribery, why have you widened it?

I am saying this in good faith; I do not want us to spend resources and time and then at the end of the day, it is shot miserably on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: I am very alive to what hon. Wadri is saying. When I convened the business committee this morning - and he was there, and he is part of this decision - I told them that I have the resolution, but I also know what was discussed and the things that the country wanted to know.

Do I confine myself to just the bribery and leave the other issues? And we as the business committee agreed together that let us include all the issues that were raised in the House because they were part of our debate. 

3.47
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): I share the fears of hon. Wadri, but I think we should put the terms of reference in the right context. I am not a lawyer, but look at the terms of reference you enumerated, which came as a result of our deliberations. If someone is making an allegation of bribery, how sure are you that this allegation is not linked to transactions from signature bonuses? Suppose it is linked to wrong computations of recovery costs.

I still argue that the terms of reference you have enumerated are not really deviating substantially from that core resolution.

3.49
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the work so far done and I do hope that the Members mentioned shall be in position to discharge this task entrusted to them.

As you may know, these are Members of Parliament, but before a Member can leave this country, you go through the Foreign Affairs Ministry. You get the per diem authorised by the Prime Minister. 

I am raising this because as Members embark on this process, they shall have to look forward to the implicated officials for their facilitation, authorisation and accreditation. I do not know how they shall disassociate from doing these duties. It is a fact, whether we like it or not. How shall these Members extricate themselves from the supervision of these officers in these offices?

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing first with the terms of reference. Can we agree on the terms of reference?

3.51
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): I think according to Rule 164, you as the business committee sat and came up with an agreement. The terms you have given are clear, but I think they are quite broad, and in my opinion, I think what we should include as Parliament is that the time is extended. 

The fact that you have even broadened the terms, and to remove the worry of hon. Wadri, the motive of forming the ad hoc committee was to investigate the bribery first. Now the terms have been broadened for the entire sector, and I even heard you state that “any other matters related”.

Let us say that we have given them three months and any other time that may be extendable.

THE SPEAKER: If they have difficulties, they will apply.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for being firm and this has enabled this Parliament to institute a committee to investigate issues that are very important to this country. As an MP for Aruu County and a member of FDC, I really want to thank you very much. Having said that, the terms of reference; the first one states, “To investigate claims or allegations of bribery in the oil sector in Uganda including allegations made against Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, Hon. Sam Kutesa and Hon. Hillary Onek, who were specifically mentioned in the Resolution.”

I am of the strong opinion that term of reference No.1 be delinked from the activity of this committee. Four years ago, I made a statement in public that Members of Parliament received bribes during CHOGM. I was made to go to the disciplinary committee to substantiate my allegations against fellow Members of Parliament. I went to the disciplinary committee, then chaired by hon. Asuman Kiyingi, and I tabled evidence because it is very serious for a Member of Parliament to state that colleagues took bribes. I made my allegations and the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges which is empowered by Rule 149, gave a formal report in Parliament. So, I am of the strong opinion - because the individuals we are dealing with are very influential. 

You know what happened during “Temangalo”. There was a minority report and some of the individuals who were the first to give the minority report are also on this ad hoc committee. They left the main group and came with their report. So, I am of the opinion that the issues of bribery allegations against the three ministers be delinked and handled by the rules, discipline and privileges committee so that this ad hoc committee can really save this country from all the dealings that have been happening in oil for the last 10 years. The moment we tie the two, I can assure you that after three months, the committee will say, “We have cleared the ministers.” We will have lost focus from the difficult issues of loyalty and environmental impact assessment. 

So, I really think that other than sending a committee to investigate allegations against individuals, who have also been mentioned, we will remove that first term of reference and take it to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, and leave this ad hoc committee to bring a comprehensive report on oil that will help this country because where we are now, we do not have any law on oil -(Interjection)– no, what we have are just pieces of paper called law. We do not have substantive legislation to regulate the oil sector, yet we have used Shs 885 billion from the oil revenue. 

Madam Speaker, I am strongly persuaded that investigating the conduct of hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, hon. Hillary Onek and hon. Sam Kutesa, has become routine for this House. From the Sixth Parliament, hon. Sam Kutesa was there; for “Temangalo”, hon. Mbabazi was there. It is now a hobby for this Parliament to investigate these people. We could just leave them and focus on the real issues of finding where our oil money has gone. I beg to submit. 

3.56
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter before us is very important and my comment is directed to Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda, which I beg to read verbatim and very briefly: “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.” On the 11th day of October, the plenary session of Parliament represented the people I am talking about to take a decision of significant nature. What we expected in the Business Committee is not what I have seen, with due respect to those who attended the meeting. What we expected was to translate the contents of resolution no.9 of what we passed, but I see new assignments, many of which encroach on what we are supposed to do. 

We passed in our resolution of importance that Government must expedite the passing of appropriate laws that will address oil harvest, and now we are giving ourselves extra assignments and in so doing, we are encroaching on people, the silent population which is waiting for the investigation of these people over bribery allegations. You should not divert us. Let us stick to what we assigned ourselves. I, therefore, with due respect, Madam Speaker, beg that the name of this Parliament is very serious to the people we represent. Let us assign ourselves what was assigned to us; that is the committee investigating the bribery aspect. For the rest of the undertakings, we have to wait for appropriate laws, including the visitation of Article 244 of the Constitution, before we go ahead. We should not shift positions as if we are going to the moon. 

3.59
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are debating is a manifestation that on the day we debated the oil sector, we used a lot of emotions and we came out with resolutions without seeing the implications of these resolutions. If it were not resolved then that “one” of the terms of reference would be investigating the ministers that were accused here, then I would have taken hon. Odonga Otto’s line, but the fact that we have put that in the resolution going against the spirit of articles 42 and 44 of our Constitution, which gives room for a fair hearing and fair treatment, and I can read it verbatim. Article 42 says, “..right to just and fair treatment in administrative decisions.” This applies to other sectors, but in particular in our case, Article 44(c) under prohibition of derogation from particular human rights and freedom.  Article 44(c) says, “...the right to fair hearing...” we are already, as Parliament, condemning our colleagues before we have even heard or investigated them. 

In this Parliament, we have also realised that there is already a constitutional petition against our decision in Parliament - Petition No.47 put before the Constitutional Court. Our Rules of Procedure –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, if I may be protected from Members. I seek guidance from you whether if there is a matter before court – Rule 61 “... shall not be made to any matter on which a judicial decision is pending in such a way as may, in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party and action.” 

We realise that there is already a petition in the Constitutional Court. I seek your guidance on whether it is proper for us to continue debating and forming an ad hoc committee when there is a petition in court.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, it is against our rules to anticipate. You are anticipating what the Constitutional Court is going to say. If I am served with an injunction to stop, I will comply. But to say that a case has been filed and, therefore, Parliament must stop its work, I will not accept. 

4.03
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you. Following the debate that we had for the ad hoc committee and the points of references that the Business Committee made for them, I would like to move an amendment to term of reference No.1. It says, “in Uganda” at a certain point, I think on the first line.  I would like to add, “In Uganda, Dubai, Malta, UK, Switzerland and any other country thereby required,” because to my knowledge, no given bank, even though in Uganda  would give you my bank statement, for example, without a chief magistrate’s order; that is a Commonwealth law.  And most of these countries that have been mentioned would require those orders, unless we get it clandestinely, because people’s reputations are at stake.  You would want the committee to present to us a certified copy for them to walk into a court in those countries, if we made this resolution, they would use that as a reference to apply in any court. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

4.04
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I salute all of you hon. Members.  I come from Obongi and Obongi Constituency as one of the areas in which oil exploration is taking place, and has particular concerns on this issue. I would also like to call upon my brother, hon. Todwong from the former Amuru, which is the current Nwoya, an area with “serious” oil; oil has already been discovered there. It is not like the one in Obongi, which is still being searched for.  If you cannot look into the other issues concerning your people, then there is a big disappointment waiting for us. 

Madam Speaker, I have been weighing the words of my senior brother, hon. Wadri, and the terms of reference that you have provided here and again, the fears of how this committee will work alongside or guided by these terms of reference without facing obstacles along the way to produce the results that will help Uganda.
 
My prayer to the Members of Parliament here is that we should not peg ourselves to term No.1 of the terms of reference. If we do that, we shall lose direction because the answer to our question is either “yes” or “no;” did these ministers take a bribe, yes or no? If the person resists this, definitely know what the answer is likely to be, and so, do not go there.  Let us be mindful of the remaining oil which has not yet been sold; which has not yet been lost through bribes; which has not yet been stolen through bribes; which has not yet been stolen from underground; let us create mechanisms of protecting what is remaining. If we say we want to recover what has been lost, you will lose. That is where my fears are.

I would also like to address myself to the big question of saying “Fair hearing.” I thought in the investigations, there will be hearing provided for the accused people. Will that not be fair my brother, Todwong through the Speaker?  How do you say, “Fair hearing,” when somebody is providing a platform for you to be heard with your lawyers and power? Why do you conclude that there is no fairness when you have not yet been heard?  People have not heard from you; they have just begun hearing from you and you are saying there is no “Fair hearing.” What are you talking about? 

4.07
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. The House on the 10th and 11th discussed and resolved - we made 10 resolutions and one of them was to form an ad hoc committee to investigate the alleged bribery of the ministers. (Applause)  I, therefore, request that we do not fall back on the resolutions that we made because I have been hosted on radio programmes talking about the retreat and the picture that had been given was that when we went to Kyankwanzi we were compromised; we were bribed to drop the allegations. Now we have got the chance to investigate these ministers. If they are –(Interruption)– I allow the information. 

DR OMONA: I thank you very much hon. Member for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the situation that prevailed in this House on the 11th of this month is something that this country will go a long way to remember.  My constituents have said if I oppose the investigation that would go ahead to investigate the Members mentioned in this, they will recall me from Parliament. Now that it has come up, why is it that since we have gone a long way to make this country know exactly whether these are genuine allegations or not, we now want to backtrack, hon. Members?  Are we serious here? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would have bought the argument of hon. Odonga Otto; very worthy idea, but unfortunately, if it is possible to undo what happened in this House on the 11th, I would buy his idea; but if it is not the case, why not let us go ahead and find out the truth about these matters? 

Finally, I would like to say that around the year 473 after the fall of the Roman Empire, when the Germanic laws replaced the Roman laws, there was what we call “trial by ordeal”. In this case, when you are suspected, you are subjected to either some test or actually killing. For example, when they suspect that Omona raped a woman, they can throw me in a pond. If you sink they say, “You see, he has committed the rape.” But if you float, they say, “He is innocent.” And this is exactly what happened in this House, Madam Speaker.  This House is turning itself into a court of mob justice on a market day -(Interjections)- and this is the time for us to prove that the honourable members of this House are either innocent or guilty and they must say it.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was holding the Floor, can I be protected -(Interruption)

MR TANNA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable member in order to say that what we did here on the 11th, a fully-fledged House chaired by you, and where both sides of the House came out and debated fully until late in the night - sacrificing hours - and he comes and says that what we did here was mob justice. Is he in order, Madam Speaker? I would like to request if your wise ruling is that he is not in order, he withdraws and apologises to this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omona, you know the work of the Speaker is to listen and I listen quite a lot. On the Floor of this House, hon. Onek said the following words: “I welcome this investigation.” It cannot be mob justice. So, withdraw.  (Applause) 

DR OMONA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As always, I respect your ruling and I very humbly withdraw.  (Applause)

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I want to complete my point. In the spirit of the words of hon. Tanna when he says we sat here, spent hours into the night and we resolved that we set up a committee, I request that the committee goes ahead and does its work.

Secondly, I agree with what you have come up with as terms of reference. They are wide enough to enable the committee investigate all areas where we suspect bribery or corruption should have emanated from. They are also narrow enough to take us to the area of approving whether there was bribery or corruption as far as the oil sector is concerned. So, I support that we go ahead and receive the report, we find out who is guilty and who is not. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we do not need to continue debating this matter. Hon. Members, I want to say that if the time is not sufficient, they will come back here and apply for extra time. I now put the question that this House adopt the terms of reference as well as the composition of the committee, as amended by hon. Tanna.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Mivule Primary School, Mutungo. They are represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome.

We also have pupils and teachers of Iganga Boys Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Olivia Kwagala and hon. Milton Muwuma. They are welcome. 

The chair is hon. Werikhe.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I thank the House for supporting the investigation, but I want to be on record to find out who the chair of the committee is. If the answer is what I heard that it is hon. Werikhe then we have a lot of reservations. I do not know where we can put those reservations. I beg for your advice.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, when you put the question, I did not hear whether you said the ‘ayes’ have it or the ‘nays’ have it.

THE SPEAKER: I did; I said the ‘ayes’ have it.

MR OTADA: Okay, thank you. (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose.)

THE SPEAKER: You have reservations?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I would also like to join my colleagues in saying that we have reservations about the choice of the chair. I sit on the Natural Resources Committee as Shadow Minister in Charge of Environment and I want to give testimony that I have no trust in the chairmanship you have proposed.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that chair will have all those six other members. That chair will also have technical support from lawyers, researchers and they will have a team to support them. Hon. Werikhe has never been a Minister of Energy. No, he was a Minister for Housing; he has never been in the Ministry of Energy. We have finished that matter, let us go to something else.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE GOVERNMENT OF SAUDI ARABIA FOR GRANTING WOMEN THE RIGHT TO VOTE

4.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the government and women of Saudi Arabia upon being granted the right to vote.

“Whereas gender roles in Saudi Arabia are regulated by Sharia and tribal culture with strict adherence to a version of Islamic law that enforces the segregation of the sexes. 

AND WHEREAS Islamic Sharia law is based on the Koran and Hadith, the teaching of Mohammed.

NOTING THAT Saudi Arabia has been ruled by an absolute monarchy supported by conservative Wahab Clerics where religious police patrol the streets to ensure public segregation between men and women.

FURTHER NOTING that all women in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia regardless of age are required to have a male guardian.

COGNISANT of the fact that women in Saudi Arabia and other liberal activists in the country have long called for greater rights for women who are barred from travelling, working, participating in politics, having medical operations without the permission of male relatives and driving among others.

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that women have been engaging the government for political reform, but in a country where conservative clerics and senior members of the ruling family oppose even minor changes, liberalisation has been very gradual.

RECONGNISING that King Abdullah has embraced some reforms and that he, in consultation with senior clerics, decided to involve women in the Shura Council as members and has granted women the right to vote and run as candidates in the municipal elections.

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that:

1.	This Parliament congratulates the government and people of Saudi Arabia, especially the women, upon the decision of the government granting women the right to vote.
2.	Call upon the government of Saudi Arabia to work towards granting the women their full fundamental rights and freedoms as embedded in the various United Nations Conventions.
3.	Encourage the women and people of Saudi Arabia to continue with the struggle aimed at the attainment of all their fundamental rights.”   I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MS AMONGI: Thank you.

4.24
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion based on the importance attached to it, not only in Saudi Arabia, but the whole world. The unification of monarchies in Saudi Arabia was in 1932 and this is 2011. Therefore, it has been a long struggle for our fellow women to be recognised in Saudi Arabia. It is, therefore, important that we join the rest of the world to congratulate women and their government.

Secondly, the granting of the right to vote is, not only a recognition of the women as stakeholders in the governance of Saudi Arabia, but also attainment of their independence in totality. This mandate will help our fellow women in Saudi Arabia to participate in all the processes of decision-making and instil in them the aspect of responsibility and also accomplishing their roles as women in governance of Saudi Arabia. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The motion has been seconded; may we now hear the justification from hon. Amongi.

MS AMONGI:  Madam Speaker, the struggle in Saudi Arabia by women, has been a long one. In that country, simple rights like driving and going for medical care – which we enjoy in this country – you have to be accompanied by a man. Most importantly, the political rights to vote – which is fundamental – the right for you to determine who should lead you has not been exercised by the women of Saudi Arabia. They could not participate in any decision-making in their country. For long, they have been struggling and many have been incarcerated. The king, fortunately, is one of those accommodative to reforms, but sometimes it is difficult because –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you hon. Amongi for giving way. While I support what hon. Amongi has moved, I want to inform her and the whole House that the latest news is that the women of Yemen have unveiled themselves and have burnt all their veils. Moreover, this is a result of the “Arab Spring”. While we look at Saudi Arabia, its change of mind came because of the “Arab Spring”. So, we should congratulate those women because even in Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and currently in Syria, women were at the forefront of the “Arab Spring”. I think while we congratulate the Saudi Arabia Government for yielding to pressure, we should also congratulate those women for the courageous stance they have taken in those Arab countries. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would also like to add some more information. Within the Inter-Parliamentary Union, we were in Santiago in Chile and the Saudi Arabians wanted to join the IPU. Initially, we had objected because they had no parliament, but then when we discussed about it we agreed to allow them in while keeping pressure on them. So, for the last seven years, every time they come to the meeting, we would ask them, “Where are the women in your delegation? Your voting rights are reduced.” So, IPU has also been putting pressure on the Shura Council. (Applause)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a matter I do not need to labour much on. I just want to thank the government and the women who have struggled. My appeal goes to women all over the world, especially within the context of the United Nations, to –(Interruption)

DR OMONA: Thank you, hon. Amongi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I totally support this motion and it reminds me that whereas women in other parts of this world are struggling for their rights, in Uganda, the NRM actually thought about affirmative action for women even before they struggled for it. It also reminds me of the saying that, “The day you develop a boil in your buttocks, is when you will realise that it is a structure meant for sitting you up.” This reminds me of how much the NRM has done for the women without a struggle on their part. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS AMONGI: Thank you for that information, but I would like to let you know that the struggle for women’s empowerment in Africa and particularly in Uganda, dates back to pre-independence and post-independence times. So, I want us, as the people of East Africa and Africa as a whole, to support Arab countries. 

Recently when I was in Nairobi, I met a woman from Tunisia, who took part in the recent uprising and wants to stand for the presidency in their country. As much as she recognises that she has a huge task ahead of her, she says it is one of the first steps she should take to encourage more women to take part in public life. So, this in itself – the giving of women the right to vote – although it is not immediate, it is a first step in Saudi Arabia and we would expect it to join the rest of the world in supporting the promotion of democratic, economic and social rights of women. I congratulate the women and the government of Saudi Arabia. Thank you.

4.31
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I will just be giving some information to the movers of this motion. First, before we pronounce ourselves on this motion, we are duty-bound to extend our sincere condolences to the government of Saudi Arabia upon the demise of the Crown Prince, Sultan Abdul Aziz, who was buried three days ago. Indeed, Madam Speaker, it was a big loss to the kingdom because he is the person who has been heir to the throne.

Secondly, I would like to inform hon. Amongi that among the issues she has pointed out to show that women in Saudi Arabia have not been free, is the fact that they are escorted to the hospital. The dignity given to the women in Saudi Arabia is such that they do not go to the hospital without being accompanied by their husbands. That is a sign of love! (Laughter) Here in Uganda, mothers go to hospitals without their husbands and these are the reasons as to why these people in Saudi Arabia -(Interruptions)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Uganda today, there is advocacy going around in every antenatal clinic where men are urged to accompany their women. This happens in Uganda. So, what is happening in Saudi Arabia for the sake of women going to hospital accompanied by their men is a good thing we want to copy in Uganda.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I want to ask for clarification that in a situation where you are not married and maybe, you are an orphan and you want to go to the hospital. You reach the hospital and you have your money, maybe you are even a foreigner working in Saudi Arabia; you go to the hospital without - first of all, if you do not obtain the permission of a male - why is it that males are not required to obtain permission or to be accompanied? It is only women to acquire that permission. Why, if it is not discriminatory.

MR SSEBAGALA: The reason as to why it is like that in Saudi Arabia - look at the level of HIV in Saudi Arabia; it is zero. Therefore -

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ssebagala is just being sarcastic. (Laughter)

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, unless my time will be added so that I can give them room.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want from the honourable member is that, whereas he appreciates that the people of Saudi Arabia, especially men, are involved in accompanying their women to the hospitals, which we are also promoting back home here in Uganda, the issue of male involvement - I would like him to tell us why they deny them other rights, which rights would bring them at the forefront of participating in other areas rather than being escorted to practice the reproductive health alone, and yet we expect women to also participate in the economic, political and other social activities.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, what honourable members should know is that Saudi Arabia is governed by Sharia Islamic Law. Definitely, you cannot really think that Sharia Law can really be compared to secular law. Sharia Law has specifications with the dos and the don’ts. 

So, the responsibility of making sure that some laws are maybe amended, is upon the muftis, and that is upon Islamic scholars. Even if we talk here advocating for more rights as the Motion is stating, we should not forget that Saudi Arabia is governed by Islamic law and when it is governed by Islamic law, there are some things that cannot be changed unless after scholars have sat and agreed according to Hadith and according to the Koran.

So, I suggest that this Motion may really be an embarrassment to the Saudi Arabian Government and I will not support it.

4.38
MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. The three principles of liberty, equality and fraternity were propagated by the 1789 French revolution when Count Mirabeau led the then representatives in the États-Généraux or the Estates General that had for a long time not be convened by King Louis XVI into the Tennis Court Oath. 

That was the mother of all revolutions in the world and just like this; this is a new wave of revolutions in the entire world. It is true that before, even voting was unheard of and it was only monarchs. 

When the war raged in the Americas in 1776 to 1783, no one would further expect that leaders would not be installed by the use of arms, but by use of the ballot paper. 

Hon. Members, today, the whole world is changing and we all have to realise that Saudi Arabia cannot be left standing alone in the wilderness.(Applause)

It is true that Sharia has been prescribed onto us, but it is also clear that the rules of Sharia Law are one, the holy Koran; and two, the Hadith or the sayings of the prophet and his deeds plus his silent approvals; and finally, for what has remained silent, they have called on reason to prevail. 

Therefore, today, the question in the world is might versus reason. You may reign with might, but finally reason shall prevail. It is true that the wahabists like the honourable member mentioned, who acquired power through might, have reigned by the sword and by the gun, and have used the arrogance of money to reign on their people and suppress all their needs and demands, but the whole world as a global village today is moving by the rule of reason.

Whosoever suppresses reason is acting like a person seated on a charcoal stove. You may sit on it for such a time, but when the flames continue to burn you, you will jump up and start hopping as the fire rages on. (Laughter)  

It is true the women in Saudi Arabia were not given the right to vote, but the principles of Islam were also clear even after the demise of the Prophet Mohammad - Peace be upon Him. The democratic system of the Shura that she mentioned prevailed -(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I want to thank the mover of the Motion and the seconder for bringing this Motion. Definitely, what has happened in Saudi Arabia was long overdue because women needed their freedom yesterday and not today, but nevertheless, it is good they have got it now.

Women play a very important role in society in as far as economic, social and political developments are concerned and it is just fair that they are given their due freedom like that of voting. 

My prayer is that other countries that may have not effected this freedom borrow a leaf from Saudi Arabia, and I also pray that even within Saudi Arabia itself, the women should be given more freedom. I have been following the incident of women not being allowed to drive. I think this is an issue that has to be handled; and others who are not allowed to leave their houses; they should even get more freedom.

But as we are looking at Saudi Arabia, even in Africa, we should look at ourselves. The freedom that the women have; we have to enhance it and in this respect, I must point out that in South Africa, in  PAP where we have been, we were held in high esteem for going with a delegation of three women and two men. No country in PAP had such a delegation. In fact, we had a case of a country that came when all of them were men and initially, they were not sworn in. One of them tried to look for a dress, but could not get it, but eventually, they had to work it out. This implies that even in Africa itself, we have not given the women the freedom that they need and, therefore, as we look at Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries, we should also re-examine ourselves as Africa to enhance and expand on what the women already have so that they can attain greater freedom. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Rusaniya comes, I have information for the House. Last month, one of the women in Saudi Arabia had broken the ban against driving and she was taken to court and sentenced to be lashed! Then I think - maybe it was this dead king who said, “No!” and she was pardoned. She was taken to court for driving a car! Yes, she was supposed to be caned for driving a car. 
4.44
MS BEATRICE RUSANIYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): I thank you very much Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I want to thank the mover of the motion and I want to congratulate the women of Saudi Arabia for having got their right to vote. We are talking about Saudi Arabia and we are congratulating them, but even here, we still have many handicaps. In this Parliament, we have a caucus for women that is not recognised and funded at all, but just survives on civil society and NGOs. In the Pan African Parliament where we have just come from, there is a caucus. But I want to say that that caucus is there because the first president of the Pan African Parliament was a woman; Madam Mongela.  I think we need many women leaders because Madam Speaker, when we see you there, some of us become strong and that is why our country managed to send –(Interjections)- I am a bit – oh my God!

MS NTABAZI: I thank you Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. What my colleague is saying is that much as we are celebrating and enjoying the freedom that our colleagues have got, we also still have a very long journey to go. There are many organisations in this country which still regard a woman as somebody who cannot perform. There are certain religions, for example, the Seventh Day Adventists, where you will hardly find a pastor who is a lady. When you go to the Muslim community –(Interjections)- you will hardly find a Sheik who is a lady –

THE SPEAKER: No hon. Member, do not divert from the motion.

MS NTABAZI: Madam Speaker, I was trying to put organisations which are in community nature –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rusaniya, please complete – has she finished?

MS RUSANIYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need protection.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS RUSANIYA: I was saying that we still need more leaders and we need to promote women because as we sit in the chamber of this august House, 100 percent of us were really born by a mother – I mean that we all have a woman in our lives and it is something that puts us together. I think 90 percent of us have got a beautiful wife by our side and also 90 percent have got a daughter. So, we need to continue supporting women not only to be there, but also to be in leadership positions. I want to congratulate the people of Saudi Arabia and I want us to continue with the struggle. As we talk about succession every day, we need to also zero on a woman as the President of this country. I thank you.   

4.48
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the mover and the seconder of this motion and I wish to state that I support women emancipation. (Applause) One scholar called Robert Brown once said that what you see depends on where you stand. I, therefore, wish to caution Members in this House that the rights of women in Saudi Arabia are a result of the phobia in cultural infusions that the Saudis have feared - the eroding of their cultural institutions by the western world. Driving as a Muslim is not mentioned anywhere in the Koran and, therefore, it is not correct that if you stop a woman from driving, then that is a religious right. It is not. A woman can also drive like any other human being -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: I thank you very much. I wish to thank hon. Hood Katuramu for yielding. The information I want share with you is that I was privileged to be in Saudi Arabia last December and more specifically in Riyadh. At that time, hon. Jack Wamai was on the team and the Clerk to the committee then, Mr Robert Tumukwasibe, who is here at Table, was also with us in Saudi Arabia. Wherever we went in Saudi Arabia, the most surprising thing was that even when we went to a supermarket, we could not see women. 

In the streets of Riyadh, you will not see a woman moving alone whatever the age. Whether young or senior, you must be accompanied by a man! Then you go to a restaurant and there will always be a curtain in between. If you are a woman who has come there with your child and you are not accompanied by a man, you will go on one side and then if you are a man and you have gone with your wife, you go to sit where women are. It is suspected that because you have got your wife there, you will not have the opportunity to be tempted to another who is sitting nearby. So, that is how restrictive the situation in Saudi Arabia is, and I hope that with this starting point of emancipation, that it really goes across the whole length of emancipating women in that country. I thank you.

MR KATURAMU: The Chief Whip in the Opposition is supporting what I said in principle. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, in this House, there is a pending Bill that has not come to this House for debate. The Bill on the gay people that they are supporting – the homosexual bill and one of the reasons is that Uganda cannot bring and table this Bill because we are dependent on the rights of people who are homosexuals to be given their freedom. We feel that as a country, this erodes our cultural integrity. (Applause) Those who think that it is a human right, depends upon where they stand; that is in their countries. 

If you look at the dressing attire, Saudi Arabia promotes that a lady should dress decently, by covering herself. Here, a lady will dress the way she wants because she wants that right. So, it will depend upon the society where that law may apply. However, I do support that there is no problem for a woman in Saudi Arabia to vote a leader of her choice; she should vote. But what has been happening is that there has been an erosion of cultural civilisations, particularly from the Western World – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Migadde comes in, I want you to join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Midland Primary School, from Nakasongola; you are welcome. They are represented by hon. Peter Nyombi and hon. Margaret Komuhangi. 

I also want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Ntunda Primary School represented by Hon. Ssekitoleko, Nakifuma; you are welcome. (Applause) I also welcome pupils and teachers from Zibondo Primary School represented by hon. Lubogo and hon. Flavia Munaba. And, I also welcome pupils and teachers of Kyampisi Primary School represented by hon. Idah Nantaba; you are welcome. (Applause)

4.57
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to some Members indicating that a man going with a woman is a form of protection to the woman. Actually, I look at that as possessive tendencies, especially if the follower is not welcomed by the person being followed. (Laughter)

What has happened in Saudi Arabia is long overdue. Countries such as Finland have had women MPs since 1907. And in Uganda, we are celebrating the first woman Speaker of Parliament –(Applause)– but other countries have had women on board for the last so many years. So, this has been long overdue and it should not stop only at voting, but they should also participate in politics. This will uplift their well-being and bring about equality. I know equality is not easy to achieve, but these women have so many issues. So, when they get involved in politics, they will actually be able to articulate issues concerning women more than men. 

It is very surprising that during this era of technology, there are still countries where women are not allowed to drive. In Uganda, when you get some little money, you want to buy your wife a car. So, we congratulate them. 

This should be an encouragement to Uganda; if a country which is governed by Sharia Law has managed to do that, then how about us who are not under Sharia? We should go a step further. So, fellow women –(Interjections)– I should say fellow women because we are one in terms of ideology though not in sex; we are behind you. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): I thank you Madam Speaker and the movers of the motion. The Declaration of UN on Human Rights says that man and woman are equal. Therefore, both have rights to all that is to do with humanity. But it has been discovered that women are being suppressed in our rural areas. They are suppressed, oppressed, exploited and dehumanised. This has caused them much suffering. 

Not only that, we the parents, especially in the rural areas, tend to send our sons to school while the girls are given out for marriage. This has not helped to lift the status of women. Not only that, we are being made to do all sorts of work. And we women are also to blame because we feel inferior –(Interjections)– let us come out of that inferiority complex, so that we can also assert our rights and develop accordingly –(Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Aza for giving way. We should all note that the process of transformational leadership based on the principles, will occur only when a critical mass of women emerge and are committed to influencing the increase of gender balance participation, policies and leadership. 

I want to thank hon. Amongi for recognising this and bringing it to the attention of this House for us to congratulate the people of Saudi Arabia. I personally believe that women and men working in equal partnership in both politics and public life would lead to a quantum shift in the way different countries, ethnic groups relate to each other; and this is advancement towards equality. 

I would like, therefore, to allay the fears of hon. Latif that it is a process. He cannot hide the head and leave his legs out; the process will catch up with him. 

5.00
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Women Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Amongi Betty for the following reasons. While the women of Uganda are enjoying a conducive political atmosphere ushered in by the NRM Government, our sisters of Saudi Arabia have not been doing so. Women in Uganda can vote and be voted; but this has not been the case with our sisters in Saudi Arabia. 

Now that they have achieved this very important goal, I want to congratulate them and encourage them to use it meaningfully. Hopefully, they can now vote to decide on their marital status and other things that have not been possible. So, I thank hon. Amongi.

5.02
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I thank you so much hon. Speaker for the pressure that you have been putting on those people each time you went there. Sometimes pressure from out can force you to do something that you were not supposed to do. I am sure every time you asked them, “Where are the women”; they were forced to put the women on table. We thank you for that. 

Then I would like to congratulate the Saudi Arabians for achieving the right to vote. But I think the right to vote is still escorted by men. As you go to vote, they still take you to vote. And I was wondering about the trips that the women take to the market. This is because for us as women, in the process of having children, we sometimes tend to forget a lot. You go for the tomatoes and you will forget, and then you realise that you must have the salt, which makes you go back there. Are the men ready to take the women back and forth each time they want to pick something from the market?

There is also this issue of a man escorting a woman to the hospital. Ladies note this; these men, I am sure, hit their women at night and the following morning they take them to the hospital so that such women do not have to say anything. They are the ones to speak for them. A man, for example, will tell the doctor or nurse that the woman has a headache because he knows pain killers will be administered to her to cool the pain.
So, as we congratulate the Saudi Arabian women, we need to note that they do not have the full rights to enjoy. I am sure women in that country are still not allowed to drive because there is a belief that it is the women on the wrong side all the time yet it is usually them. 

Madam Speaker, as you continue with your visits to those Arab countries, please insist on the rights of women by talking to them alone without their husbands. That way, you will be able to find out what kind of rights they are enjoying. I am saying this because we may think that they have been allowed to vote when actually they are only voting men.

5.05
MS ABIA CHRSTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is a historic moment for the women in Saudi Arabia that they have been granted the right to vote. We are proud they came out for that. 

The biggest question, however, is: Vote for what? Voting means they will be able to make informed decisions about who governs them and who manages their country. That is fundamental. Why is this coming after so many years of repression? It is basically because the king has realised that the Arab Spring is spreading so fast. It is also a realisation that bottling up voices for decades is no longer something that the citizenry can tolerate. 

That makes me picture the home situation. We are women Members of Parliament but, Madam Speaker, I want to bring it to your attention that much as we are representatives here, there are fundamental inequalities in regard to how we do our work. You are aware of that. If, for example, I manage five constituencies and my counterpart manages only one, what is my right to vote equivalent to? Also, what is my mileage of doing work equivalent to? These are issues that we should be looking at as we congratulate the women in Saudi Arabia. We need to review the domestic situation. Are we really true representatives by virtue of our sitting here or we are just the voice of our people. That is very important to look at.

Back to the Arab Spring, I want to applaud the women, especially the dead. I am saying this because I saw veiled women in Libya display their anger to the utmost. Why? It is because of the fact that the way their country was being managed was not good. When you bottle our women for just two weeks, the situation gets delicate. When you bottle them for a year, the situation warrants security. When you bottle them for ages, the situation generates into a spring –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion, but most importantly, to congratulate the women for leading their own struggle. I was privileged to attend the first celebrations for International Women’s Day in Uganda in 1984 though some of my colleagues are not aware that women issues took root in this country long ago. Each time the women make a stride, we must appreciate and congratulate them for that. I feel it more important to recognise the achievements of those who have succeeded; for example, our Rt Hon. Speaker - highly capable, very competitive and can win hands down in the field with men.

As we deal with the question of women voting in Saudi Arabia and also women driving in that country, I think there is only one Ugandan woman who we need to recognise too, that is Ms Susan Muwonge. She is now the national champion in a competitive field not normally frequented by women. She won on her own merit and ability. This should be a clear point to the women in Saudi Arabia, that women cannot only do driving, but there are those who can drive extremely well.

Overall, whatever small achievement we get, let us consolidate and continue in the struggle to ensure that the women are fully emancipated and that they are able to live and enjoy all their rights and freedoms irrespective of culture. I thank you.

5.09
MR MANOAH ACHILE (Independent, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. It will be very unparliamentary for me to repeat what has been said. Some of the Members have already said something about what I was going to talk about. However, let me say that I support the motion. I also would like to appreciate the effort of the mover and seconder together with the efforts of the honourable members who have spoken to this motion.

That aside, let me say that women are actually voicing their rights. What I mean here is that women have all rights like men. When the first man, Adam, was created, he lacked a partner and we all know that - I am only trying to refresh our minds – when God put him in a deep sleep, he pulled out one of the ribs and by the time he woke up, he had a very attractive partner. Adam was the happiest man, the Bible says. Indeed, when the two were together, they were fellowshipping and everything was going on very smoothly. 

There is nothing like the woman being suppressed because she is a lesser human being. We have seen right from the Bible days hitherto, Madam Speaker, you chairing this august House. We have read about Queen Esther in the biblical times, a very powerful queen. We have read about the Queen of Sheba, a very powerful queen and a woman; name them -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Reagan Okumu comes in, we have children and teachers of Hill Land Primary School, represented by hon. Joseph Balikuddembe and hon. Seninde. We also have teachers and pupils of Fellowship Primary School in Pallisa. You are welcome. 

5.12
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think first and foremost, everything rotates around the economy. So, sometimes I wonder why in countries, especially those in the Arab world where there is at least money which can be shared, women are not in position to utilise those resources like their male counterparts. This is what brings the imbalance. I think this is one of the reasons why the Arab Spring saw women in the forefront. In Egypt, Tunisia, Libya and Yemen, they have now unveiled, and this is a protest. So, while we congratulate Saudi Arabia, I still think that is just a political thought which may not go far enough. 

To allow somebody to just vote and let the status quo remain may not actually do much. Do they own property? If you come here in town, there are women who are educated, they have good jobs, they drive their own cars and they have their own homes. I can tell you that men have no option, but to respect these women because they know they can survive. The moment you do not have that, then a man can toss you around. To me, economic equality is more fundamental.

Finally, this reminds me of the political economy of society. At one time, women were actually marrying men, and they would throw men away at will. You produce children and the man becomes helpless. So, men started thinking, “What do we do?” Life had become very difficult. They then identified one thing; they realised that women love meat. So, men started hunting. When they started hunting, they were able to bring meat. In the process of bringing meat, they also curved out their territory and said, “If you love me, come here.” (Member timed out.)
  
5.15
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this motion for one reason, that is, courtesy. It is very important when a neighbour has got an achievement to make a courtesy call in the evening as you go back home from work. If a neighbour has got a newborn, for example, it is important to pass by and congratulate them. That is the reason I support this motion.

This is a very important motion. Unfortunately, when the movers introduced the motion, I saw Members of the front bench move out, especially those on the government side – at least I did not see any move out from this side. I saw almost all of them walking out of this Parliament. It is a very important motion, especially to Uganda as a champion of women’s rights. A majority of the supporters of this Government are women. If a motion is being moved to support the women in this world and you do not see the Frontbench here, it is very unfortunate. 

I hope that Saudi Arabia will go a step further to grant their women real fundamental rights as human beings. I want to see this later translate into even granting rights for women to also be voted in and not simply to vote.      	

5.17
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. However, whereas the motion should be supported, we should look at areas where it is necessary for debate to be carried out here or outside in order to take the issues of democracy, not just women’s rights alone, but the scope of democracy, in Saudi Arabia and all other countries that are governed under Sharia Law.

First of all, Sharia Law is not a bad thing. We should look at the good things in Sharia Law and the good things in our law, and take out the bad and encourage changes to take place by not scaring those who live by the Sharia Law. Sharia Law says, God first, for example. In Uganda we say, God first – “For God and My Country” is our motto. That is a point of convergence between the Uganda law and the Sharia Law. Sharia Law prohibits homosexuality and abortion and in Uganda these things are not expressly accepted, even in Africa. So, there is a merger between Sharia Law and the African law, if you can call it that. There is something good with regard to morality. 

We are celebrating today, through this motion, the acceptance given to women to vote in Saudi Arabia, but for what positions – municipal? What about for president and other elective positions? I would like, therefore, to say that I congratulate the leadership of Saudi Arabia for opening up a window of democracy. I am not against the monarchy, but I am saying: Is it possible for the monarchy to co-exist with elections, maybe like the one of Britain? 

I would like to recognise the Muslim world, especially those who are using the Sharia Law, by congratulating Iran. Why don’t you look at the example in Iran where women are allowed to vote and to be voted? Iran does not have a monarch, but uses Sharia Law. We should not scare people who think they need something in the Sharia Law. We should encourage them to yield and retain their Sharia Law. If the Sharia Law can allow women to vote –(Interruption) 
 		
MS KHAINZA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. He talked of appreciating the values in the Sharia Law. I would like to appreciate the issue of males accompanying women to health centres. As advocates for maternal health, I would like to appeal to honourable members to move out and preach this notion to our people in our constituencies. Maybe in the Arab world people are financially well, but in our setting, a man will send his wife to hospital. When the wife gets there, there are no gloves, they need a referral, but if the husband is at hand, he would help. Knowing very well that in our setting in Africa, and in Uganda in particular, it is the men who are the bread winners, if these men accompanied their wives to hospitals, it would be good. Since they are the ones with the finances, it would help. That is why I am advocating for male involvement. 

So, honourable members, as we move out to our constituencies, male involvement should be a priority to reduce maternal mortality in Uganda. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: As I conclude, I would like to say that the removal of veils, as mentioned by many honourable members, is not a rebellion against Sharia Law. A veil is good for a woman. Why is it that in the Catholic faith, some of the highly respected women, nuns, still put on veils? So, do not jeopardize the good progress in the Muslim world by saying that veils are bad. Allow women to be voted, but let them go with their veils to whichever office; whether president, speaker, there is no problem. Thank you. 

5.22
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I am rising to support the motion that hon. Betty Amongi moved. I also wish to congratulate the women and the government for the steps so far made. Half a loaf is better than nothing. When they say women should vote, we know at some point possibly an issue of whether they can be voted for will also arise. When that time of being voted for comes, we are sure some of the issues, even in the Sharia Law, will be corrected. 

I am not about to say that Sharia Law is a wrong law. It is not a wrong law. It is good for those who believe in it, but the unfortunate bit of it is that it somehow violates the fundamental human rights. Where you say that a woman should not move in public unaccompanied and yet we are aware that most of these husbands have more than one woman, it implies every time he is moving out the other women are kept in the house. If I put it into the Ugandan context, I will not hesitate to say that they are under preventive arrest because they cannot move unaccompanied. This is a violation of a fundamental human right. I am glad, therefore, that some level of reducing this tension is coming out.

The issue of escorting women is a good one as long as it is not part of patronage. I do not like it when it is patronising. Our men will always accompany us to the health centres for love - (Member timed out.)

5.25
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Amongi. There are things that we take for granted and some who have not participated in the struggle may think those things were there. I am proud to be a Ugandan because we are much better than some developed countries in terms of fundamental human rights. Previously, there was this struggle of equal pay for equal work. Even in Uganda, men were paid more than women for the same kind of work. The Sarah Ntiros had to fight so hard and in the 60s we achieved this. For Saudi Arabia to be achieving this, it is great. For me this is a big achievement for the women of Saudi Arabia and the whole world to be allowed to vote. This shows that they are being recognised as full human beings so far.

I was shocked and surprised by the reasons our colleague, hon. Latif gave for not supporting this motion. I want to plead with hon. Latif, who is the Parliament Imam, to change his attitude. He did say that these laws can be reviewed by scholars and muftis if they sit together and agree. Even this started by lobbying; people said, “We should allow women to vote”, and I am sure that they were regarded as wishful thinkers, but here we are seeing the women of Saudi Arabia being allowed to vote.

I do respect people’s culture and religious practices, but for those that are unfair and oppressive, fellow honourable members. I believe we should join in the struggle to emancipate our women. Actually, I know that in some circles even men suffer. So, wherever there is injustice, unfairness, oppression let us join hands and struggle for the emancipation of human beings. I thank you. 

5.28
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like many other colleagues, I would like to thank the mover of this motion for showing solidarity with the women in Saudi Arabia. 

I want to say that unfortunately, this motion has come when your fellow women in Saudi Arabia are mourning their crown prince who died and was buried on Tuesday. If you knew that they were grieving, you would have expressed your condolences. However, I want to appeal to you and many of us to go and show our condolences by signing a condolence book at the Embassy of Saudi Arabia. That way, we can show sympathy with the women in Saudi Arabia.

Human beings have come from very far and, therefore, they are governed through different systems. Sharia Law is one of the systems. Even before any new introductions, we had our own cultures. We have been governed by our own cultures. This modern system, including Sharia Law, found our cultures here. However, some cultures agree with Sharia Law. Sharia Law says a man marries four wives. Even before Sharia Law came here, our grandfathers were marrying more than one wife. That, therefore, means that when Sharia Law comes and it does not stop me from marrying four, at least I will go with it because it is in order. 

Another religion came and said that we should marry one wife, which is difficult for an African or even non Africans. People have broken that law; for example, the Catholics cannot take Holy Communion after breaking that law because you are supposed to stick to one wife, which naturally is not possible for a human being. (Laughter) It is true. Men take longer to become older than women. That is nature.

MS LEMATIA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for a Member who is a devoted Muslim, and even reads the Old Testament, to say that a man cannot have one wife when Adam had one wife, Eve, from his rib? The holy book does not say that a man cannot live without many wives. I want him to correct that statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as the General was holding the Floor, we received children from Chad Ohudu primary schools represented by hon. Vincent Bagiire and hon. Nakadama. 

We also received pupils and teachers from Guiding Star Nursery and Primary School represented by Imam Latif Ssebagala and hon. Nabila Naggayi. 

THE SPEAKER: General, please conclude. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was stating a fact; not that women do not live longer –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Is it in order for the deputy Prime Minister who is occupying a very important position of acting Leader of Government Business, knowing very well that in accordance with our Constitution we have freedom of religion guaranteed and in view of the position he is occupying, to make a statement saying that we cannot comfortably live without several women? Isn’t that statement prejudicial to the Constitution? How could he, as Leader of Government Business, make such a statement which his boss, the President, could not make? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Uganda is a secular state and we tolerate all religions. Please conclude. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Because the Constitution of Uganda allows no state religion, that is why this statement can be made. A man is just as free as a woman because if a man can marry four like me, what law have I broken? If he marries one, that is his choice, but he should not go to steal in the evening -(Laughter)– this is what I am saying. 

Madam Speaker, as Ugandans, we lost Gaddafi in Libya, but the new leaders have said that Libya is going to be ruled under Sharia Law; which means that much as Gaddafi is not there –(Interjections)- if Gaddafi was removed because of Sharia Law, then too bad. 

Women in the world, not only in Saudi Arabia, have come from far. It was only in 1928 that the UK allowed women to start voting. Even men without property could not vote. If you had no property, you were a non-entity and you could not vote. (Laughter) If you were a black man, you could not vote. Hitler refused to give a medal to a black American who won the race. So, human beings have come from far and we should really appreciate that achievement, as hon. Amongi has done. 

Russia, after the 1789 revolution, France in 1789, Belgium in 1845, Greece in the 17th Century and Uganda in 1962 all started. Before that, it was a bit difficult. However, what we really need now is democracy with knowledge. You must learn and you must know what is happening. We are living in a modern era of knowledge and technology. I have seen so many gadgets among us here and you can know about the Sharia Law and why these veils are there or why these things are happening in that country. You must learn on your own. To come and say Sharia Law is bad is not fair. Some things in the Sharia Law are better, and like Latif was saying, the rate of HIV in Saudi Arabia is more less nil because of the Sharia Law. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to the General.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I was saying that it is within us to know why things are happening the way they are happening and in a way we do not like them to happen. We should know. If you are going to study law at Makerere University, they teach you Islam properly. They teach you how Muslims divorce and how they marry so that as a lawyer, you know. If you want to become a priest, in these seminaries they teach religion seriously, not only Christianity but even Islam, so that contradictions in the world are reduced. 

I am glad that hon. Amongi is concerned about the fellow women in Saudi Arabia but she should also be concerned about women in other parts of the world. I am very happy and glad for all those who contributed to the motion for showing their concerns. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance and thank you for listening. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am directing the Clerk to send it to the Shura Council of Saudi Arabia so that they know that we are here and we have taken note. We also note the death of the Crown Prince. May I ask the House to stand for one minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was another motion but the movers prefer to push it to Tuesday. However, the shadow finance minister has something to say. 

5.40
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence under Rule 46(1)(k) of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion. May I request that a copy of the motion be circulated to Members. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to examine and investigate the current increase in inflation and exchange rates in Uganda. 

“WHEREAS for the last several years inflation has been on a single digit and the economy has been growing at an impressive rate of six to seven percent;

AND WHEREAS in the last 10 months inflation shifted from a single digit to double digits mainly attributed to the supply side, such as poor performance in agriculture resulting from poor weather and other factors; -(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya is moving according to Rule 46(1)(k) and it is under motions without notice. I beg to read: 
“(1) The following motions may be moved without notice – 
(a) any motion by way of amendment to a question already proposed by the Speaker...
(k) any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency…”

Madam Speaker, you have not informed us that -(Interjections)- That is why I am rising on a point of procedure. It is about the emergency of this motion because the issues of inflation and the exchange rate have been discussed before and continue to be discussed. I am looking at this motion being an emergency and I do not comprehend it at all. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us listen to him first. (Applause)

MR EKANYA:  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your kind wisdom. I was saying that:

“AND WHEREAS in the last ten months inflation shifted from a single digit to a double digit mainly attributed to the supply side such as poor performance in agriculture resulting from poor weather and other factors; 

CONSIDERING THAT Article 152 of the Constitution provides that Bank of Uganda shall promote and maintain the stability of the value of the currency of Uganda and also regulate the currency system in the interest of economic progress of Uganda, and further encourage and promote economic development and efficient utilisation of the resources of Uganda through effective and efficient regulation and supervision of the banking and credit sector; 

NOTING THAT in a bid to counter the double digit inflation and the general rise in prices of goods and services in the economy, Government through the Bank of Uganda has recently introduced a new monetary policy (Central Bank rate) that targets interest rates as opposed to targeting broad money that had been responsible for price stability over a long period of time;

AWARE THAT as a result of the new monetary policy, commercial banks have been compelled to increase their lending interest rates from 16 percent then to 28 percent and then 30 percent;

NOTING THAT this new measure has grossly affected existing borrowers (business people, salaried employees) who obtain loans against their salaries and businesses and now have to pay more interest and yet their salaries and income has continued to dwindle as a result of inflation;   

FURTHER NOTING that there is no regulation in Uganda to regulate trade and commerce by preventing unlawful restraint, price fixing and monopolists to promote competition and to encourage the production of quality goods and services at the lowest prices with a primary goal of safeguarding public welfare by ensuring that consumer demands will be met by the manufacturer and sales of goods at reasonable prices; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
(1) Parliament examines and investigates factors responsible for the:   
(a) increasing inflationary trends; 
(b) change of monetary policy framework; 
(c) high interest and exchange rates;
(d) high bank charges and fees; and 
(e) impact of  a, b, c and d on agriculture, employment, access to financial services, consumer rights and protection, and advise Parliament and Government on all necessary interventions to mitigate the situation.

(2) Government fast-tracks the introduction of anti-trust legislation to promote free competition in the market.” 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the colleagues of mine who had agreed to second this motion are in a seminar on women’s land rights. So, I beg that –[Member: “Seconded.”]- The motion has been seconded. So, can I justify? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have conducted research on this matter. Some of my colleagues may not be updated with the latest information, but by the fact that I am the Shadow Minister of Finance, I am under obligation to help the entire country. 

Primary school teachers, doctors and civil servants who are surviving and developing themselves using salary loans, and  had secured them at a rate of 16 to 17 percent, have been issued with circulars by banks that they have to henceforth begin paying between 28 and 30 percent. Colleagues, you are victims too; some of you may not be aware. 

Secondly, I had a meeting with KACITA – they consulted me - and most of the business people who secured loans and mortgaged their buildings, land et cetera and imported goods into this country, have had their interest rates’ payment margin increased to between Shs 1 and Shs 20 million. So, some of them were thinking of going to court, but they said that since there is Parliament, they have their hope in us. 

Because of inflation, sales have gone down whereas the banks are demanding more payments. If you used to pay Shs 20 million as interest, now the banks are asking for Shs 30 million and yet the sales have gone down because of the problem at hand. 

Whereas the problem of inflation is national, regional and international, there are best practices. I would like to give you a case, by Government of Uganda, through the Bank of Uganda, moving away from quantitative targeting of inflation using interest rates; that means containing inflation using money supply instead of the quantity of money.  What the best practice demands the world over is that first, the Governor of Bank of Uganda should have constituted what is called a monetary policy committee. The monetary policy committee is supposed to be composed of experts from Government, the private sector, academia and researchers.  The monetary policy committee is supposed to present a policy position to Government, which must be approved by Parliament and must have a target - for example, within the next one year or six months interest rates should fluctuate between 16 and 25 - and they have benchmarks –(Interjection)- Let me justify the motion; I will give you an opportunity. That policy committee should be reporting to Parliament and Cabinet monthly.  

In Uganda, however, the Governor, Bank of Uganda is acting unilaterally and alone. The Governor Bank of Uganda is hiding under the pretext that Governor Bank of Uganda is independent; independence does not mean lack of consultation.

Secondly, on formation of a monetary policy committee, the Governor, Bank of Uganda, would be signing a contract with the Government of Uganda to establish a bond, and all commercial banks would now agree that interest rates in Uganda would be communicated to consumers. If you go to seek a bank loan, you would be asked whether you want a fixed rate of, let us say, 16 percent. In this way, whether the inflation moves to 30 or drops, you would pay that 16 percent for that period. So, it has advantages and disadvantages. If inflation went down, you would still pay what you agreed upon.

Thirdly, under the policy of central bank rates, the commercial banks are also supposed to inform consumers when they are seeking loans that if they want floating rates, the margin would be either, let us say,  between 16 and 25. So, at no one time would the bank exceed 25. So, it would fluctuate within that depending on the inflationary trend of the economy.

What has been happening, because of this shift that the central bank did without properly involving commercial banks and constituting a committee, commercial banks have unilaterally taken advantage of the ignorance of consumers who sign for loans, and within the loan contract, there is a clause which states that the bank reserves the right to vary interest rates anytime. The practice is that it must be clear. Varying, is it fixed or floating?

This morning, I had a meeting with the Minister of Finance and we discussed this matter. She agreed with me that this practice is not acceptable and she is going to take it up. She also said there is no problem with us going ahead with this motion because in the US and Europe - because she has been a World Bank expert - this is the practice and she could not see this happening and the people of this country are not complaining.

It is based on that framework that I urge this House to support this motion because at the end of the day, all salaried workers including MPs, are going to default and when you do so, first of all, civil servants will stop going to office because the bank will now recall the loan, try to sell anything and cannot. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well that in the past, when MPs had too many loans and were defaulting, performance in this House was very low. I thought the emergency nature of this matter is that it should be referred to the appropriate Committee on Finance, the Governor, Bank of Uganda, Minister of Finance, commercial banks and the business people to discuss before it is too late.

I am speaking out of experience. As of today, I have defaulted with United Bank of Africa. My accounts are in red because they decided to adjust interest rates without officially informing us.

Secondly, these banks have a memorandum with Parliament, but they did not inform the Clerk. These banks also have a memorandum with ministries where civil servants are working and with the district councils, but they went ahead unilaterally without the authority of the accounting officers in the districts, to adjust rates. So, civil servants and business people are defaulting and because of this, they are going to money sharks in the streets.

Some of them have their properties attached as I speak, so the situation is really very urgent. I want to beg hon. Kabakumba that this matter is very urgent and the country needs to address it. It is non-partisan, has no religion, colour or tribe. It is not only for MPs, because if the business people default, even if you auction their property, there will be no buyer. Who will buy, since everybody is defaulting? We do not want commercial banks to make losses; we want best practice.

In Kenya, what has happened? The government discovered that some commercial banks were hoarding dollars, so the Government of Kenya decided to regulate the amount of dollars per day or week that commercial banks should hold, and it is paying. 

In order to contain inflation, the Government of Uganda needs to move and find out the essential goods that are produced locally in this country, so that we stop importing junk. Because we import everything, the demand for foreign currency is very high and yet the manufacturers who use our local raw materials have goods in stores.

During a time of inflation, we should all be putting on clothes from Phoenix Logistics because we have granted them loans. We should all, at this time, be saying we are going to make sure that we reduce, for example, luxury consumption. Government needs to target expenditure and say, if you want to borrow for agriculture, tourism and other strategic sectors like you need to buy fertilisers or tools, you need to borrow at this rate. If you want to borrow to import watches and TVs, do so at 50 percent.

This policy needs to be introduced by this government so that there are two approaches, and so that we can stimulate production for export and we earn foreign currency, and then those who want luxuries like TVs and new watches, should pay 100 percent. But the poor farmers in the villages, in order to create jobs and allow manufacturing to continue, should borrow at 10 percent so that they stimulate growth and the youth who are on the streets can get employment.

Unless that is done, we are going to have many youth coming out of university; factories are going to close because we are not consuming local goods because of the interest rates which are very high, even for local industries. I beg that this House supports this motion. Thank you very much.

5.58
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): I want to agree with the honourable mover and his suggestion that this motion is referred to the appropriate committee for thorough investigation. That will also allow the relevant officials to come and testify for in-depth investigation. That way, I think we will be doing justice to this motion and to the concern raised. So, I support the proposals. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Hon. Chair, I do not know why you wanted this to go to Finance, I was thinking it falls more under the Committee of National Economy.

5.59
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to most sincerely thank the mover of the motion and to express my solidarity with him and the seconders. This motion is long overdue; Ugandans have been crying because of the effects of this inflation, which affects every scope of life in Uganda.
 
I, therefore, say that on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi, I support this motion and urge the whole House to come up and speedily work on this matter, because it is one of emergencies with many effects, which can even bring down this country. I support the motion.

6.00
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Ekanya for having brought this motion. In the recently concluded retreat for the NRM Members which took place in the National Leadership Institute, Kyankwanzi, the Governor, Bank of Uganda, was among the facilitators in that retreat. The main objective of the retreat was rotating around the performance of our economy.

In that retreat, we had Mr Richardson, the IMF official, who also gave a presentation. It was resolved in that retreat that a committee be established where the Governor, Bank of Uganda will be a member together with the private sector, academia and some other two people whom I do not recall very well, to do exactly what hon. Ekanya is proposing to do.

Whether the issue affects MPs or not, it is our cardinal duty as Members of Parliament to legislate for the rest of the country. So, I thought that I should give this information and that also, there was a programme called “Buy Uganda” because you also informed us that at this critical time, we should be making sure that we promote all the produce made in Uganda. So, there was that campaign, which was launched by Uganda, encouraging Ugandans to support fellow Ugandans who are producing. I support the motion that this matter be started in-depth so that we save the situation.

6.02
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to very closely associate myself with this motion moved by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. In this august House, many of you have studied Economics and when a country is experiencing a very unfortunate economic situation like we are experiencing now of galloping inflation, there are certain widely acceptable principles in Economics that need to be put in place in order to curtail the hazardous effects. And for those who are in the salary sector, one of the economic principles is to increase salary, which unfortunately is not easy because of the current state we are in. We do recognise that and that is why in this motion, we have a heartfelt concern for those who have committed their little salaries to loans. If this was happening in other countries, automatically, salaries of workers would have gone up as one of the ways to fight inflation.

The other principle that is widely accepted is to increase production. And hon. Ekanya has articulated it very well by urging that more resources of Government should be committed to productive undertakings that would be able to earn foreign exchange for the country. Unfortunately, in this country, we are yet to reach that because 80 percent of our population is involved in agriculture and we are not doing much as far as producing excess for export in order to earn foreign exchange is concerned.

Thirdly, a country that is experiencing galloping inflation of this nature has to take a decision to increase taxes. That is one of the globally accepted economic principles - (Interjections)- yes, it is those who have who must be taxed more. I think it is on that basis that hon. Ekanya said that there must be purposeful taxation of luxurious goods – like champagne and whisky. Those are the items to be heavily taxed –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just one minute.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is because it is assumed that it is those who have who will go to bars to spend lavishly on those items. 

Lastly, in order to address this, there would also be need to reduce consumption. Once taxes on luxurious goods are increased, consumers will opt for cheaper ones. With these very important suggestions moved by hon. Ekanya, I beg that the committee, as it will be agreed, should be given a timeframe of one month, because this is a very urgent thing and it cuts across the board, and it is for the good of this country. As the institution of Parliament, we should assist Government to see how we can all join hands to fight this galloping inflation. Thank you.

6.06
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to support this motion. If you looked at the times we borrowed when we came here; we borrowed at about 16 percent interest rate. But now, if you want to increase on your borrowing, you will have to pay back at the current lending rate, which has gone to about 30 percent. What does that mean to the ordinary person, for example, the primary school teacher? It means that the 30 percent projected to an income of about Shs 230,000 reduces the actual value of that money to about Shs 70,000. And when you take 30 percent of Shs 70,000, the primary school teacher is reduced to something like Shs 20,000 of real income as monthly earnings. So, this motion is timely and I beg that the relevant committee takes prudent steps to look at the crisis we are in.

But that said, what is it that this country can do? For example, we are subjected to this inflation because we import nearly everything. So, it is very difficult, because we know that is very hard for economies that are in this state to control imported inflation. For example, we do not manufacture needles; if I buy a needle in the current market at 30 percent lending rate, it means that I need to subject my profit margin to about 60 percent. That means it is very difficult for a country that is a net importer to fight imported inflation. 

Giving another crisis – we are suffering from food inflation and fuel inflation. This subjects us to torture. It means that it is difficult for the economists to put their heads together and streamline an economy where we are absolute importers.

On top of that, there is a lot of money floating; for example, the telecom companies have gone into mobile money transfers. Much as the government is increasing bank rates, what is it doing about mobile money? Then you add on SACCOs and informal lenders, who also lend out money. That said –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your argument and we have others.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that there is a lot of money that is floating outside the banking system. So, what is Government doing about that? As much as we are targeting interest rates, the informal resources that are circulating out there are subjecting the country to unprecedented liquidity. So, this liquidity needs to be controlled by controlling all supply ends of money. Unless we do that this country cannot sort out this inflation in the short-run because we are net importers. Thank you.

6.10
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion which I stand to support has come at the right time and I know from colleagues that even the government is attempting to answer the questions that are in this motion. Now, these questions are actually a bigger issue than what is within the economy. The issues surround what is called a “free market policy”, which this government embraced about 20 years ago in good faith that it was going to revive this economy and put us on the right path. But I think we are all aware that this policy has gone terribly wrong throughout the world. Even the people who initiated this policy - the US, Europe and elsewhere - this policy is crumbling on them. Now, when I look at this motion, there are things in it that are remedial and small in nature; they may never significantly change the path that we have taken.

I would like to suggest a number of things that, apart from those to be investigated, Parliament sets itself to examine the appropriateness of this “free market policy” in Uganda with a view to adopting a new system. I am not sure that if we continue on this path, we can go very far, even if we make the changes proposed by hon. Ekanya –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just one minute for you, hon. Okuonzi.

DR OKUONZI: Secondly, I would like it to be added that we, as Parliament, explore interventions that government needs to take to bring this economy back on the right path. All over the world now – in Europe, US, China – people are taking government interventions as the remedy for bringing to control the free market economies which are actually crumbling everywhere. And the system which is emerging is that governments need to devise a system where production, distribution and decision-making are harmonised with equity, sustainability and with human fulfilment. Until we have that kind of system, I am not sure that we can solve this problem by just doing minor changes in our current policy, which really is not in the right context to address the economy in a comprehensive way.

6.14
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, thank you very much and thank you hon. Geoffrey Ekanya for this motion. It is important that we get concerned about the interest rates, because the spread between the saving rate and the lending rate is the highest - Uganda’s spread is the highest in Africa. So, it is important that we get to know that this is very serious.

I am very happy that this government, especially the central bank, which as hon. Ruth Nankabirwa said - with the Governor of Bank of Uganda, he agrees with us that salaried loans actually are almost risk free loans. There is little risk on the salary loans and he has agreed that this is an error on the commercial banks and this matter should be corrected. So, we are happy to let the House know that Government is taking these steps in that direction.

The other thing is on the foreign exchange - the fluctuation of the exchange rate. Whether we like it or not, hon. Colleagues, whether the committee investigates the factors, we must improve on our productivity. We must export to earn more foreign exchange to reduce the fluctuation in the foreign exchange rates. So, I think it is all of us as Members of Parliament, but also as members of Government and Opposition, to make sure that when we are approving the budgets, we are ensuring that money is going to where it is going to produce something.

One area which I am particularly concerned about is tourism. Uganda has a lot of potential for tourism. Many of you who have gone to Kabale - for example, Lake Bunyonyi, the deepest lake in Africa has a lot of potential that can improve tourism and earn foreign exchange and reduce the fluctuation of foreign exchange in our country. I think the ball is in your court to make sure that when we are approving the budget, we allocate money where we can have an -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for hon. Bahati.

MR BAHATI: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I wanted to suggest on recommendation number two that we amend it to include, “Government fast-tracks the introduction of anti-trust and amendment of money lending legislation to promote free competition and consumption protection in the market.” This cannot go on. We all benefit from money lenders in one way or the other, but to be charged 10 percent per month or 20 percent per month and we go on looking like this - there must be a way this has got to be regulated. Otherwise, 200 percent to Ugandans is something that is killing people and we cannot go on looking. So, we need to capture it so that we do some legislation around it to protect the people who are in that business, but also the consumers of their products. Thank you very much.

6.17
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with hon. Ekanya to some extent. You find that I am really interested in these economic matters because I am partly involved and I have some knowledge about them. When you are dealing with inflation, you do not only use monetary policy. So, you find that there are countries - like two months ago, Kenya and Rwanda were experiencing a similar thing with Uganda, but they intervened in other ways. For example, we have what they call price regulation. When they handled price regulation, they solved the inflationary situation. 

You find that inflation sometimes is caused due to scarcity, so to an extent, you may not blame Government if food is not there because of weather conditions. The scarcity will inevitably exist and the people who have the money will be the ones to access food.

I will give some examples, whereby there are other factors which have caused the whole world problems. For example, the credit crunch crossed right from the United States of America, Britain, the Middle East and I think was buried in Africa. That is why you find that we are still experiencing the inflationary situation. 

I would like to propose that much as banks are behaving like that, we also need to control and improve our institutions. For example, you find that in the UK on Tuesday, the taxation had gone beyond. There was an error in taxation so they had to address it in order to save the businesses. I am not saying that it is the situation here, but I think we would put on board the Minister of Finance and the people involved so that if they bring in other measures to control the inflationary situation, you find that we can control it. Much as we may not eradicate it, we will move a certain level -(Member timed out.)

6.20
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the honourable Ekanya for bringing this motion. It has been long overdue since people have been complaining about the same.

When you go out there, the issue of inflation and exchange rates is the song of the day and it is now high time that people knew that Government is coming out openly to discuss this issue and show the world the causes of inflation. When you go out there, the information which is there is that we came to legislate in this Parliament to increase prices, increase anything, and this is the blame we are baring. It is right that hon. Ekanya has moved this motion for a resolution of Parliament to examine and investigate the current inflation and exchange rates. 

When you look at the teachers and other civil servants, the money they get for loans, how it pours in the population and ends up in the market without causing any production - this production would be used with value addition and export so that we bring more dollars into the country. Look at the funds the donors are bringing into the country which end up in workshops and with farmers and other people who end up with it in the market without using it for production; maybe this production would be for exporting and making more foreign currency. 

When we look at the money used during campaigns, which we poured down there for other things, this money ended up with peoples’ agents without going to the production sector. This is high time people understood that inflation comes - in fact, when we addressed it to the Governor, the Governor said that the too much money in circulation, which is not going in for production purposes, and which would maybe cause more dollars to fall in Uganda - Uganda relying on only imports - he said he will continue increasing the rate so that Ugandans stop the habit of borrowing -(Member timed out.)

6.23
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I, too, would like to thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya for coming up with this motion. The tabling of this motion coincides with what has been going on in the NRM camp. We spent a whole week in Kyankwanzi reflecting on the state of the economy and what needs to be done to revitalise the economy. To us, this is very encouraging and I wish that our brothers and sisters on the other side of Parliament had joined us in Kyankwanzi because I think we would have been able to move much faster in generating a solution. What this really means is that the door is wide open for all of us so that when it comes to issues that are so topical and critical, we can all put our heads together with a view to generating clear and sustainable solutions that will help our people, economy and the country.

The entire world economy has been hit negatively in as far as performance is concerned. When you go to the United States, there is talk of the American debt crisis arising out of ceiling levels. When you go to Europe, the Euro Zone debt crisis is a matter of concern to many countries like Greece, Portugal and others that are having serious problems arising out of this crisis.

When you go to the Middle East, the Arab spring effects are also taking their own toll. The inflation we are faced with, therefore, is not only arising out of internal factors, but is also being compounded by external factors -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR MIGEREKO: All of us here will agree that inflation has been a major source of concern to the NRM Government, and for years, the NRM Government had been able to reign in on this inflation. As a result of successfully putting in place sound micro-economic policies, we in the NRM know that inflation erodes the purchasing power of our people – I was going to say our supporters but it is better to say our people. Therefore, it is a major source of concern. 

I would like to pledge that this is a discussion in which we shall all participate because at the end of the day, nobody is going to be spared if no clear solutions are generated. I, therefore, would like to support hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and thank him for the timely tabling of this important motion and we shall be together with others who have already been mentioned by hon. Nankabirwa as per decisions taken in our NRM retreat. I thank you, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. (Applause)

6.27
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I believe that this will give an opportunity to Parliament and especially our Committee on National Economy to have an in-depth analysis of these issues because I used to sit on the Committee on National Economy and many times we would look at these issues even before being prompted, but now maybe, we had taken long and the committee should expeditiously consider these issues.

My colleague has mentioned that Government is considering some interventions to this inflation and exchange rate. Yes, Uganda is part of the global economy and we are having some of this imported inflation as pointed out by the MP for Arua District. But for me, I think that there may not be a quick fix solution, but as a country, you have to boldly face this evil as I call it and also tackle the supply side. Hon. Ekanya pointed out clearly, I think in paragraph two or three, about the supply side - we still have rigidities, but government is planning, especially in agriculture – can we consider irrigation? Yes, irrigation is now becoming a priority. We are also looking into the land ownership, commercialisation of agriculture and value addition. So, if all these are handled properly and with the support of Parliament and all Ugandans, I believe inflation and of course, the exchange rate -it goes without saying - will be handled. 

I also want to inform my colleagues on the other side that some of the money we use comes from outside Uganda and outsiders, especially through the tourism sector. But when we are engaged in some civil unrest, some of this money may not come and definitely it affects our economy. My colleagues have clearly realised this -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MS KABAKUMBA: This “Walk-to-Work” and others - let us have a stable country and definitely work together to eliminate some of these challenges. (Applause)

The monetary policy is with Bank of Uganda, while the fiscal policy is with us Government and of course Parliament. We also have the Trade License and Business Categorisation Statutory Instrument of 2011, which will give some relief, starting next year, especially to the business people, where the tax rates are going to be reduced drastically. So, when the committee starts its work, we shall be more than ready and willing to give them more information about all our sectors where this inflation and exchange rate is very key. I thank you. (Applause)

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker and Colleagues, when hon. Ekanya moved his motion, I was not in favour, but as he continued to explain in his justification, I came to support this motion –(Laughter)- and the lesson I learn here is that colleagues should listen to each other because sometimes, we reject good ideas when we come with standard positions before listening.

I would like to say that this motion will help the nation to understand much more about the inflation that is going on. I believe that after the committee report as we debate objectively here, people will appreciate that the issue of inflation is not a political issue of NRM, but a global concern. (Applause) But most importantly, we will also need to understand many of these issues; when you talk about the monetary policies of reducing money in the economy, in order to have a balance between money supply and the goods, then you have a contradiction. But it will also help us to learn, not only here, but even our voters, how we borrow and why we borrow. 

I remember, hon. Speaker, that you did organise an orientation workshop at the beginning here and cautioned Members that as we go out to borrow, we should take caution. But you have to understand that we sign agreements that even have clauses that are opened to the bankers. Where you are saying that the bank reserves the right to increase the interest rate and you sign hurriedly; this happens. 

In a capitalistic world, where people look for profit maximisation and cost containment, they will always look out for ways of getting the money. Therefore, if we as Members of Parliament can fall easy prey to the banks, then you can imagine what they do to the voters down there –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute, please.

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, this will also be an opportunity for this Parliament to share this big concern with the Executive, because the Executive is already looking at it and Parliament being our partners in development, should be moving in the same direction. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am glad to see that the House has merged again. (Laughter) But on a more serious note, there was an amendment by hon. Bahati and I saw hon. Ekanya cheering. So, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed by hon. Bahati.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion as moved and amended be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, because it is a matter which is pressing to the whole country, I direct that the Committee on National Economy expeditiously meets and reports within one month on this matter. 

Hon. Members, yesterday, I directed the Clerk to produce and distribute the reports of the Local Government Committee – I hope that has been done - to facilitate our sitting on Tuesday. The House is adjourned to Tuesday. 

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 November 2011.) 

