Tuesday, 27 October 2009

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Last week we had indicated that we would start in the morning but because of the programme that we had with IPU on conflicts, it was not possible for us to sit in the morning. That is why we have sat in the afternoon. But as all of you have heard, there is some sad news concerning people who are connected to us. 

Hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, who is the Chairman of the National Planning Authority, lost a son who has been a student at Makerere University. I would like to inform you that I, on your behalf, sent him a condolence message. Also this morning, we heard the news of the demise of Rev. Fr Byaruhanga who has been working in the President’s Office; he also died in an accident. It is appropriate that we observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.55
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I stand here on two matters of national importance. Last week on Thursday, the whole country woke up to an alarming story carried on the front page of the Daily Monitor newspaper, which said that we have got one million ghost voters on our Electoral Commission register. The same newspaper story went on to say that there are also 5,000 ghost villages that have been turned into polling stations. 

According to the source quoted by this newspaper, this information came about as a result of the findings of a research conducted by a firm hired by the Minister for Security who also doubles as the Secretary-General of the National Resistance Organisation. 

This story has caused a lot of doubt in our minds as to whether the reforms that we are agitating for, and upon which government has promised to table four Bills, will focus on electoral reforms. If these findings are true, as per the revelations of this quoted source, then the fact that we are going to have elections in 2011 already casts doubt about the nature, genuineness and transparency of this election as expected.

I, therefore, would like to request for the following: One, that the minister responsible for security, also Secretary-General of the NRM, who contracted that firm to carry out that research avails in detail to the public the findings of this research to enable us very analytically look at the report to establish the authenticity of the information given therein.

Secondly, I also would like to draw the attention of the House to the Daily Monitor newspaper of today, 27 October 2009 in which the Chairman of the Electoral Commission has been quoted categorically disassociating himself and the Electoral Commission from the contents of this report. This further compounds the doubt in our minds. Who do we believe? Do we believe in the findings of the secret consultancy firm that carried out this research or we believe the Electoral Commission, the authentic body charged with the responsibility of organising and managing elections in this country?

In the same vein, I would like to request the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is also the Attorney-General, under whose docket the role and responsibility of the Electoral Commission falls, to assure us that the information given by this firm’s research findings is not true and that we can have hope in the 2011 elections. I am saying this because the two arms of the same government are not agreeing, which casts doubt in our minds.

Mr Speaker, the second issue that is also of national importance is about – and I am raising this in my capacity as the Vice-Chairman of West Nile Parliamentary Group – over the last three months stories have been serialised in The New Vision, the Daily Monitor and Red Pepper newspapers complaining and exposing dirt, which exists in the External Security Organisation. 

According to the stories, there seems to be a lot of infighting among the staff of this organisation to the extent that even the Ministry of Internal Affairs and more specifically the Police Department has received reports that there were matters of a criminal nature and that expeditious investigations are being undertaken so as to arrest the unrest, which exists in that organisation. 

I know it being a security organisation, there is a lot of caution being taken and that information, which is being unearthed from that organisation, is not necessarily for public consumption. But these squabbles have continued for the last three months to the extent that the Deputy Director-General, Mr Emmy Alio who comes from West Nile has his life in danger to the extent that last Saturday, his house, which is even guarded by police, was attacked after somebody allegedly hid into the ceiling before jumping into action at around 2 a.m. The fortunate thing is that Mr Alio was not in the House, neither was his wife. The sister, however, fell victim - she was beaten. She had her head crashed with a hammer and she is now in Mulago National Referral Hospital.

So, how long does it take for the state machinery to investigate matters of criminal nature? Should it continue being unsolved to the extent that the person who has reported the matter is done away with? Can the Minister of Internal Affairs assure us of the safety of Mr Alio? I am talking on his behalf because he is from West Nile, a region whose parliamentary group, I vice chair. Is Mr Emmy Alio safe whether as a Deputy Director-General of ESO or as just Emmy Alio, the man from Arua? 

Can the Minister of Internal Affairs give us a report to the effect that these matters are under his investigation and that he will soon give us some information that can be useful to the public? I would like to ask government, through the Minister for Security to assure us on the security of this country. As far as matters of external relations are concerned, when we have officers or bureaucrats fighting among themselves over issues of corruption, are we safe? Can the Minister of Security give us an explanation in that regard to put our hearts to rest as far as the issues surrounding the threats on the life of Mr Emmy Alio, the Deputy Director-General of ESO who hails from Arua, is concerned? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to very much thank the hon. Member of Parliament from West Nile for raising these pertinent issues. As far as I am concerned, he has asked two questions and I will give him very simple answers. One is: is the life of Emmy Alio safe? My answer is a straight yes. He is absolutely safe in as far as police are able to guard him. As I have said before on this Floor, the first policeman in our security is ourselves. I would like to urge Emmy to avoid places that could be rather tricky for us, as police, to protect him. Otherwise, we shall definitely protect him and his home. Any moment he feels insecure and needs additional security, we shall provide it.

As to the investigations on some of these allegations, I would like to say that I am fully aware that there are investigations going on. At an appropriate time, I will give you a report to that effect. Although my intention was to give it out in form of a press release, now that Parliament is requesting for it, I shall be too happy to bring it here. Thank you.

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, regarding the alleged ghost voters, I would like to say that the Attorney-General will make a statement on Friday in the morning. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to again request that the statement in regard to pension be provided because last week you guided this House that the minister would come and tell us the goings-on in regard to payments of pensioners in this country. This is important because there is a general outcry that there are double listings in the newspapers with many names of people who are not getting their pensions. I remember you guided that the minister comes here today and gives a statement. I would like to pray that this is provided in order for us to get briefed on what is happening. Thank you.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, it is true we were requested to make a statement on pensions, but since the issues of pension are enormous, I would like to request that I give this statement on Thursday. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we look forward to the statement on the ghost voters, I would like to say something relating to the matter that was raised by the Opposition Chief Whip, which I hope the Minister of Internal Affairs can respond to. 

In my constituency, there are almost 100 youth who have been arrested on grounds of being idle and disorderly. When they are arrested on these grounds, they are tortured. But also, much as they are arrested from Rubaga, some of them are taken away from Old Kampala Police Station that services Rubaga, to Nsangi Police Station from where they are tortured and from where –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, honestly you are extending the subject as presented by hon. Wadri too far. The matter only concerned a person from his constituency, but you are now talking about issues from Nsangi, Lungujja, where I stay and later we will hear of something from Karamoja when actually there were no special arrangements made by me. He approached me and I allowed him to present it; but you are also taking advantage of his presentation. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without waiting for investigations to be completed in respect of Mr Alio, the Minister of Internal Affairs should tell us more. As Deputy Director of ESO, is Alio guarded? If so, how many policemen are supposed – because if your home can be attacked in spite of the presence of bodyguards, then that is a very serious matter. I think we need to know more about this. We do not have to wait until death has occurred and then we begin saying, “We wish we had done this and that.” I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But will it be in the interest of the person we are talking about to get the details of how – is it one or ten guards – we have heard of presidents of other countries being attacked although they are guarded. I do not think it will be in the interest of this person. We are prejudicing the security of this gentleman.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, maybe let me put it in another way. If he was being guarded, what happened to those bodyguards at the time of the attack? Where were they?

THE SPEAKER: Then the answer will be, like hon. Wadri said, that he was not in the house and maybe he had moved with his bodyguards. Anyway, the minister is here.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned, you have answered that question. It would be very dangerous from a security point of view for me to stand here and give you security details of an officer. I will not do that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, for the security of that gentleman, please do not give us those details.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I will not do so, Mr Speaker - (Interjections)- well, you heard that he was not around but I suggest that this information comes together as one package when we make the statement.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS REGISTRATION REGULATIONS, 2009

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in accordance with Section 13 of the Non-Governmental Organisations Act, I humbly hereby lay on the Table the Non-Governmental Organisations Registration Regulations, 2009.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee study the regulations and subsequently advise Parliament on it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

(I) UNEXPLAINED CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY – UGANDA (NITA-U)

3.11
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, first and foremost I would like to thank you for the opportunity of making my maiden ministerial statement –(Interjections)- no doubt, my honourable colleagues know that I had gotten used to being on the other side where I would attack but now I have to receive. (Laughter) 

I wish to apologise that I was not available to make the statement at the appropriate time as requested by my senior colleague the Prime Minister because I was attending to some other state duties.

I wish to refer to the issues raised by my honourable colleague, Hussein Kyanjo, MP Makindye West, titled, “Unexplained Circumstances Surrounding the National Information Technology Authority – Uganda (NITA-U)”. I wish to clarify as follows:

Following the assent to the NITA-U Act 2009 by His Excellency the President on 15 July 2009, the Cabinet approved the Board of Directors on 05 August 2009. On 10 August 2009, NITA-U Board of Directors was formally appointed by the Minister of ICT and subsequently sworn in on 21 August 2009.

The board originally constituted or appointed was as follows:
    i) Ms Betty Oyella Bigombe as chairperson;
    ii) Prof. James Patrick Mangeni as a member;
    iii) Mr Ibrahim Kariisa, member;
    iv) Ms Betty Kasimbazi, member;
    v) Mr Kenneth Lubega, member and; 
    vi) Mr Ambrose Ruyooka, representing the Ministry of ICT.

However, soon after the constitution of the NITA-U Board, it was realised that Mr Ambrose Ruyooka, who was representing the Ministry of ICT was already a member of the governing council of the Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT). He is also coordinating the Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Incubation Centre activities, in addition to his generic duties as the acting Commissioner of Information Technology. The extra duty as a member of the Board of Directors of NITA-U, therefore, was going to exert an overload of duties on Mr Ruyooka. This would have made him inefficient and ineffective.

It was, therefore, adjudged appropriate to terminate the appointment of Mr Ruyooka as a member of the Board of Directors of NITA-U as provided for under Article 10(h) of the NITA-U Act, 2009. 

Similarly, on 21 September this year, Mr Ibrahim Kariisa tendered in his intention to resign from the Board of Directors of NITA-U, to the chairperson of the board. Meanwhile, I am making the necessary consultations to identify appropriate persons to be presented to Cabinet for approval for appointment to the NITA-U Board to fill the two vacancies. At this juncture, I would like to invite honourable members of this august House to nominate any persons they think are good enough and that is subject to approval.

With regard to a one Mr Kaluja, who is alleged to have resigned from the NITA-U Board, I wish to state that this is a blatant lie because such a person has never been appointed to the NITA-U Board.

Concerning the vacancy of the Executive Director for NITA-U, I wish to report that the board has put in place a mechanism for competitively identifying the right candidate. A firm to undertake recruitment of the senior staff of NITA-U, including the Executive Director, is being procured according to the government regulations. In the meantime, an acting Executive Director has been appointed to carryout start up activities in the interim period.

On the issue of funding, I wish to state that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is yet to release funds for operations of NITA-U as a body corporate. How then does the hon. Member for Makindye West allege that funds released to NITA-U could have been utilised more effectively in other sectors? In any case, NITA-U, as indicated earlier, is only two months old. 

Notwithstanding the allegation being labelled against NITA-U, I wish to report to the august House that the board has made positive progress in its short time of existence. NITA-U is soon fully taking over the implementation of key programmes and projects in the IT sub-sector including:
    (i) National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure and e-Government project;
    (ii) Business Processing Outsourcing and; 
    (iii) District Business Information Centres

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I thank you for this opportunity of putting the record straight.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.18
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my senior colleague, the hon. Minister of ICT, for bringing this short report to the House.

I want to first make one correction regarding a one Mr Kaluja. In my submission I did not talk about him at all. I hope that the minister found that along the way when he was looking through his other documents, but I did not talk about that name anywhere. (Mr Aggrey Awori rose_)

The honourable minister has – 

THE SPEAKER: With regard to Mr Kaluja, are you saying it was a blatant lie or it was inaccurate?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with decorum of the august House, I wish to apologise for the remark. To put the record straight and facilitate better debate, I accordingly amend and withdraw it. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for your honest approach. 

The hon. Minister has indicated the circumstances that surrounded the removal from the board of Mr Ambrose Ruyooka. I was wondering whether this time round he was going to use Article 10 of the provisions of the NITA-U Act. Otherwise, the question would be, why didn’t you investigate in the first place? 

On page 2 he talks about the resignation of Mr Ibrahim Kariisa. I do not know whether it is inadvertent or deliberate but the minister does not give any reasons whatsoever as to why this gentleman resigned.

In the last paragraph on page 2 he talks about the vacancy of the Executive Director and that he wishes to tell this House that the board has put in place a mechanism of competitively identifying the right candidate. 

I and probably several Members of the House do not know who is chairing NITA-U right now and I do not know how you are going to look for the Executive Director without a board that has a chair, unless of course you are chairing it yourself.

Still in that particular paragraph, there is the issue of the Executive Director and you say, “…including the Executive Director”. Who is this Executive Director because you have seen that the whole flesh of the so-called board has been eaten away? You listed properly the people who were supposed to be on the board but you did not list those who are still there and those who are not. 

I have two more questions; one regards the funding in the Ministry of Finance. I hope the explanation of the Minister is sufficient enough. 

Lastly, the Minister talks about promising programmes and projects including the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure and e-Government. This House needs to be explained to in further detail what happened to the finances that were supposed to run this arrangement of the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure, and the problems that the honourable minister is aware of. And you will need to explain the discrepancy between the amounts we used for the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure as opposed to the report that appeared in the East African. I would refer the Minister to the East African of this week where a little portion of that same amount that was used by Uganda was used by the Government of Kenya to do a job greater than what we did. Thank you, Minister and Mr Speaker.

3.23
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you. I would like to thank the minister for this statement that explains the queries that hon. Kyanjo had.

In his statement the minister gives us reasons why Mr Ambrose Ruyooka was withdrawn from the board and one of them was that he was serving on another board. My problem is that the NITA-U Act, which I have here, specifies the kind of people that should be on the board and one of them is the Commissioner responsible for Information Technology in the Ministry for ICT. Membership on the board is by portfolio. I want the minister to tell us today whether Mr Ruyooka has ceased to be the Commissioner of ICT and if he has withdrawn the Commissioner from the board, how does he intend to fill that board given this provision of the Act? Thank you.

3.25
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. It is true that as required by law, the President assented to this Bill on 15 July 2009 and this Act was meant to be the flag bearer of the Ministry of ICT and also to implement the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure. 

According to the statement of the minister, it gives me an impression that the Board of NITA-U is just in words but non-existent practically. If one member has been fired and one has resigned, that gives me an impression that probably this board has no quorum and, therefore, it has not been transacting any business since its appointment.

In this financial year, this Parliament passed Shs 6.5 billion for the operationalisation of the Business Process Outsourcing abbreviated as (BPO). This money was meant to provide employment to the youth of Uganda and particularly the IT graduates. Makerere University alone each year graduates over 1,000 IT graduates.

The minister has mentioned something to do with the money in his statement. From my sources in the Ministry of Finance, I am reliably informed - much as the minister is disputing this fact - that Shs 700 million that was realised as part of the Shs 6.5 billion in this quarter on the NITA-U Board for the BPO, has been refunded or taken back to the Treasury. Let the Minister of ICT clarify to this House, if not the minister of Finance; we can even move an extra mile to get information and data on this issue. 

I would like to ask the minister one fundamental question; what would be the implication if the youth of Uganda hearing that the Shs 700 million that was meant for the Business Process Outsourcing to create jobs for them has been taken back to the Ministry of Finance because we have problems in your ministry on the issue of the negative, direct, and the skeleton staff of the NITA-U Board? This is a fundamental question because the issue of unemployment is a big problem in this country.

Last financial year this Parliament approved a loan of US $61 million from a Chinese Bank to provide the BPO with capable infrastructure but we do not see the impact of this money. If this infrastructure were put in place, they would facilitate the minister and put things right. By now the IT graduates would be in business. But up to now we do not see any substantive progress on this matter.

I represent the youth and this issue is very critical to us. I know that in this era, the issue of IT and ICT is the way to go. Without the knowledge of IT, I think you would be in a misplaced generation.

The other question is; why is it that we are witnessing all this negativity in the formulation of this board in its initial stages? The minister appointed and fired the other man before he worked for even five days. Another one has resigned. Why all this negativity and what is the future of this board? In my culture, there is a saying that, “You cannot organise a party at home, knowing that you have chicken and you invite eagles.” Something is fundamentally wrong and the minister has a fundamental role to ensure that this mistake is corrected. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.31
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I am also concerned that they tell us on page 2 that they realised the over-load of the duties of Mr Ruyooka. Even if you were recruiting low level civil servants, under normal circumstances, you first ask for their CVs. I wonder how the minister could get to the level of recruiting people that they know had obligations and some of them are in a way incompetent. After taking them, you then realise that they are over loaded and that they work somewhere else?

And when we look at the names, still there are some who work elsewhere in busy offices. So at the end of the day, we might get similar stories. But we have many people who are unemployed. The other day we were discussing the unemployment problem in the country. Why don’t we bring them on board instead of giving the jobs to people who are already working somewhere else? Are we dancing to the tune of the Bible that, “To him that has, more will be given?”

I appeal to the minister; most of us have people with qualifications for these jobs. Let them make use of us and we submit the CVs of the people who can serve this country better. Thank you. 

3.32
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for responding to the Members. While reading this response, I was intrigued by something that has not been done. On page 3 - it is almost the last sentence - the minister said, “NITA-U is soon fully taking over the implementation of key programmes and projects in the IT sub-sector.” 

A month ago, this House passed a report from the Committee of ICT, and in that report we had recommended that NITA-U should take over all activities within the Ministry of ICT among which was the operationalisation of the first phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure, which was grossly mismanaged by those in the Ministry of ICT especially the PIU Department that was overseeing the implementation of NBI-1.

Up to now, the ministry has not been able to fully operationalise this NITA-U and yet there are activities going on within the ministry. The recommendation of Parliament is that all the activities, especially phase I and phase II projects under the Ministry of ICT, should be done by the NITA-U Board. Now you wonder, why is the ministry deliberately taking time to have this board fully operationalised? Why are we having this confusion of putting a member on the board and sacking him after three days? Why are we continuing to do what is meant to be done by the board or NITA? This means there is something fishy going on within the Ministry of ICT, especially with the constitution of the board. This problem should be addressed as fast as possible. 

The money that we passed in this House is bound to be misused just as we misused the US$ 30 million in the first phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure. We are again having a board that cannot take off. According to us, Members of Parliament and members of the Committee of ICT, we had thought that NITA-U would be able to correct the problems in the National Backbone Infrastructure. So, I want the minister to tell us when this authority shall be fully operationalised. 

I am also concerned about the members on this board. I can see Mr Kenneth Lubega also appointed on this board. I know Mr Kenneth Lubega and what I know about his background is that he is a chemist by profession. However, if you read the NITA-U Act, 2009, Section 8, it is clear on who should be appointed to be a member of the board –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: The modest information I want to give to my friend is that Mr Kenneth Lubega is an engineer. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, before I did a Bachelors of Procurement and Logistics Management, I had done a diploma in water engineering. To talk broadly that he is an engineer is not specific. This particular section in the Act says that persons who qualify for appointment should qualify for appointment by virtue of their professional qualifications, knowledge and experience in a related discipline. 

How is a chemist or an engineer, as you want to call it, have any knowledge related to ICT? Would you bring a water engineer and say he has better qualifications because he is an engineer and would be relevant in this field? All these irregularities tell us a lot about what is happening in the Ministry of ICT. Just this morning, the Committee of ICT had to detain three main staff of Ministry of ICT - the Permanent Secretary, the Chief Engineer and the Chief of PIU. They are detained within Parliament here because they could not produce the reports that were needed by the committee.  

Mr Speaker, we have been pleading in this House. The President in this statement made it clear that this country must grow. We have even been making reference to Rwanda. Some of us went to Rwanda to see how far they have gone in ICT. All of us have a lot of interest in moving this country from the traditional technology to the dot.com technology –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it should be known that we do not debate a statement for more than 30 minutes.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am winding up. There is a big challenge in the Ministry of ICT. The Committee of ICT recommended that the Ministry of ICT should not go ahead to implement Phase II of the National Backbone Infrastructure. However, as we talk now, a contractor in the names of Owayi has gone ahead to implement Phase II of the National Backbone Infrastructure against the recommendation of a committee of Parliament and against a position that was passed on by this Parliament. That is why some of us feel that this statement here should be deferred until the minister comes up with a comprehensive report on the mess in the Ministry of ICT and then we can take it on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have anything to say?

3.42
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened carefully to the concerns raised by my honourable colleagues. I will clear, for the sake of the record, some of the items which are totally misplaced, distorted, and probably fabricated. 

Number one, I want to make it clear that Mr Luyoka was not appointed to the board as a person. The person was supposed to be the Commissioner of Information Technology representing the ministry on the board. Mr Luyoka was acting. Not only that, in the process, the ministry has submitted a name to PAC to appoint a substantive commissioner who shall represent us on the board. 

Two, the question being disputed that one can carry more than one load and how come we were not aware of his previous responsibilities; I would like to state that the new duties which were included on his lap included DPO, which was recently constituted in the ministry. 

I take this opportunity to lump it together with the other concern expressed by my colleague representing the youth, that nothing has been done about the youth by the ministry. It is my pleasure to report to this august House that in the two months, we have recruited 48 graduates in ICT and IT who have been undergoing internship in my ministry in preparation for various positions, not only in the government but also to set up DPOs.

The ministry has set up what we call an incubator. An incubator is a small place you put people who are likely, or who might be interested in managing and running a DPO. An incubator, as my honourable colleague has been heckling, has nothing to do with hatching chicks. It is for the purpose of training persons. As a matter of fact, my ministry is in close consultation with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and specifically the IGP, where I have seconded eight of these interns to help wipe out the usual problems of ghost policemen, ghost soldiers and so forth.

One cannot say this ministry is an embarrassment and an insult to the youth because we are not creating jobs for them. That is the first step, notwithstanding the facts about the money which has been quoted on the Floor as available to us - Shs 6 billion - and somebody also quoted Shs 700 million. I can say categorically that no such funds have reached the coffers or the accounts or the vote of ICT. I have got evidence. Only yesterday, we spoke to the desk officer in charge of ICT at the Ministry of Finance and he confirmed that as soon as a separate vote has been set up for NITA, the money shall be released.

We all know in this august House that in proper management of public resources, there are channels to be followed; and without exception, we are sticking to that formula and hopefully by next week, the resources shall be available. As I said before, notwithstanding lack of resources, we have been able to put together a team of 48 youth who recently completed their degrees and diplomas in ICT and IT. Instead of getting commendation from their Member representing them in this august House, he is displaying a certain deficit of information which is worrying me. Such a deficit existing in his databank could cause problems for representation - (Interruption)

MR BALIDDAWA: I have listened to your presentation and I am impressed that you have taken a lot of initiatives; but I think it will be fair for you to provide that information to the honourable member than portraying him as ignorant. How else would the member know that you have 48 graduates that you have been employing; not even the committee knows that anyway?

MR AWORI: At no given point did I call my honourable colleague ignorant and do not use such words. I use words that are acceptable in parliamentary language – “deficit in knowledge”. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Is that the end?

MR AWORI: I would like to make it very brief. Regarding the sources of money, Shs 30 million dollars has been designated for this project of NBI. This money is not in the custody of my ministry. This money is part of the loan which was approved by this august House from the Exim Bank of China. There, its control is between the contractor and a Chinese company appointed by the lenders. So, really, this money rarely touches our accounts.

There is this question of negativity in the media about a new department in the ministry. Indeed, there have been some amounts of negative publicity in certain select and elitist organisations within the sector. It is not for me to say, because I cannot produce documentary evidence, but I know there has been jostling in the sector for appointments on a number of positions. We intend to advertise in the sector. As a minister who finds a number of challenges in the sector, it honours me that I clear some of these issues which might stifle the growth of the industry. I am going to do it, notwithstanding the kicks and shouts from the sector. We have to be clear, transparent, forward looking and development oriented. 

Last but not least, my colleague who is a member of the parliamentary committee on ICT; I do not want to use the other phraseology, but I will simply say I refer him to the Act which was instrumental in passing NITA. The Act is very clear on who shall be a member. At no given time does it say all members of the board shall be qualified in ICT or engineering. It says, among other things, they shall be a prominent Ugandan with knowledge in ICT. I am glad to say in answer to that qualification that we have the highest trained person in mathematics and IT called Professor Patrick Mangeni, the first Ugandan to get a PhD from Oxford -(Interjection)- As you all know, for the Samia, 90 percent of their diet is fish and fish contributes a lot to brain power. 

Just because someone has said he is a Samia, I should not be ashamed. Nothing could be further from the truth; I am very proud of him, first as a Ugandan, then secondly as a Samia and then third, but not least important, an expert, probably the highest in the country in that industry.

As correctly put by hon. Kyanjo, Mr Lubega is an engineer in ICT. We took the trouble to fish for these names and we recommended them to the Cabinet for Presidential and Cabinet approval. These are people who are not lightweights in the industry. We all know from our administrative experience that when you appoint an expert as a chairperson, and then the executive director is also an expert, you are likely to come up with people knocking each other. So it is always better to have the chair as a person who has got administrative experience, management experience, and capacity to make decisions committed to the course - I do not want to say it, but a nationalist like the person who is occupying the chair.

I am conscious of the gender requirements in this country and that is why I deliberately looked for the person. If it had not been for the time limit, I would have gone into other details, especially in what NITA is about to do. It has to be given a chance. It is only two months old. If you are going to judge it as a 40 year old, you are really using the wrong yardstick. The board has already met twice and generally boards meet once a month. This one has met. 

Four members constitute a working quorum. Why should anybody be concerned that the board is idle for lack of a quorum? Again, as a serious situation regarding information, I do not want to use the word “deficit”. Thank you very much for the opportunity to put the record straight. I hope and pray that you give support to NITA to grow and take care of our IT needs in this country. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY) (Mr Simon Lokodo): I am standing here on behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to make a statement on measures to strengthen the quality and safety of manufacturing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you come in, I have to introduce some important guests. In the gallery we have Mr Adiama Robert, district speaker of Amuria, together with Mr Edetu Paul, Clerk to Council of Amuria. You are welcome.

MR LOKODO: Let me start afresh. I am here standing on behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to make a statement on measures to strengthen the quality and safety of manufacturing and packaging of spirits in Uganda.

Between the months of June and August 2009, a number of reported scattered deaths due to unknown causes were reported in Kasese, Kampala and Mpigi districts. The suspicion at that time was that the deaths could have resulted from the consumption of spirits or liquor.

In order to investigate the cause of these deaths, a multi-stakeholder technical team consisting of officers from key institutions was constituted. The institutions which constituted the team were drawn from the following: The Ministry of Health, which played the lead role; the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; the Government Chemist and Analytical Laboratory; the Uganda Police forensic pathologists and Criminal Investigation Department.

Based on the findings of this team, a ban on the manufacture, distribution and sale of spirits packed in plastic sachets was instituted from the month of September 2009. Since then, the ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry alongside other stakeholders has put up considerable effort to ensure that there is quality and safe production in the spirits sector.

The stakeholders made a number of consultations with public and private sector institutions. These consultations yielded recommendations that have been put across to relevant stakeholder institutions in a mechanism which spells measures to strengthen the quality and safety of manufacturing and packaging spirits in Uganda. These measures include, but are not limited to the following:

1. 	All companies and persons involved in spirits production should register with UNBS and will be re-assessed to ascertain their capacity to produce quality and safe spirits fit for human consumption. 

2. 	Measures will be put in place to ensure that the quality of water used in production of the spirits is subjected to physical and microbial treatment to transform it into drinking or potable water as per the requirements of the Ugandan Standards, US 201:1994.

3. 	The neutral spirit which is an ingredient used in spirits manufacturing, shall be tested regularly to ensure that the methanol content is within acceptable limits as per the requirements of the East African Standard on neutral spirits, East African Standard 144:2000

4. 	Apart from the product quality standards - standards specification for gins, Uganda Standard 44:1999; and standard specification for Vodak, East Africa Standard 142:2000 - labelling and packaging standards will be adhered to. This will be to address the issue of access to alcohol by minors.

5. 	From now on, all spirits manufactured, distributed and traded in Uganda shall be routinely subjected to testing to ensure fitness for human consumption.

6. 	The current stocks of spirits on the market and in the factories shall be re-tested. These tests shall also apply to ingredients and packaging materials intended for use in spirits manufacturing.

7. 	All manufacturers, packers and distributors of spirits shall show proof of compliance with other national regulatory bodies and Government institutions such as Ministry of Health, Uganda Registration Services Bureau and NEMA.

8. 	They will declare to UNBS the suppliers and source of the neutral spirit, packaging materials and any additives used in spirits manufacturing. In case of any criminal case or negligence that may result in loss of life, such incidents will be reported to the Police.

9. 	Before production resumes in this sector, each manufacturer will be assessed on a case by case basis and the minister will have to be satisfied that all the above have been complied with before a license is issued.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, when you say manufacturers, people producing waragi go to the forest or near the river; are these manufacturers? Who are the manufacturers you are talking about? 

MR LOKODO: Those ones are not legally allowed to do that job. In regard to the regulation and monitoring of the industry, UNBS has signed a memorandum of understanding with the manufacturers; not those in the valleys, under the Uganda Alcohol Industry Association. This manufacturers association will undertake to identify, vet and register their members countrywide and liaise with all relevant public sector institutions at all levels of Government, including the lower local government. These lower levels of Government will enhance the revamped enforcement of the Enguli Act, the Liquor Act and other laws. 

The Uganda National Bureau of Standards on its part shall play its role as is stipulated in its mandate to provide standards, quality assurance, metrology and testing services. 

To create further checks and balances in the safety, the ministry will interest consumer protection associations in the property to participate in the monitoring process in the country. 

It is my sincere hope that what the ministry has done as stated above, will address the issue of availing safe spirits and liquors to be packaged, distributed and sold to responsible persons in Uganda. 

Care will be taken in the packaging to make sure that spirits are not easily availed to minors. Packaging for ordinary retail will not be done in containers which are easily concealed, but will be done in bigger containers of about 250mg. 

The current stocks and package materials will be phased out gradually to allow the manufacturers time to acquire new technology and to dispose of the existent stock. This takes into account the ban on buveera or nylon polythene bags before 10 April 2010. 

As I have outlined above, there is now a mechanism put in place to address the issues that the earlier ban on production and sell of alcohol was intended to achieve. This mechanism has been shared with all of the relevant public and private stakeholders who participated in developing it. I now recommend to this House that the ban that was instituted by the hon. Minister of Health on 12 September 2009 now be lifted henceforth - immediately. (Laughter)

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Emmanuel Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have had time to interact with my colleague, the Minster of State for Industry and Technology, and we have agreed that if the measures agreed on in his statement are enforced, then we would have no problem with lifting the ban. 

The Minister of Health instituted the ban because alcohol and spirits, to be specific, were being packaged in small quantities in plastics, buveera and in any other materials you can mention. So, we will mention that these spirits and alcohol in general should first and foremost be packed in quantities that are not less than 250 mg, that is, a quarter of a litre, and they must be packaged in glass bottles and not plastic materials. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.09
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister of State for Industry and the Minister of State for Health for the brief. I want to thank the minister for putting in place quality and safety measures for manufacturing waragi and spirits. 

However, when you go to the measures that have been put in place, bullet no.2 says that “measures will be put in place”, but the minister urges that the ban be lifted even before these measures are put in place. When you go to bullet no.6, the minister is specific. He goes on to say that the current stock of spirits on the market and in the factories shall be re-tested. But the minister urged Parliament to lift the ban! -(Interruption) 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. In as much as my colleague is mentioning the measures and the bullets, he forgets that there is the last bullet which is on top of page 3 and it says, “Before production resumes in the sector, each manufacturer will be assessed on a case by case basis”. So, I think this answers his concerns. I thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you for the information although it is actually irrelevant because that is the point that I want to address. When you go to that bullet the minister has been referring to, which is bullet no.8 on page 3, it says that before production resumes in the sector, each manufacturer will be assessed on a case by case basis. 

We represent constituents, so I would have loved the minister to table the list of firms which have been assessed so that when I go to the islands in Buvuma, I tell my people, “Drink waragi from factory A, B, C or D.” However, that information is now secret or classified and yet if you are to lift the ban, it will be with immediate effect. 

I want both ministers to assist this House and the entire Government and Ugandans. I do not see why we should hurry. Why should we hurry to lift the ban? We are talking about lives of people, and with due respect, this should not come from the Reverend Father –(Laughter)– Yes, you would be the last person to recommend that. These are lives of people, by the way –(Interjections)– Even if you lose one person. –(Interjections)– He is a Reverend Father and a minister –(Interjections)– Do not derail me. 

Mr Speaker, I represent a constituency where say 30 percent of my voters actually take crude waragi; so I have the heart for these people. If they lift the ban today and tomorrow we receive cases, the entire Parliament will be condemned. I want to urge the two ministers to at least - we can give you two weeks and you come up with a statement. 

THE SPEAKER: But in spite of the ban, don’t you think that people were taking their waragi as they wished? I am surprised when you talk about manufacturers. Who are these manufacturers? Small scale ones?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am moving on a point of procedure. I remember early last month I moved a motion in this regard. The minister said he wanted three weeks to come up with a position that would be very agreeable with the House and the ministry. I would like to be advised because the way the minister has moved, it is as if he has done so singly and is disregarding the motion. Whereas we made several recommendations, today he comes up and says he is lifting the ban on the sale of these dangerous substances when people are dying everyday. 

I think that our motion, which is the property of this House, should be moved because the minister has not fully met the demands of the motion. He has instead disregarded it and is acting as if nothing took place, by lifting the ban, and saying alcohol in sachets is going to be re-tested. How will we know as it is already in the market? 

Our motion also looked at us operationalising the Enguli Act and ensuring that alcohol is only sold in places where it is supposed to be sold and at times that are agreed upon. The minister has disregarded all this. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to move my motion because the minister has failed to address the concerns of the motion.

THE SPEAKER: No, he thinks he has answered you. If at the end of the day you still think that you need your motion, it is up to you but let us debate his statement as he put it.

I want to welcome pupils and teachers of Kumi Girls’ Day and Boarding Primary School. They are here to see what you are doing. You are welcome. You have a good uniform.

MR WILIIAM NSUBUGA: In conclusion, I want to urge the entire House; the minister should come up with clear procedures on how to verify because some traders have stocks of the purported waragi which is not good. The moment we lift the ban before identifying that stock, this will cause more loss to our country. So, I want to urge Parliament that we defer the lifting of the ban until we get a clear statement from the Ministry of Health. I thank you.

4.17
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my very good friend, hon. Rev. Fr Lokodo, for issuing this statement. Nearly three weeks back, this House through the motion which was moved by hon. Kubeketerya, did agree to temporarily place a ban on the production, sale and consumption of alcohol packed in various packages. Probably before I go to the ingredients, it will be right and befitting that I give a historical perspective of alcohol production and consumption in this country.

The production of alcohol was first introduced in this country by chemists who were of Nubian origin. We did not have alcohol production in this country, but it was introduced by the Nubians during the colonial administration. I do not want to turn this into a lecture theatre but I have told you and that is a historical fact. 

Having said that, you will appreciate that even when we had that temporal ban on the production and consumption of alcohol packed in sachets, in the first place there was hoarding by those who already had the stock in their stores. As a result of that hoarding, the price of these sachets tremendously shot up, but all the same, men and women craved for its consumption and in the process more deaths were registered. It means, therefore, that we do not have control over the existing stock in factory premises and those that are already out there. 

To make matters worse, we lack an efficient operational and institutional framework. We have Uganda National Bureau of Standards, but you remember a few years back, when we received fake tools and seeds for supply to Northern Uganda. These went through the hands of the same staff of Uganda National Bureau of Standards. 

Here is a situation where we are playing with lives. It is not physically possible for us to re-test some of this stock, which is already in circulation. It is impossible and we cannot. I do not think that my friend, hon. Rev. Fr here, has got the machinery to send people to Terego, Arua, Ariwara and wherever, to go from shop to shop, while testing the stock that is already in circulation; that is impossible! 

As a result, even after that temporary ban, we as a country registered more loss of lives and I do not think it is in our interest as an institution that is charged with designing and making frameworks for good governance, that we should see our people die. So, the issue of selective testing, my fellow altar man, is not possible. You are a priest and you know this. If you do not know - My friend hon. Awori, we know those things and I do not want us to go into the seminary and be at the altar. Therefore, if we are talking about protection of our people -(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, whereas we are debating a very serious issue about alcohol and particularly the spirit that is causing deaths, my colleague the Minister of State for Industry, who also happens to be a priest, is presenting the government position. I do not want this to be associated with the Catholic Church, because as a Catholic, I feel offended when my priest is being ridiculed in the House. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, if my colleague and senior brother, Hon. Hilary Onek, got me right - I think you also came close to the gates of the seminary and you cannot pretend to be more of a seminarian and Catholic than myself. We are all believers and in no way am I putting that on my colleague the Reverend Father who is serving in this country as a minister. It is not his personal statement. He is acting on behalf of Government.

When we look at death as a result of consumption of spirits; from our traditional spirits and alcohol that we have - be it what they call “Mandule” in Luganda; “Kasese”, “Lira-Lira”, “Nguli” -  cases of deaths are not as highly registered as has been the case with these ones that are packed in sachets. Death due to consumption of these various types of alcohol will only arise if there is overconsumption. But if you consumed what you require, incidences of death will not arise. 

In this particular incidence, the case that brought this motion into being is about the poisonous content, not the amount.  However little you sip, some lose sight, while others die. That is what we are trying to safeguard our country and our people from.  Therefore – 

THE SPEAKER: So, does it depend on the raw material you use? If you get “Enguli” from “Mwenge Muganda”, do you think we have a problem?

MR WADRI: You see, if you got the material from “Mwenge Bigere” or “Kaliga” -(Interruptions)- yes, “Kaliga”; and as long as the alcohol content there is not the poisonous one, it will be safe. So, it is about the methanol content because here, they are saying we must emphasise the methanol content, but if it has ethanol, that is where issues of poisoning come in. It is no longer the quantity, it is the content. If it is that “Mwenge Bigere - Mwenge Muganda”, which I believe has no ethanol, it will be safe.

What we are urging our development partners - our investors - is to mind about the content of the stuff that they produce. (Interjections) European gin is tested and you know it; you know how nice it is and I know you are a consumer; and it has never killed anyone. This is because it does not have a high content of ethanol. So, we are asking, as a country and without producers, to ensure that whatever we produce is ethanol-free so that it is fit for human consumption.

DR RICHARD NDUHUURA: Thank you hon. Wadri for giving way. I seem to have heard the Member on the floor saying that the alcohol must be ethanol-free. Are you talking about ethanol or methanol -(Interjections)- because it is methanol which is poisonous.

MR WADRI: It is methanol, which does not exist in “Mwenge Bigere” or “Mwenge Muganda” -(Interjections)- I think what we need to do at this stage as hon. Kubeketerya  rightly said in his motion, is to be very clear as Government in terms of operationalisation of existing laws. When we are talking about allowing these investors to package these spirits in various quantities -(Interjections)-  they might be up there, but I am talking because I know I am in Parliament; I must talk as freely as possible. Is it in accordance with the Enguli Act? Are we not using our own State positions as a country, as a government or as a minister, to undermine the existence and operationalisation of the Enguli Act? (Interjections)

Yes, because what does the Enguli Act provide in simple terms? It means that before you consume any locally-produced spirit or alcohol, it must first be taken to Port Bell, the East African Breweries, for processing. That is the only plant, which is specified in that Act. 

So, what are we doing? Are we creating one law with one hand and undermining it with another? Even before we can consider the idea and request of lifting this ban, I appeal to Government to come up with an enabling law, which does not conflict with the Enguli Act so that we move in tandem. Otherwise, we will lose direction. We will even fail to maintain and observe law and order in this country because we will be using State machinery to undermine our own efforts.

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, feel that it is true we have received this report and request from the hon. Minister, but it is too early for us to consider lifting this ban. Let this ban be operational; let us do all it takes to make sure this country is free of any poisonous drinkable stuff, whether it is Enguli, Hunter, Officer, Tyson or whatever you call it. We want this country safe and to have safe stuff for consumption. I thank you Mr Speaker.

4.29
MRS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I feel ministers should take the lives of citizens of this country seriously, especially the two who have submitted this afternoon about alcohol consumption.

Honestly, in this case, we are doing a disservice to this country and the nation at large. I remember when this motion was moved by hon. Kubeketerya, we raised a number of issues. I personally raised the issue of Singo Distillers, who were closed one time because of deficient hygienic conditions. Today, on page two, the minister the has brought back a statement, which has not explained anything about what has been done so far to rectify some of the reasons as to why Singo Distillers was closed because of lack of hygiene in the processing of alcohol.

As if that was not bad enough, still on the same page, he speaks as if all the distillers are in one room where he can have tyrannical control over all of them and he is able to follow their activities. What is it that you have done in the short time that we gave you? We are not seeing this come out in the statement that you are giving this afternoon. It shows that –(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, hon. Ibi for giving way. I have got a copy of the press release from the Ministry of Health when the ban was instituted. And it says,”Recommendations: After exhaustive consultations, the team recommends the ban of vending alcohol and other beverages in plastic sachets.” So, from these, what the Minister of Health had actually banned was the vending of alcohol and other beverages in plastic sachets. The Ministry of Trade and Industry, however, went ahead and I do not know how they did it, but the ban became general because it was on production, manufacturing, distribution, vending - call it anything. So, what the Minister of State for Industry is presenting now leads us to a situation that has been prevailing, and that is that, manufacturing, production, vending, etc., has not been ongoing. When he recommends that the House lifts the ban, it gives the impression that we are lifting the ban on vending of alcohol and other beverages in plastic sachets, and this is not the spirit. I think that rather than engaging in a very long debate, we would advise that this statement be amended –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I wish to propose that we amend this statement –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear what she wants to say.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are debating a very pertinent issue concerning the lives of Ugandans, and some have already been lost; and yet we are hearing contradicting and uncoordinated information from Members of Cabinet. We expect that as the Executive, they do their in-house talking and whatever comes on the Floor of Parliament should have a harmonised position. Would it be procedurally right that the ministers come and contradict themselves in the House when they should have harmonised the position and done their in-house talking in their meeting rather than throwing the House into more confusion because of their contradiction? Is it procedurally right? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What do we do? I think it is to harmonise positions, study more details and maybe we ask some committees to sit with the ministers concerned – Health, Trade and Industry, and find a solution. Meanwhile, we should not pronounce ourselves formally here and you take time, like maybe by next week, in which you would have harmonised the position – I do not know. Which committee is going to do –

MR HENRY KAJURA: This has been a very lively debate and of course the consumption of waragi is an interesting issue in the country. (Laughter) During the British days when I was a young administrative officer, the banning of the manufacture and consumption of waragi was forcefully enforced. Nobody was allowed to manufacture and consume waragi, but as soon as Independence came, that was the first thing – relaxation - that was made and it was welcomed by some and not so much by others. The consumption has increased and the stigma that used to characterise it has more or less disappeared on certain grounds, and one of them is that it is the common man’s drink. Why should people then interfere with it? It is the rich ones who consume whiskey and brandy. 

But it has problems. Many people have suffered as we have debated here before about its consumption, and in particular, when it originates from certain plants or when the manufacturer is not good in terms of hygiene and contamination. Therefore, for the sake of our people, I think we should handle this matter with greater care and depth. (Applause) Therefore, I suggest that we are given another opportunity in Cabinet to have a look at this matter and try to get a harmonised position before it comes to the House. 

Members of the Opposition will be consulted so that we get something; we do not want to deny the people a good drink and time, but at the same time, we have a duty to look after their health. I thank you.
    
THE SPEAKER: Don’t you want to involve members of parliament in studying this statement and maybe in expanding the contents?

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am the mover. Can I have a – 

THE SPEAKER: You are a mover but we are dealing with a statement.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: I am highly indebted to the Prime Minister for the very considerate statement he has made. In my own understanding, when a matter of this nature comes to this House, it should have first been considered at Cabinet level, which I believe, because of what I see on the Floor, has not been the case. Whereas I agree with him that Cabinet needs to have a second chance to have its eyes and hands on this document, I will humbly wish to differ from that proposal, that rather than limit and leave it only to Cabinet, let eminent and professional Members of this Parliament first and foremost give technical input to this work so that at a later stage, if Cabinet wishes to consider it, then it can be able to do so. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would wish to propose that this matter be as a special assignment committed to the relevant parliamentary committee, which I believe is well endowed with the technical people who can conversantly handle this matter on behalf of Parliament, and then they report back to us. I beg to move that it is given – 

THE SPEAKER: When you say the appropriate committee, is it for Industries or Social Services? What is it? 
 
MR WADRI: Because of the importance attached to this particular assignment, we as a Parliament could come up with a select committee borrowing membership from a few of all sessional committees so that they are tasked with a specific schedule and responsibility within a specified time-frame, and it does not drag on like any other ordinary business of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: How do we do this? Do you suggest that each committee should bring five members? I can see that the issue concerns many committees; because people are concerned with health, and he is concerned with production and industry - 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I beg that you give this responsibility to the Committee on Social Services with a mandate to co-opt members from the relevant committees. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Why do you want the Committee on Social Services? Is it because of the issue of health? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, they can also co-opt others. Discuss this with the minister concerned who has brought the statement and with some people on health. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues in this matter are more to do with trade. Of course, the issue –(Interjections)– let me explain. The issue of health – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking in terms of money? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a point of order. Only two weeks ago, I buried a first cousin. He drank this Waragi in the sachets and died. He was unable to feed for two days and I understand this stuff is very addictive and it just kills your appetite. The poor man died and he left us with three orphans who cannot find their way in life. Is it really in order for the Minister of Health to come here and say that this is not a health but a trade matter when the poison is affecting the very lives of the people who are under his care? Whose lives are his political mandate? Is he really in order to put money ahead of our lives?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us do it this way; let us combine the two committees – the one on Trade and Industry and the  one on Social Services - as you seem to suggest. Then they can handle it and come back within one week or more. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Since I was among the Members who moved that motion, it is really prudent that we do not just look at money. It is not the issue of money. It would be very prudent that that Committee on Social Services with the one of Trade and Industry and the petitioners, follow the motion and then we come up with an agreement and – 

THE SPEAKER: It is not the motion; we are trying to find a solution.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, the information within the other motion could be used and eventually they can come up with a good position. 

THE SPEAKER: So, is it agreed?

MR KUBEKETERYA: It is agreed. 

THE SPEAKER: Should we keep quiet about the ban? (Laughter)

MRS IBI EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. There is also this element of the National Bureau of Standards. Whatever happens, at the end of the day, we want to have an institution that we hold accountable.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ibi, when these committees meet, they will call all these stakeholders including the National Bureau of Standards. They will definitely be involved because they will give the technical aspect of the matter. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is important that we really state our position on the ban. The reason we are having this discussion is that we are concerned about the illicit sale and the presence and prevalence of these poisonous drinks, and of course we are not yet satisfied with the explanation by the hon. ministers. It is important that we maintain the ban and I pray that this House moves in that direction; that the ban is hereby maintained until the committee – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the status quo be maintained? Okay then, let us stop here; they will come back to us within two weeks. 

Today, we have many visitors and I can see teachers of Musubi Church of God Primary School, from Bukabwoli Sub-county, Bunya East, represented by hon. Kubeketerya. You are welcome. (Applause) Your Member of Parliament is working seriously. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON ETHNIC MINORITIES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: The debate continues.

4.48
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As honourable members will recall, when the House was adjourned on this debate last week, I was the Member holding the Floor and I wondered why we have been driven into a discussion of this nature. Members will recall that two hon. colleagues stood up - somehow in assistance of my submission, which I later discovered was a total distortion. One was Hon. Perez Ahabwe and the other was hon. Mutuluuza. What they were attempting to explain was that there are no tribes in Rwanda and that the nationality in Rwanda is the tribe, which is wrong. 

Besides that, my query is, why do we have to look at ethnicity as a specific element when we know that the issue of discrimination and the issue of imbalance take greater proportions than the limits of ethnicity? In its introduction, this report says that there has not been any affirmative action taken to ensure equal treatment and participation of ethnic minority groups in national policies and development programmes. I contest this statement because I have time and again, together with many other colleagues, stood here to say that there are other groups both minorities and strangely majorities, which are discriminated against.

Allow me to ask about religious minorities. If there is House on Friday, I come and attend. If I have to go for Idd, I must reach my home at night because I have to leave office on a working day, share with my people that very particular night, and have a day with them, and leave that same evening of Idd to be behind my desk the following morning. I have no free pre-day; I have no post-day for the Idd. 

When is that consideration going to be looked at? What about suppressed majorities in unemployment; in the Army and Police? This has been my consistent cry. So, to drive me to discuss ethnic minorities is diversionary, while leaving out the major and broader subject. 

You remember recently, the Kabaka of Buganda was denied the opportunity to go and tour his people. Baganda are not a minority; they were suppressed and people were called terrorists; they are now answering charges; some were killed without verification and these are not a minority.

So, you bring me here to discuss a minority group when majorities are being suppressed! It is difficult for me to believe.

On page eight of the report, it is probably a solution to all these. The report, under (vii) says, “The Equal Opportunities Commission should be put in place without any further delay to carry out its mandate to address issues of the marginalised.” As a broader subject, not ethnic minorities - because I am suspicious that with ethnicity there is something hidden. If you read the annexes of this report, they all point to a direction of a specific ethnic minority in which either the petitioners or those who advised them have a specific interest, which was not discovered by this report.

The conclusion of this report also has another interesting statement and they say the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states that, “Every effort shall be made to integrate all people of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity”. I would, therefore, beg that this House be guided properly to avoid discussing an element that is going to look like there are people whom we want to give special treatment against others. The query still stands, why do you want to start with minorities and not suppressed majorities? I thank you.

4.54
MS BEATRICE MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not amused when we started discussing this paper, saying that we are talking about minority groups because it immediately took me to thinking that we now want to segregate people in small groups, call them Ugandans wherever they have been, maybe they could have been called ‘Abasoga’, ‘Abanyole’ and so on.

We now still want to break them into smaller groups because I have not done much of the history of Ugandan people - as to where they came from and lived - but at least I know that big groups came and settled in large areas. We can call them Baganda or Basoga and so on.

But now when we start looking at tiny groups and those tiny groups have been amongst the big groups, and they have been there for a long time. It is like when we were talking of the Banyala; I asked where have the Banyala been? Haven’t they been in Uganda and in Buganda? How come we are now saying Abanyala? Haven’t they been there? 

I remember that in Busoga we have as many tribal groups as there could be, maybe 10 or more, but we have not gone in to say, “these have been discriminated and these have not been discriminated”. I think this kind of thinking comes in where people now have special interests, and personally, I shall never be happy that we are now having smaller groups whom we call Ugandans, whereas they are going to become tribalistic.

I think we should not have started with minority groups. Was that really our interest? I was looking at segments like the youths being discriminated against because they are young; the women and the children.

How come this is the first statement we make about equal opportunities in terms of tribes? I think we do not want to bring Ugandans together, but we want to separate them in those small groups, which will not be to our advantage. I thank you.

4.57
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken just a very short time to look at this report, but after scanning through it very fast; I completely fail to understand the gist of the report and what this committee was meant to investigate.

Looking at this report, I get worried and I feel we have been caught off guard. I would not expect a committee of Parliament working on equal opportunities to bring a report of this nature at this time when tempers are still very high with regard to ethnicity.
I am looking at page one and page two where we mention small tribes like the Batwa, Bahehe and the Ik in Kaboong, among others.

Whereas other regions of the world are talking about unity and massive unity at bigger levels, we are still coming back to think about breaking Uganda into smaller groups; and not even tribal this time. I would assume we are moving towards that level. At the same time, we are going to preach patriotism. You are not going to say -(Interruption)

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of this committee and I have appended my signature to this report. According to the sentiments being expressed by the few people who have talked, I still think that the real mandate of the Committee on Equal Opportunities has not been grasped and the real mandate why the Committee of Equal Opportunities was formed has not been well understood. 

When the Committee on Equal Opportunities was formed, I think it was about 2003/2004, I became a member, and I am a member up to now. The reason why the Committee was formed is that the world is not always fair to all at any one time. At that time, we were looking at people from the North that were being affected by the war; the youth who were marginalised and so on. As we talk, the Committee of Equal Opportunities has moved on to listen to the ethnic minority in this country. It was not out of nowhere; they have been petitioning Parliament for a long time.  When you go to, for example, the Batwa, you know the Batwa are a small community living at one end of Uganda, and the conditions under which they live are actually not the same as those in which a Muganda or an Acholi lives. It is the same for the Ik and the Bahehe.

Therefore, I am bringing this up because if we are going to continue debating this report based on the fact that the committee is trying to bring smaller issues to Ugandans, we are going to miss the point. I beg that if Members do not understand at the moment, the mandate and the purpose for which this committee went out and came up with this report, we would rather give time to Members to read through thoroughly and understand the mandate of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, before coming here to begin thinking that the Committee on Equal Opportunities is bringing problems to this Parliament. I thank you very much.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Nyeko for the information. It is unfortunate that the information I am giving to the House in my submission is got from the report. I do not know - I still trust what I read. So, if the problem is with the committee and how the information is unfolding, then at the end of the day, we will need to get back on the right track.

I was still explaining how the country is getting disintegrated. When the British came, in their quest to colonise Africa, they played the game of divide and rule. What I feel the small groups need at the moment - we all see the social injustices that they are faced with. Most of these social injustices would be rectified if they had social services and social amenities reaching them. I do not think any of these communities have failed to raise their voices and have failed to be heard. We have only chosen not to listen to them, but they have spoken very many times.

I had a chance of listening to the Batwa when they came to present something under the pastoralists group at Hotel Africana. They had genuine concerns. It is only that we the powers that be have possibly failed to listen to them and do the little things that they request of us either as leaders or as Members who are leading this country. 

So, at the end of the day, it is not that we should continue breaking the small groups and giving them poking autonomy. In a small group we have over 20 prominent smaller groups coming up. Where will we end? Will the spirit of nationalism still stand? Will we still stand and count ourselves as one Uganda that we all love to cherish?

What I believe is that there are social injustices caused by services not reaching the people and because we are choosing not to listen. One time the youth, the disabled and the workers in this country felt they should be represented in Parliament and now they are being represented. Is there a problem of such big magnitude that we can point at and say that we have rectified, because the youth are still crying about the plight of unemployment and their other problems? Therefore, I feel the issue is not how we can give all of them autonomy, but how we see and accept them the way they are, and we hear and listen to them, and are able to provide them with services; services that make them happy; make them belong to Uganda; and make them feel they are part of this country. 

The question should not be breaking up Uganda into clans, but turning Uganda into one spirit, and body; a country that we all cherish. I thank you very much.

5.05
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank this committee for highlighting the issues that have to do with the smaller groups among us in this country. When you belong to a very small group surrounded by a majority, more often than not you do not have the opportunity or at least the capacity to get your voice heard. If you imagine yourself coming from the Ik who live in the Karamoja area and you probably constitute less than one percent of the total population, in this Uganda of today, if a member of the Ik contested to be a Member of Parliament, I think we would need more than 10 centuries to see an Ik Member of Parliament here. This is because we elect our representatives based on largely who we are, our culture, our tribe or whether we speak the same language or not, and something like that. We have not yet been able to transcend some of these things, but also, these so-called minority groups have not had the opportunity that the larger groups have had in this country; the access to good education for the Baganda, the Iteso and the Banyankole. So, these people are actually more marginalised in their setting.

I would like to ask this House to try to imagine the fate of these people called the Ik who live in Karamoja. Karamoja is such a disadvantaged piece of land on earth. If you see a typical Karimojong, who does not know where his or her next meal is going to come from - imagine you are also among the marginalised; among the Karimojong - those are the Ik. Imagine the fate of the Batwa and the rest. The list is endless.

Mr Speaker, for these minority groups to have found a voice in the Committee on Equal Opportunities is a great thing, 
and I am happy that the issues that have been highlighted here are a very good eye-opener for purposes of us addressing issues of development across social lines.

I am aware that if you look at bigger areas like Australia, there are deliberate efforts to try to conserve the Aborigines. Why? Because if you left the Aborigines the way colonialists looked at them from the beginning, targeting to shoot and kill them and take over their wealth, they would be no more. But consciously, the Australian Government decided it was time to try to conserve them. 

If you go to the United States, there are deliberate affirmative measures for such groups. The black woman in the United States is targeted affirmatively. The Indians in the United States are targeted affirmatively. Why? Because there is a conscious acceptance of these groups, and if there is no deliberate step to help them move on, they will actually get wiped away completely, because of the global trends and the development that confronts us.  We are clearing forests, modernising agriculture and doing what it takes to destroy their natural habitat. And what is in place for them? Almost nothing, if there is no conscious effort. (Interruption) Let me take that clarification.

MR KYANJO: Thank you Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way. Let it not look like some of us are against the idea of looking at minorities specifically. That is not the issue. The issue is that if we are going to start with minorities, I asked, what about suppressed majorities? (Interjections) Because I told you the Kabaka of Buganda was going to Kayunga and he was denied the opportunity, and his people were suppressed with the utmost ferocity that has never been experienced throughout my time in Uganda. 

Two, if we are going to look at marginalisation, are we going to start - I know we have to start somewhere - but are we going to start specifically at ethnicity and not look at other elements? 

I said, and I will continue to say, that Moslems on Friday do not eat lunch because public servants on Friday have to go for Juma prayers, and it is the same lunch time that they use for prayers; but they are a sizeable minority. So, let us look at this subject within the broader mandate of the committee, rather than starting specifically with ethnicity. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I will just presume that hon. Kyanjo wanted to make an additional submission and I think this House should have the capacity to look at suppressed majorities at another point.

But I want to remind the House that our Constitution provides that Parliament, and indeed the government, shall make every effort to provide affirmative measures to address whoever is considered in the opinion of this nation as a disadvantaged group. Until you realise that a group is unique and, therefore, requires affirmative action, you will not. 

The uniqueness we are talking about here is that for a long time, these groups that we are now discussing have been marginalised. The Batwa are away in the forest and all we are doing is to clear the forests and provide power lines which kill them. 

The Ik are out there in Karamoja and all we do is to mine the gold from Kaabong and take it wherever. We do not do anything. There is no specific education to conserve these people and develop them within their setting.

So, I am so happy and I would like to implore the House to adopt the recommendations in this report, particularly the recommendation to do with the Equal Opportunities Commission. When we have an Equal Opportunities Commission in place, I believe, first of all, it will give a voice to these people. 

This issue of suppressed majority, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: For your information, names have been submitted for members of the Equal Opportunities Commission, and the Appointments Committee has so far considered two nominees. They were five, but one did not come. We are remaining with two and waiting for certain details which the Appointments Committee - but the process is going on.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not have that information because I was not consulted to make the proposals. If I had been consulted, I would have submitted one or two names. But I am glad that the process is going on. 

What I am saying is that when the Equal Opportunities Commission is in place, Mr Speaker, these people will definitely find a voice. They will find a home in which issues of development, representation, accessibility and service delivery will be looked into. 

When we go back to this matter of suppressed majorities, Mr Speaker, you cannot abuse Emorimor Papa Iteso in this House and I keep quiet. You know that you will definitely set me in motion because I am around. The Batwa are not here; the Benet are not here; the Ik are not here. All these little groups are not here and that is why this recommendation is very important. 

Now that the process is going on, I am hoping that the relevant minister will ensure that once the commission is in place, it will swing into action as soon as possible to address service delivery, conservation and matters of education.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I hope that at some point as we look at matters of equal opportunity, we will address marginalisation. Marginalisation is not only because you are an ethnic minority. You can also be marginalised geographically. 

I do not know; I feel so passionate about Karamoja because I hail from that side; we are the Ituunga group. Some of us came from Ethiopia and when we reached Karamoja, the old people got tired and so we told them “Akari imojong,” or “You are tired; you stay here and then we proceeded to Teso and they told us, “You go to Teso; you will die and become graves or atesea,” and so we are the same people. 

When you look at the geographical marginalisation, I dread; I shudder everyday. I think about Karamoja as though when we pass resources here we just do not think about the unique nature of some of those areas.

I also want to think that the Equal Opportunities Commission will think about political marginalisation. There are areas like my part of the country where the best you are given in Government is a Minister for Disaster Preparedness. No wonder we are hit by disasters everyday. It is like a bad prophecy came upon us. Every time they want a Minister for Disaster Preparedness they give it to Teso and so we have famine and then drought. Why don’t you give us Ministry of Finance also? Perhaps the finances will begin to come to Teso. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not here last week when the report was being presented, but I have gone through the report roughly, particularly the recommendations. 

Mr Speaker, I did not know about these small ethnic groups until 1973. I was attached to one of the business allocation committees giving away the businesses of Asians. So, after the exercise; someone wrote a letter in the press expressing concern about the marginalisation of the minority groups; that none of them was given a single shop. And then the late Idi Amin called all the seven business allocation committees together to talk about the minority groups: Batwa, Ik and so forth. The late Erinayo Oryema actually became an authority to tell the committees what these groups were, because he said during the colonial period there was a move to protect the rights of these people. 

I think what we are talking about here; we are not saying that the Ik or the Batwa should be represented in this Parliament, we are saying that their rights should be protected; they should live just like any other Ugandan, without getting worried everyday that their land will be taken away and that they shall perish. I think that is what we are talking about.

I think fundamental rights - whether it is fundamental rights of the majority that are being suppressed - as the Parliament of Uganda, we should not allow that one to happen. One big majority which is being catered for are the women. This government has given Ugandan women affirmative action to go to Makerere because they were suppressed and they are the majority, but they were getting less than they deserve. In this Parliament, they come on affirmative action because they were few in the House. I think that is all we are talking about.

Let us not mix this thing with the disintegration of the nation. Today, I do not know whether I am in the majority or minority, I am in the middle there (Laughter) but tomorrow, the way things are going in this country a majority tribe may become a minority and we shall crave for this kind of protection. So, I think I support the recommendations of the committee. We have to protect these people so that they don’t disappear.

5.21
MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (MR HILARY ONEK): I support the report, but I just want to relate my little experience as chairman of the Basongora community; the marginalised ethnic group called the Basongora in Kasese. The Basongora are a small ethnic group; they are hardly 30,000 people in Kasese, and they have been thoroughly marginalised and denied land. They were actually on the verge of extinction. The few that remained were forced out of their land into Congo. The Congolese chased them back and it became a crisis because they moved into a national park, and that is when Government attention was drawn, because now the national park had to host tourists.

What did the Basongora want because they were a suppressed minority? Their demand was access to their land. As we know in Kasese, there two Busongora counties - because Bakonzo were on the hills, when Bakonzo as the majority descended down the hill and occupied those two Busongora constituencies. The representatives of those two constituencies are Bakonzo; so the Basongora were disappearing. 

Number one; they want access to their land, and to be guaranteed safety. Number two; they want social services so that their children can go to school. They also want the right to enjoy their property such that it is not taken away from them.  All those rights, hon. Okello-Okello, are the fundamental rights of any minority groupings which include Basongola.

The right to culture is also enshrined in the constitution. Every ethnic grouping, you enjoy your culture as long as you do not mix the two, politics and culture; because most often, people hide under culture and advance political interests, and that is what creates a lot of problems in this country. You hide under culture and then you advance political agenda and try to marginalise others. These are the problems that we must also be mindful of; my brother Hussein Kyanjo, should be mindful of that as a majority. 

Freedom of worship -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr speaker, when I stood up to speak, I was airing the views, first of all, of the people of Makindye West who brought me to this House; and two, my own honest and considered views. I did not at any point need or indicate for that matter, that I was driving my point to mean that as a suppressed majority, I am not careful. 

You heard the Minister of Internal Affairs here coming to say that there were people who were killed and arrested by mistake. How else could they have been careful really? Is the hon. Minister, therefore, in order to insinuate that some of us who are considered to be majorities are not careful, and are espousing political agendas under cover?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. Do you mean the people of Makindye West? Certainly, the people of Makindye West are not majority and they are entitled to express their views. (Laughter)

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The human rights abuse that goes on; we are looking at the rights of women; they are being raped, defiled and so forth. The weaker sex is being abused by some unscrupulous characters. So, these are some of the rights that we are talking about. Whereas in our population here in Uganda women are the majority; they are over 51 percent and men are 49 or even 48 percent, but the minority are suppressing the majority and those are the rights we are talking about.

Freedom of worship: As long as you worship anything, any devil without doing child sacrifice, you are free to worship; but as long as you infringe and you do child sacrifice, those are the kinds of challenges that we are faced with; the kind of abuse of whatever form of worship - to suppress the weak, the children and the innocent - the presentation of all these rights like the rights of owning land, property and you are not disturbed.

Representation in Parliament or whatever institutions, will definitely not be very fundamental as long as your rights are all catered for, and these are the challenges that we face. Our society or society globally is dynamic. The society keeps evolving. 

I am telling you today, for most of us who are in Kampala, our children have gone to these schools around Kampala; they speak Luganda perfectly and most of them do not even speak our languages. You give it another 50 years after we are long gone, there will be no difference among the population, particularly those who are interacting and evolving around here.

We have to allow that evolution to continue so that Uganda grows and becomes a strong nation without any divisions, which we are experiencing today. We are still embedded in those personal small cultural differences and a little bit of some element of sectarian view of things; our children will overcome them with time to come. I would wish that we support this paper but focus clearly on the rights of our people. Thank you very much.

5.28
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa county, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and the committee members who took time to scrutinise the ideas of the marginalised people, including the Ik, Batwa and the Bahehe.

This Parliament must at this time compel the Executive arm of Government to begin extending facilities to the rural areas. When I was reading some pages of the report, it is not any different from what the fishermen in Kyamuswa are urging Government to do for them. It is not any different from what is in this report. 

The issue is basically that the Executive arm of Government that extends facilities to the rural areas is not considering the rural areas. I am soon coming here with a petition that the fishermen are marginalised and the committee on Equal Opportunities will go to consider the marginalised community of the fishermen.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean professional marginalisation? (Laughter)

MR KABUUSU: Mr Speaker, it is basically to do with their employment; to do with their social way of life, access to roads, health facilities, clean water and schools. I have been here on the Floor of Parliament talking about it.

Every other day when the President speaks to Parliament after reading the budget, he takes pride to say, “We have now moved a long way as compared to what UPC and other governments were doing”, which is appreciated but it is a problem that rural communities need to come here with a petition to be given services. Rural communities will come here to be given a police post; a police post to even be given more orders to start helping people. Government should not sit. The ministries and departments of Government that have agencies in rural areas are either asleep, relaxed or on professional leave.

There is a law that criminalises rape and abuse of rights of women. The police in Ik and Bahehe communities do not regard it as a matter to be handled; it needs them to petition Parliament to be helped. I understand this Parliament must urge Government now and the ministries that handle these issues which the Bahehe and the Ik petition about, to make a report on the progress of what has surfaced.

The committee has proposed that Government should speed up enacting equal opportunities legislation. This legislation should be specific. What is regarded as a matter of marginalisation? Should it be tribe; or should it be economic activities; should it be accessibility to roads? If that be, many of us must then come on board to see that Government responsibly addresses issues that are of a marginalisation nature, and that are not addressed in this report.

Finally, it is important that when Parliament passes laws, whether they are the majority, or as hon. Kyanjo put it, suppressed majority or marginalised minority, it is important that Parliament assesses how far these laws have been implemented. 

This is because in 1995, when the Constitution was promulgated and provided for articles in respect of rights to customs, culture, religion and the like, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have spearheaded and fast-tracked the sending of delegations to meet these people and mobilise them to form up a Ssa Bahehe and Ssaba Ik to benefit from the Shs 5 million and other things that suppressed majorities are benefiting from. Otherwise, the Ministry of Gender has not handled their duty of reaching these people and helping them. I thank you very much for this opportunity.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukia Chekamondo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I also rise up to support the paper. When you go to Kapchorwa or Sebei sub region, you will find the Benets, who comprise of two groups; the Kapsegets and the Dorobos. Concerning the Kapsegets in Bukwa District, Government turned their area of habitation into a national park. They then moved the Kapsegets from Bukwa, their area that was open and cultivatable to the middle of the forest, where they were given a small portion of land and not allowed to practise any other activity.

In 1983, when Government was giving out this forest, they moved these people from the right place to the wrong place. In the forest, these people could not access any schools, health centres or shops. If they are to move to any school, it must be between 15 to 20 kilometres down the cliff and it is really steep.

The Dorobos on the other hand were used to the Benet area because they grew up there and practised pastoralism and a bit of agriculture. When the national park came in, these people were pushed from the forest where they had lived from time immemorial. When their cattle were pushed down with the people, all the cows died because of the climate as they were used to cool weather. Some people also died and many others had problems. 

Up to today, those people are marginalised. As they move to look for social services, women are raped. The situation is pathetic and I feel that this report has come in at the right time to rescue some of our Ugandans. Mr Speaker, I thank you and urge members to support this paper.  [Mr Kasaija rose_]

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I suggest you listen to these people then come in.

5.37
CAPT. GRACE KYOMUGISHA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this report and I think it is an eye-opener but nonetheless, not comprehensive enough. When you look at the minorities that are recognised in this report, there are a number of people who are considered minorities in this country, but who are not mentioned in this report. I think this would have been an opportunity for us to unearth a lot in as far as the issue of minority people are concerned.

When you look at the petition, there are many people like the Basongora and people in Masindi area, who are not mentioned here. The report talks about the Batwa, the Ik and the Bahehe. Between you and me, we know that there are many people whose rights are marginalised and the committee could have unearthed a lot. 

I recommend that the committee goes back, does more homework and comes up with a more comprehensive report.  This should include the Basongora and other minority groups. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.38
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, but as we think of concluding, I want us to think of whether these are the marginalised people or not. Have we carried out a study to see whether wherever there are social services and amenities, these are available to the majority so that we can look at the minority? 

When we are looking at the minority, are they deprived and discriminated when they go to the social services that are available? This is because when we say that these are the minority and they are not discriminated - If one thinks he is discriminated because he belongs to the minority, what happens to those who are from the majority groups? 

Let me give an example. I am born in Namayemba and it is in this report. The Babukusu have lived with other tribes under the same circumstances. When there is no rain, it doesn’t rain in the other people’s gardens and rains in the Babukusus’ gardens. If it has not rained, it doesn’t rain in everybody’s garden. So, if there is food shortage, everybody suffers. There is no health unit in Namayemba which is Government-aided; so, everybody has a problem. As such, why do we talk about the Babukusus? How about the Basiga, Basamia, Adholas and Ateso who are there? 

When we talk of the minorities here and mention the Banyala, where are the Banyala? They are everywhere in Uganda and are actually the majority in Sigulu Islands. When we talk of Migingo, that is where the Banyala are. We have not thought of them but have only thought of Banyala in certain places. We need to have a comprehensive report. If it is to do with Banyala as a small ethnic group in this country, it should talk about all the Banyala in the various parts of the country, not in a small section. If he is to talk –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable member for yielding the Floor. When we are talking about these ethnic or small marginalised groups, the bottom line of our thoughts should be the element of social exclusion. This is because, even if you are a small society, but you are well-integrated and relate very well with the other big ones around you, or with whom you stay with, and you are able to access services on an equal footing like others, you are not marginalised. The issue of social exclusion should be the bottom line of our description of being marginalised or being a minority. I wish to give that information so as to enrich your debate.

MRS KASULE: Thank you for the information, but I think you were just beefing up my point. 

When we talk of the Bahehe in Busia District – it is good I am married in Busia District and the Minister in charge of this ministry is from Busia District. The Bahehe are just a sub-county with so many clans in that sub-county. Are they really – it is not a small tribe, they are Samias. So, when the report comes here and states the Banyanga – actually the Banyanga – Hon Dan Ogalo’s mother comes from the Banyanga. The Bakangala – my mother-in-law comes from this clan – they are all Samias. So, let us not create these small tribes. Buhehe is just a sub-county in Samia land with so many Samia people there, but from different clans, but not tribes. The entire list on page 14 is of clans.

Mr Speaker, now that he has put on a yellow shirt, I have to allow him. (Laughter)

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, it is true there is a sub-county called that. But again, if you also go to the details, you will find a small ethnic group called the Bahehe. If you went to the details of how they live with the community and so forth, you will actually find that what hon. Wadri talked about is a reality. That is social exclusion; it is a reality.  Really, this is the gist of the idea of equal opportunities. Thank you so much.

MS KASULE: Mr Speaker, when the report is talking of Buhehe sub-county and mentions the various clans which are there in the same sub-county, and a Member gets up to tell me its a tribe from Busia called Buhehe; when Buhehe is a sub-county where so many tribes are found, and they are all Samia-Bagwe! I do not know who of the two of us has the best information.

What I want to request this House is that – with the exception of the Batwa – it is general knowledge that it is of recent when they got a graduate, these ones, it is really so genuine. For so many years, people have graduated; but for them, they just got a graduate recently; that means there is a problem.

What I want to suggest is that we should now encourage Government to provide social services to everybody, wherever he or she is, irrespective of the tribe, colour or height. This is because they are all Ugandans, instead of saying we should have special programmes for some and leave out some.

I also want to request that when the Executive gets to the issue of budgeting like - let me give the example - you have the Banyala here as some of the small ethnic groups, and they are many in Sigulu; but whenever the Ministry of Works is thinking of buying a ferry, it thinks of Kalangala and does not think of the other big islands in the same lake, and in the same country called Uganda. That is why we have some of these problems of Migingo because the administration of Uganda is not felt so much there; so the Kenyans came. We have a flag flying, but they are in control. When we have these social services evenly distributed, it will be good for all of us and some of these things would not even be coming up. Thank you so much.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter. It is important to remind ourselves that in the third schedule of our Constitution, these groups we are looking at as minority groups and as ethnic minorities are actually listed. The Batwa are no.35; the Ik also called Teuso are no.40; the Bahehe are no.14 and the Benet - I have not found the Benet - the Basongora are no.31. So, Mr Speaker, in order for us to proceed in a way that is consistent with our Constitution, I just thought I would put that on the record. The Bamooli are not provided for here, Mr Speaker.

5.48
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru District): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the report and to express my concern about the topic we are handling, and that is the ethnic minority.

Two weeks ago, there was a documentary on NTV about the Batwa community in Kisoro. They were showing us how they eat; how they entertain themselves and where they sleep. From that documentary alone, you can learn that there is a lot of social exclusion of the Batwa community from the rest of the population who live in Kisoro District.

What we are talking about is equal opportunity for all Ugandans, so that one may use his or her talent to excel and to compete favourably. We are not looking at the political and other aspects; all we are focussing on are the social inclusions and how these people can freely interact and enjoy their fundamental rights.

I do not want to take much of my time on the preamble. I just want to go straight to the report. On Page 8 of the Executive Summary, recommendations 7 and 8, where the committee observed that the Equal Opportunities Commission should be put in place without any further delay to carry out its mandate to address issues of the marginalised communities. In 2007/2008, I was on the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. There was a very good amount of money allocated for the creation of the Equal Opportunities  Commission. I do not know why up to now that commission – somebody is providing information that the commission is there and I do not know why they are not carrying out these activities; because if they were there, they would have been in position to provide relevant information on what they have undertaken to ensure that these minority communities within our areas of jurisdiction are taken care of. 

In that same report, there is recommendation no.8 which is a bit tricky, and I want to seek clarification from the author, on the statement, “The government should carry out a systematic mapping of ancestral habitats of different ethnic groups.” I find this a bit confusing. We are talking about expanding our family to include the minority groups - I find it a bit difficult if we go to the extent of identifying ourselves according to ethnic belonging. I think we will be shooting our point; what will be the main objective behind these recommendations? I feel that I should be educated because if you are talking of inclusions of other minority groups, why again do we have to start identifying other ethnic groups. Like, I belong to the Acholi community, and that is how we may end up isolating these minorities and putting them in their own status quo. I feel I should be educated and thank you so much.     

THE SPEAKER: But we should conclude – the minister and the chairperson will make closing remarks.

5.53
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will also start by thanking the committee for the report and also support some of their recommendations namely, the one that says, “Every effort should be made to integrate the people of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity.”

However, I will seek a few clarifications on the observations where the committee observes in no.14 that, “The overriding threat facing the minority group is the risk of continuously being driven from their habitats and at the same time, and in some cases, their ancestral land, which is the source of their livelihood, their heritage, subsistence system and often their source of identity as a people.” That is a good observation, but the question is whether we should maintain that status for them? Should some people be confined to that type of life?  How do we expect these people to develop and leave that habitat? Should they move? I think we should seek services for those people so that they can also get out of that situation; other than saying we should maintain that situation with happiness. 

Then there are other observations; “The committee strongly recommends that Government should put in place comprehensive mechanisms to determine who constitutes ethnic minority groups as some groups are not enshrined in the Constitution.” As I was listening to the report, I was looking for the definition of ethnic group. The words are being used interchangeably – ethnicity, tribe, group, clan - I wonder! Because, sometimes they talk of the Bantu, the Luo – what are these? We shall end up missing the argument. The question is, “What is at stake?” If we do not define the problem, we cannot find a solution. We should know what we are looking for so that we do not dwell on sentiments. I think, unless ethnicity is the same as tribe, as it has been used in this report, we shall end up sympathising with everyone who defines himself or herself as a minority. And where we are going, we can see intermarriages and all that, and you may find it a problem to know with whom to sympathise with – the wife who has married a husband from a minority or marginalised group or whichever.

Anyway, this report should have given us concrete examples of where marginalisation of ethnic groups has been. Like the hon. Minister was talking about the Benets – but that is a long story, and I do not want to condemn anyone to remain in the mountains forever. But definitely, when we are talking about saving a minority, we should come up with concrete proposals and see whether the problems are geographical, climatic or ethnic. 

I think we should find the problem before we come up with concrete conclusions. I would also like to support those who are saying that maybe the committee should do more work before we can proclaim ourselves on this report; because the problem is not well defined and there are so many things that are still hanging. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Then the minister, and we conclude.

5.57
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have been keenly following this debate, even the last time Parliament stood over this matter, and I have some three observations to make. 

On page 5, paragraph 1 of the report, when the committee was talking about general findings of the Batwa, they say, “Segregation and derogatory treatment” – in the district of Bundibugyo, for example, it was reported that the Batwa were used as centres for tourist attractions. I personally see nothing wrong with this –(Laughter)- because on a few occasions, I have gone across the border to Tanzania by road and when you reach Namanga Border Post, you will find the Masai identifying themselves and in order to take a photo with them, you must pay some money. In fact, the few English words that they know are “photo”, “twenty” and “money” and they have taken advantage of that. We see them as unique, with widely pierced ears, yet they take advantage of that and get the money out of our wallets and then do whatever they want with the money. So, I would rather the Batwa are encouraged to derive some economic gains out of the benefits that are being meted on them. If Government can invest all that money in marketing Uganda abroad with such tourist attractions, why would people shy away? In fact, Karamoja is also a good tourist attraction centre. So, I think that they should take advantage and tap potential out of that other than asking people why they drive all the way from Kampala to see them - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank Hon. Odonga Otto for leaving the Floor. I do appreciate the example he has given about Namanga, where the Masai are able to take charge of their own revenue that they generate from people taking photographs with them. If you are also on your way to Bundibugyo near the hot springs, you will also find the Batwa who will put a road block saying, “Before you pass, part with a few shillings…” and at the same time, the Wildlife Authority and the Ministry of Trade and Tourism that is responsible for tourism and tourist activities, also gets money from the tourists who go sightseeing and seeing our fairly short colleagues in that part of the country. 

The clarification I wish to seek from hon. Odonga-Otto is whether Government should come up with affirmative action so that a fraction of any amount of money generated from tourists who go sightseeing in Bundibugyo, should particularly be targeted to go to them so that they are able to appreciate their unique situation, instead of taking all the money to the Treasury and in the end, these people do not get a fair share of what is generated out of their unique situation. That is the clarification I seek. 

MR ONEK: I just want to state the case of Karamoja. In 1971, when Amin took over power, I used to live in Karamoja and my parents were there. The Karimojong were forced to put on clothes and those who were found naked were even shot and killed violently in big numbers; and that definitely introduced violence in Karamoja because the Karimojong were very peaceful. They would walk completely naked; just the way God created them; and the tourists would see them. There was one time when a German lady came and identified one gigantic figure and took him to Germany; and he became her husband, because there were a lot of benefits the tourists were deriving from this natural environment. The issue is that they should own whatever proceeds come to them. That is where I support Hon. Odonga Otto. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank the two Members of Parliament and I think the minister should take note of these serious suggestions. When I went to launch the FDC party in Karamoja, it was my first time there and I went with my wife. But I couldn’t believe that in this republic, there are people who move without clothes and they do not care, and in the rally that I addressed, people were seated on small stools and all their private parts were out. (Laughter) It was a traumatising experience for me. I even had second thoughts as to why I had gone with my family. But if we can tap this kind of potential where they are trained to only avail it upon payment and not freely, probably we may be thinking in that line. 

Secondly, on page 2, item no.8 of the first annex, on the petition by the ethnic minority groups in Uganda, they recommend to rename Chope ethnic group as indicated in the 1995 Constitution, to Paluo. I lived in Gulu for 17 years and I studied with several Chopes and I know of two friends who are Chope in this Parliament, although it is only one who admits that the Chopes are marginalised. The other one is totally distant from that identity. Now, this idea of renaming Chope to Paluo is itself an indicator that there is a violation they are fighting. They now want to go to a secondary stage to get a new identity called Paluo because they are running away from the name “Chope.” I think this is where Government should come in to help them feel proud of being Chope and not to style-up by changing their names to Paluo. 

The Danish Government is doing quite a lot in this field. I was requested to recommend five people to go there, but by the time the one from Chope that I identified was in Denmark, they were calling me to say, “Hello, you brought an Acholi here.” He styled up and changed his identity probably during the flight. So, we need to help these people -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Odonga Otto for giving way. Chope actually is a forged word. The real name is Choope which means that there are no men. This group is actually a part of the Luo group who remained there in a different set-up but they are known as Choope, translated to mean “no men here.” 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, without mentioning names, if at the level of Parliament a Cabinet minister cannot be proud of their identity, then we really have a lot of work to do at the grassroots, because by being a government minister, you should be liberated from those discriminatory issues. If anything, there are only 60 ministers in Uganda and I am not one of them. 

So, I really think the government should come out with policies and programmes, workshops and seminars so that these people will be aided to identify themselves, other than changing their identities. As we speak, there are less than 70 married Chope families. You find that a Chope man is going to marry an Acholi. Identities are now changing, which means in the next 20 to 40 years, this ethnic group called Chope will be totally extinct and this is what is bothering the western world. 

I really pray that Government does something about it. Otherwise, I want to thank the committee for this report and I want to thank the Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Can you briefly summarise and then the minister in charge of the ministry comes in at the end?

6.07
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMITTEE (Ms Safia Nalule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to also thank my honourable colleagues for appreciating the content of the report and most of the recommendations.

My work has been made very easy because most of the concerns raised have been in one way or another answered by other Members, but I want to start with some few clarifications which were sought by some Members.

The first was the issue of systematic mapping. This one actually came. If you read the details of the report, it was just to do with the kind of life these people are living. For example, living in forests and when National Forestry Authority comes, they just displace them without any restitution.

You may have read that part of the Ik whereby the gold mines were found and when they were found, they were just displaced; and you know; the kind of compensation is not commensurate to what was owned.

The other clarification which was sought was about the definition of ethnic minorities. Actually, from the other desk work we did, we realised that in Uganda, we do not have a universally accepted definition of ethnic minorities as of now. One of the recommendations we made is that if the Equal Opportunities Commission is in place, this is one of the issues it may take up; but the issue of marginalisation exists; I think we agree to that.

The issue of my colleague Grace saying that you know little has been done; when you look at the third schedule of the Constitution, and you look at the list of ethnic minorities, the amount of work which was done by the committee was like a sample and we could not exhaust each and every ethnic minority.

Allow me to now go to some of the questions which were raised. People were wondering why we are doing this work now. Just to emphasise the point, if you read the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, one of our mandates is to do such work although it has to be beefed by the Equal Opportunities Commission. If you also read the documents we gave you, you could see the petition which was given by the ethnic minorities and even Article 36 of the Constitution as amended talks about minorities; and there are provisions in the international law talking about ethnic minorities.

Secondly, one of my colleagues was talking about why this report has been presented now and why we are looking at small tribes? I think this one was answered by hon. Alaso; these minority groups are stipulated in the Constitution. And, why is this report coming now? This report has been on shelf since I think 2006. It was just not coming on the Order Paper, but it was on. It is not intentional that it is coming now.

I have talked about the injustices because as much as affirmative action has been given to persons with disabilities to go to university; women given extra points; if you read the report, you will see that they are only getting diplomas and certificates and only three. As much as we have the affirmative action in place, they have not reached that stage of benefiting from this affirmative action.

I agree with the Leader of the Opposition, although I did not agree so much with Hon. Odonga Otto, who talked about human beings as being centres of tourism attraction. If you read the report, I think the issues they were raising were like being taken as not human beings and what the Leader of the Opposition was saying, the revenue raised being taken away from them. I think if some of you have travelled to Masai land in Kenya, they have all the resources, the hotels, the tourist attractions; all those resources go to that part of the country. It does not go to the coffers of central Kenya. So, if we can improve on that, I think it can take us a long way.

Most of my colleagues have actually been saying that the kind of issues of marginalisation, which have been raised in this report, affect even other areas and I do agree with you because this is a dynamic society, but when we are looking at the issues raised by these people, you know we are fundamentally looking at the issues of human rights; the issues of equity and non-discrimination; and to me, this is just an eye-opener to this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, you remember when I came to you and wanted to find a way in which this Parliament could consider issues of equity in all what we do, be it legislation, be it budgeting -many times, we pass legislation but the issues of equity are not there. We pass budgets but the issues of equity are not there and as I told you, I am still undertaking a study. 

My own thinking was that we should maybe demand that this Parliament looks at a certificate of equity. For example, if you are passing budgets; if there is no certificate of equity may be we do not pass it; but you advised me on how to go about it and if all is done, I will bring it to this Parliament.

Finally, the issue of the Equal Opportunities Commission. As much as you have told us that you know the work has started, but when you look at the Constitution, it says in the first year after the promulgation of the Constitution; but the names were brought and -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened very attentively to the chairperson and she has ably expressed her discomfort with the issue of the Batwa in a degrading way that is prohibited by our Constitution; not just as tourist attractions but in a degrading manner, and I thought that the chairperson would have proceeded to also address the issues raised about my uncles, the Karimojong. The reasons my uncles and aunties walk naked is not that we like to walk naked. We the Karimojong are very poor people, we barely have what to eat and if we cannot find what to eat, definitely the question of a suit, the question of a dress, becomes a secondary issue. That is why my uncles who are here in this Parliament and my aunties who can afford clothes, actually put on clothes. So, we do not love to be naked for the sake of being naked, and I thought that bit of the record should be straightened.
 
When you give us a sheet, we actually tie it across and that is the maximum we can go. So, we do not love to expose our private issues for the sake of it; it is because we are poor; the first priority is food and water and the day this country is able to give us food andwater for production, we will be able to spare some money and cover our private issues. I thank you.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I do not think hon. Alaso is really representing the correct views because I had school mates; we were all given uniforms; we used to dress and when they went home; they had to remove it because that is the normal standard of life; it is not because of poverty. That was a culture at the time; that was their culture and they adore it.

In fact, their perception is that when you put on a pair of shorts you are hiding disease. [Ms Alaso:”Order”] No, I gave you opportunity, let me finish my statement. In Karamoja, when you put on shorts you will never marry because they will think you are sick; you have gonorrhoea; and you are hiding. That is what it is, I grew up there.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have heard this argument 1000 times. I have grown up and worked with the Karimojong. I have been to Karamoja a number of times myself; these are the arguments that are used to stigmatise our quest for development as a people and as a community. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to come here and say it is just because of culture that people walk naked, when in this very House we sit with hon. Abura Pirir who does not remove his clothes because of culture? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us not exploit this matter further because when we say clothing, hon. Alaso, when we say dressing up, it does not mean this cotton thing or wool. Dressing could be even leaves; could even be animal skin; so you have to trace the history, forget about this modern living when cotton became cloth; trace it and then you will be able to talk about it because I see the idea is they are interested in leaves; but I think it is better we leave it at that level. (Laughter)

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, I was just concluding on the issue of the Equal Opportunities Commission. I feel that —

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I have told you, last week we had these people, the nominees; four of them turned up, one did not turn up. I can just tell because since she had been appointed on two, she preferred one and then the four came. We interviewed two of them, but we wanted certain details which they did not come with; we told them to go and bring them. We shall finalise this matter soon.

MS NALULE: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. What I wanted to say is that today we are looking at the issues of minority groups, but some Members raised the issues of the suppressed majorities so I just feel that if the Equal Opportunities Commission is in place, maybe the issues of the majority who are suppressed will be handled. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Then last and not least, the honourable minister, what do you have to say on this and then we pronounce ourselves?

6.21
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER AND SOCIAL AFFIARS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to just make Members know that the Equal Opportunities Act was debated here and passed, and it was debated in 2007. I would also like to say that Article 36, if I can read, “Minorities have a right to participate in decision making processes and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans and programmes.” So, it is also backed by the Constitution. The minorities have the right.

I would like to thank the committee for their findings, but before I go to that I would like to also state that in their findings on page 14, they were requested to look at the minorities called Bahehe in Busia District. I would like to say that in the 40s, there were some clans and during the usual socialisation, some lady stood up and said, “Our clan is the bigger one, it has swallowed everybody” and that sparked off fighting because one was claiming it had swallowed the others. So, it meant that the DCs of that time in the early 40s, had to organise some census and they were to go to every village and say, “Where do you belong?” and where there were more of one group, they said, “Okay, that village belongs to that.” So, eventually, there was a sub-county called Busiho which had combined all the two groups then they said, “How do we now get a sub-county out of this one” and they  said, “We call this one Buhehe,” dividing it from Busiho; so that is how the name Buhehe came.

Why could this elder come with a word Buhehe and not any other? It has been studied that some of the people who were in that area believed that they came from the Hehe area; so this person said, “Okay, now that you are not part of Busiho, so we call you Bahehe”. Actually, that person became the first sub-county chief of that area. He benefited, but the people did not feel that they were different apart from that squabble. So, they remained the same and that is why you see that the committee says that they were informed that there was no marginalisation.

Apart from the name, it was all the same, but because of the fight which emerged from socialisation, they wanted to divide themselves although they were the same. They said, “We also want to have our sub-county”; and they began fighting. So, they made a sub-county called Buhehe. 

I wanted to give that history so that people do not say there was a tribe called Bahehe; it is a sub-county but the people who are there were told that their ancestors came from some place called Buhehe but they speak the Lusamia; they believe like Basamia and so forth and, therefore, there is no marginalisation as such -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, my problem is not just the report; my problem is constitutional. In the third schedule of this Constitution, Uganda’s indigenous communities, the Bahehe, are no.14. So, how do we come up, when we should be the ones defending this Constitution, to say that actually, it is a mistake; they are not supposed to be -

THE SPEAKER: No, I happen to have been in the Constituent Assembly in 1995 and I happen to have been present when the Constitution was amended. I think some people wanted recognition - he is just giving you the background as to how the name came up. But during the CA, people were saying, “We also recognise this,” and so we said, “What does it matter?” And we did include a number of tribes and I know that is how it came about. People in the CA said, “You have recognised the Baganda so also put this other tribe”, and we had that list of - that is how it came. But I think he was giving us the historical background as to how the Bahehe came up.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This story was told to me by the chief who was the first one to become a sub-county chief. He was very proud to have participated in resolving a quarrel which started at a beer place with everybody claiming, “We are the bigger ones.” So, he said, “Okay, let us separate you; you remain there” and those people believed that they had the ancestors who were from Bahehe and said, “Okay, for us we shall call ourselves Bahehe.” From that time there have not been any wrangles and the people there are living together and going to school. The only problem here which they mentioned was that they wanted a bridge. But who does not want a bridge?

I would like, therefore, to say that there is no marginalisation in regard to the Bahehe versus the rest of the people in Busia District. 

The Speaker has helped me by responding to the question of the Equal Opportunities Commission. I would like to say that the government has done a lot with regard to the Equal Opportunities Commission. In the budget of 2008/09, the Equal Opportunities Commission was allocated Shs 1.0 billion. Three hundred million of that has been spent on the purchase of the six vehicles which have been stationary, waiting for the Equal Opportunities Commission to be appointed. 

In the 2009/10 budget, Government again allocated Shs 1.0 billion. Some of this money has now been earmarked for purchasing of the building. Actually, the process of acquiring the building through the tender has been completed and we are now waiting for the report to purchase the accommodation for these people.

Now, the question of the commission itself. When I went to the ministry, the process had started because this Act was passed in 2007, and it is one of the difficult Acts to implement. It specifically states, among the five, who should be a member. There must be at least two women; one member for the disabled and an older person. And then there is this position of regional. So, the permutations you go through to arrive at the five members are many. 

Anyway, we found the five and we sent them to the President as the Constitution and the Act says. At the same time, the President had identified one of the five, Kisaakye, to go to the Supreme Court. So, the names which came to the Speaker were five, but we had to withdraw one. After withdrawing that one, we again went to search for a lady who had to be a lawyer because the Equal Opportunities Commission requires a judicial person to be the chairperson. We had to search through chief justices and others to get a person. From there we had to send the names for vetting by ISO and it took another two months. After the - well, let me stop at vetting. She has come to us and we have sent the name, as the Act says, to the President. The President now has to send it to Parliament to make five. So we -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just for the record and for the readers of the Hansard, did the honourable minister say the name had to be taken for vetting by ISO or it was just a slip of the tongue? It sounds very strange and irregular to me.

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, we have to vet. As a ministry we do not just bring people whom we know will not be approved by you people. So, we do it as Government, to make sure that the person we bring here is that one who qualifies. I am saying that as a government we have to make sure that the person who is here is fit and my ministry does that -(Interjections)- yes Cabinet also has to scrutinise and say, “This one we do not -”  So, we do that.

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the minister. You talk of Government doing the vetting. Now, what is the work of Parliament? I thought Government nominates and then forwards to Parliament for vetting. Do you have any other body that carries out vetting before Parliament? I want to know.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the Equal Opportunities Commission which, therefore, in my own simple understanding, is supposed to be as inclusive as possible. The clarification I wish to seek from the honourable minister is as to whether, now that he has drawn our attention to ISO’s role in as far as the vetting process is concerned, it is possible also to have candidates from the minority political parties of this country, since this commission deals with provision of equal opportunities and it looks at social inclusion of every other person? Have you considered members of either minority political parties in this arrangement?

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about minorities I do not think FDC calls itself a minority -(Interjections)- but let me answer the question of vetting. The process is that we have to go to Cabinet so that we present to you a Cabinet list. As you know, what happens is that all ministers send to colleagues and say, “Please send us someone to be looked at so that we include him or her on the committee.” That is the process which you go through. So, by the time it reaches here, the Cabinet owns those names and if the Cabinet has owned the names, you must collectively have them involved. So, that one is our process. And then we bring to Parliament and you Parliament do your work. You expect us to bring you names that were not certified?

THE SPEAKER: I think what the minister is saying in as far as the Executive is concerned when making nominations for various posts is that, they do what they call security vetting; that is their work. As far as Parliament is concerned, we do not do that kind of thing. They send us names and we have things we look out for and I want to say they sent us someone aged 26. We said that 26 years is a young age, but when we looked at the Act, it provides for that category of representation of youth. I realised that is why that person had to come. They say youth have no experience, but this is a youth with qualification. There is somebody who is very experienced; there is somebody who has some disability. But as for security vetting, I think that is their policy; it does not influence Parliament. We do not do security vetting; in any case, we have no means of doing a security vetting.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the explanation you have given us. I think Parliament, in its own wisdom, when it passed the Equal Opportunities Bill, which now became an Act of Parliament, it made sure that provisions were embedded to take into account the interests of every marginalised groups as much as possible; that is how regional balancing came in, that is the reason the youth came in.

THE SPEAKER: But certainly, the Leader of Opposition, they would not include a muyekera on the list. I am just giving you an example. In their nominations, do we expect them to include a muyekera, in their view? They cannot!
 
MR WADRI: Certainly, the issue of a muyekera will not arise because that is a group involved in an illegal activity; a criminal activity. The point I am driving at is to have the composition of this commission to represent the interests of every other sector and that is why I am asking among other parameters that have been taken into account the issues and interests of other political parties, which are judged to be minority because they are not the biggest, taken into consideration. It is either yes or no so that we know whether we are in or out.

MR OPIO: For us we look for people who qualify to be on the committee. We are not going to say that this is UPC, this is FDC. We look for Ugandans and fulfil the conditions such as two women, a youth, a disabled person and then once we get those we constitute it. They also have to qualify academically. Then we bring them to Parliament and say, “here are our five and they represent all the constituencies as par the Act of Parliament; and we have done that, now we are waiting for you Parliament to give us a go ahead.” 

One of the major problems was to cover the regions; apart from the other permutation that you must balance regions. That is how we managed to have it as equal opportunities; so that there is someone from central; someone from the North; east and the rest. 

We accept the recommendations by the committee, and as the Equal Opportunities Commission is put in place, it is going to do more to investigate other minorities that were not included in the study, and to come up with recommendations on how other minorities will be studied and how we shall cater for them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the item for consideration and adoption of the report of the Equal Opportunities Committee on ethnic minorities in Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

Thank you very much, honourable members, for your time and for your views. I hope the minister who is going to implement will take into account what we have expressed in our contributions.

We come to the end of today’s proceedings.

(House rose at 6.40 p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 28 October 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

