Tuesday, 20 October 2009

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this sitting and I want to take this opportunity to thank you for praying for the Leader of the Opposition, who had an accident along Gulu Road. 

This morning, I received a letter from him and I am going to read it. 

It is addressed to me. The subject is, discharge from hospital. “This is to inform you that I was discharged from International Hospital Kampala yesterday, 19 October 2009, at noon, where I had been hospitalised since Monday 12th October. 

This was after a tragic accident at Nyakadot in Masindi district from which I only survived by the grace of God. I am now at my residence in Mutungo.

Doctors recommended that I get bed rest for at least three weeks. I will, therefore, not be available at Parliament, but I will make endeavours to avail myself whenever the need arises. 

Let me take this opportunity to thank you, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister, Ministers, Members of Parliament, medical staff of Gulu Independent Hospital and IHK, my family and Ugandans of all walks of life for the prayers and support that have enabled me make a quick recovery. 

I look forward to a full recovery and towards coming back to work closely with you.

Sincerely, Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo.”

That is the communication I received and I thought I should inform you about it and also to join hon. Latigo to thank you for the prayers and to thank the doctors for the skills that have made this recovery possible. Thank you very much. (Applause)

I have also received a letter which will interrupt our work. This is a letter from the Prime Minister and it is about a Cabinet retreat on 21 October 2009. And it says, “I sincerely apologise for having omitted to communicate earlier due to a lot of work that I had concerning the Presidential Investors Round Table Meeting that concluded on Friday last week. I am requesting you to allow Cabinet meet for a whole day tomorrow, Wednesday 21 October 2009, in a retreat to handle PPDA law and manifesto reports.” 

This is from the Prime Minister’s Office. So, I wanted to inform you that because of this request, we shall sit today and then resume on Thursday because the Cabinet will not be with us tomorrow to transact business. 

We have guest children on both sides of the Gallery, but I will get the details later so that I formally introduce them and they go on record as having visited Parliament. Thank you very much.

3.03
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for availing me this opportunity. I am rising on a matter of national importance and public concern. 

The National Information Technology Authority (NITA), referred to as NITA in the language of our Parliament, is a Bill that was brought to this House in 2008 and was assented to on the 15 July 2009. 

A statutory instrument put NITA in operation as of 15 August 2009 and a board was duly approved by Cabinet. The Executive Director was supposed to be on his official desk by 30th August 2009. It is 20th October 2009 today, close to two months since then and the board is non-functional. 

Information available is to the effect that the following people were appointed but there is also interesting information about the appointed members of the board. Hon. Betty Bigombe, who leaves in the United States; there is a one Kenneth Lubega who is a distinguished Ugandan; Ibrahim Kalisa; Ambrose Ruyoka; Betty Kasimbazi and Prof. Mangeni. 

It was barely two weeks when this board had been put into existence that it started getting problems. Mr Ibrahim Kalisa resigned; Mr Ambrose Ruyoka was fired by the minister and up to now, the Executive Director has not been recruited and nothing has been done in the direction of putting an advert so as to get this person. 

Mr Speaker, you remember as honourable members do, that we have already invested a lot of money in ICT and a lot of trust in NITA. Submarine cables were already imported and are lying idle in the country today, while taxpayers are crying for lack of fees, but we have already spent this money. While this is so, very many functions that were supposed to be formerly performed by UCC were transferred to the now non-functioning NITA. 

At the time of debate, Members will bear witness that some of us had apprehension regarding the creation of NITA in the presence of UCC. The explanations were unconvincing, but the vote swung in that direction. Now, circumstances surrounding this distinguished organisation are only doing nothing but to confirm our worst fears. 

May I, therefore, request that the minister concerned explains the circumstances surrounding this important organisation which has refused to start when some monies in the budget were supposed to be allocated to that very particular organisation?

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, who is the minister concerned?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the minister concerned is the Minister of ICT or the Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business is here. I think he will help us to – unfortunately, I have just seen him enter. Do you think he will be in position to clarify? I think the Prime Minister should -

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Mr Speaker, I think everything regarding the NITA board was done according to the law and as prescribed under the Act itself. That is the clarification I can make. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: I thought I was fair to you because you had just entered and you did not know the genesis of this whole thing, and that is why I asked the Prime Minister who was here to make a statement or give a directive. 

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister in charge of ICT will make a statement to Parliament on Friday morning. 

THE SPEAKER: He will extract the details from the Hansard. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CHATTELS SECURITIES BILL, 2009

3.10
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Chattels Securities Bill, 2009” be read for the first time.

Pursuant to Section 10 of the Budget Act, I obtained a certificate of financial implications in respect of this Bill from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I also beg to lay the said certificate of financial implications on the Table to accompany the Bill.

I beg to move.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PETITION BY SITTING TENANTS OF BUGANDA ROAD FLATS

3.12
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oleny): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the petition by sitting tenants of Buganda Road flats. 

In accordance with Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Hon. Nabilah Sempala presented to this House a petition by the sitting tenants of Buganda Road flats.

The petition was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is now my pleasure to inform this House that the Committee considered this petition and now reports its findings.

THE SPEAKER: I see that it is an eight-page report; do you intend to read it or to give us a summary?

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, this has been a fairly concise report, and also aware of the fact that it has a lot of sensitive matters, I would beg your indulgence that you allow the committee to point this out well in advance. 

I do not think that it will take a lot of our time; I will try to deal with the highlights.

The committee proceeded by holding meetings with the petitioners, the ministers of state for finance, the Minister of State for Lands, the Board of Management for National Housing and Construction Corporation. The minutes of these proceedings are here and I wish to lay them on the Table. 

The major concerns of the petitioners:
    1. That National Housing and Construction Corporation has denied the petitioners the opportunity to purchase the Buganda Road flats
    2. Other flats elsewhere have been sold to seating tenants and the petitioners feel that they are being discriminated against.
    3. The plan to relocate the petitioners to Namungoona Estate is not tenable and the Shs 82,000,000 per flat is exorbitant – this is the view of the petitioners.

The petitioners seek the indulgence of this Parliament and pray that it resolves that:
    1. The decision of the Chief Executive Officer of National Housing and Construction Corporation to cancel the prospective sale offer to the seating tenants be halted. 
    2. That Parliament does direct the Chief Executive Officer and his board of management to offer to the petitioners first priority to purchase and acquire the residential units they currently occupy.
    3. That Parliament orders that the tenant’s further payment of rentals to National Housing and Construction Corporation be halted in favour of the tenants’ purchase deposits.

Mr Speaker, I wish to reflect on the background of National Housing and Construction Corporation Limited. According to the Managing Director, National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd is a 44 year old entity founded as National Housing Corporation under the National Housing Corporation Act, CAP 321 of 1964. It was later repealed by Decree No.19 of 1974 that established National Housing and Construction Corporation.

In July 2002, under the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture CAP 98, National Housing and Construction Corporation was transformed into a limited liability company owned jointly by the Government of Uganda with 51 percent shareholding and the Government of Libya, which holds 49 percent of the shares. 

The National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd has a board of directors appointed by the two shareholders. 

The Committee’s Findings

While handling the petition, the committee discovered a number of facts pertinent to the dispute and obtained a lot of information that is crucial in recommending on how this dispute can be resolved. This information is now presented under the different sub-headings below:

The committee scrutinised documents provided regarding the dispute and came up with the following details: 

Buganda Road Flats were property built, owned and managed by National Housing and Construction Corporation and formed part of pool houses formerly occupied by civil servants. 

On 7 October 1991, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service communicated to all permanent secretaries asking them to meet the decision of a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister and attended by several ministers –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I seek your indulgence so that I introduce these people. In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Belle, Sergeant-at-Arms of the Assembly of Seychelles. He is here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

And in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of Bukoteka Primary School, Bugweri County Iganga District, a constituency represented by hon. Abdu Katuntu. (Applause) Hon. Katuntu has been in, but I think he has just gone out for a while.

We also have pupils and teachers of Bamussuta Church of Uganda Primary School, Nakifuma County, Mukono District, represented by hon. Joseph Mugambe Kif’omusana. (Applause) You are welcome.

We also have pupils and teachers of Nile Vocational Institute Buhanguzi County, Hoima Districts, represented by hon. Kyahurwenda Abwoli Tomson. (Applause) You are welcome.

We have pupils and teachers of Kidokolo UMEA Primary School, Buikwe South Mukono District represented by hon. Lulume Bayiga. (Applause) You are welcome. Those are the guests we have; you can proceed. 

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, on 7 October 1991, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service, communicated to all permanent secretaries asking them to observe the decision of a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister and attended by several ministers and the Chairman and Managing Director of National Housing and Construction Corporation to sell the corporation houses in keeping with the government policy, and this sale would ensure that the lives of civil servants resident in them would not be disrupted and would give such tenants first priority to purchase.

Mr Speaker, the details of this communication are in Annex 1 of the report. Members may look at it. These flats were taken over by the National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd, which took over the interests of the National Housing and Construction Corporation pursuant to the PERD Act, CAP 98. 

National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd contracted a consultant in 2002 to obtain the mapping and approval of the condominiums and undertook to prepare title deeds and actual evaluation of the various units. This progress was communicated to the seating tenants by the company on the 2 August 2005, and the offer for the housing units was estimated to follow – we have the details of this communication in Annex II. 

The company also gave an estimated value of a unit to be Shs 41 million, excluding VAT, another incidental cost. In the same communication, it was communicated that the company had made arrangements with the Housing Finance Company of Uganda to provide mortgage loans for the interested seating tenants. 

The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, in his Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2006/07 indicated that the condominium units of Bugolobi, Bukoto, Buganda Road and Wandegeya would be sold off. Annex III has the details.

In a meeting held between the tenants of Buganda Road Flats and the Minister of Housing and the Chief Executive Officer of National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd on 15 February 2006, the CEO disclosed the acquisition of 49 shares of National Housing and Construction Corporation by the Libyan Government, but reiterated that this would not constrain but instead enhance the policy to sell to the seating tenants the existing units to permit the building of new ones for other citizens. 

The state minister for housing indicated that the condominium sales was part of the government policy divesture where all seating tenants in all former Public Service houses would benefit without discrimination. 

The delay, however, in the case of Buganda Road Flats, according to the minister, was caused by the mistakes of the surveyor in the mapping process and the constraints in the title deed operations at the Ministry of Lands. 

On 25 July 2006, there was a twist of events when the CEO of National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd, hosting the seating tenants of Buganda Road Flats at Sasa Hall at Grand Imperial Hotel announced to them that the company board of directors had reached a decision to re-develop Buganda Road Flat estates and, therefore, relocate the seating tenants to other estates yet to be built elsewhere. 

A complaint in this respect was addressed by the tenants to the hon. Minister of Finance who in turn wrote to National Housing and Construction Corporation asking for clarification from the company if that proposed programme would not be discriminatory and illegal. Annex IV of the report shows the details of that communication.

The company also indicated that in these last meeting held on 15 August 2006, the board agreed to the request by tenants to purchase condominium units from the new estates. The tenants however assert that they have never made any such request nor did they apply to buy the condominium units after the re-development by the National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd. 

The tenants have petitioned the Office of the President, Inspector-General of Government, and the Human Rights Commission and have not been helped. So they have decided to petition this honourable House through a petition presented by hon. Sempala Nabilah, the Woman MP for Kampala District.  

The Government Policy on Divesture of Pool Houses

Mr Speaker, the Minister of State for Lands informed the committee that government had a policy of divesture of pool houses to seating tenants which was subsequently adopted by the National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd. 

According to the board of management of National Housing and Construction Corporation, the corporation sales policy incorporated the handling of residential houses that were occupied by civil servants. They said the policy was in line with government policy to facilitate civil servants to buy pool houses that were transferred to National Housing and Construction Corporation by government as capitalisation. 

The policy aims at giving priority to the sitting tenants where such properties are being sold. They noted that the company had used the same guidelines in selling the condominium properties. 

They further informed the committee that the company complies with the policy when it is economically beneficial to sale the properties as the policy works in consonance with the aims and aims of the company. 

The criteria used in disposing of other flats
According to the Minister of Finance, National Housing and Construction Corporation properties that were identified for sale following the enactment of the Condominium Properties Act were Bugolobi, Wandegeya Flats, Kololo Flats and Nakasero Flats. These were sold in accordance with National Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd policy to offer properties to seating tenants. 

Following the enactment of the Condominium Properties Act, 2001, 1,365 flats have so far been sold to sitting tenants. The National Housing and Construction Corporation is also developing more properties and plans to develop and sell more than 1,000 condominium units over the next three years.

The Disposal of the Buganda Road Flats

Mr Speaker, according to National Housing and Construction Corporation and the Minister of Finance, National Housing and Construction Corporation does not plan to sell Buganda Road property in its current form following the decision by the board of directors of National Housing and Construction Corporation. There is a minute extra in Annex IV for members to read. 

The Minister of State for Privatisation informed the committee that after completion of the re-developments, the company plans to avail some condominium space on the new development. She cited that the company may have the following options:
    1. Offer first priority rights to the current tenants at Buganda Road to purchase the planned condominium space 
    2. Guarantee availability of condominium space on the new development to current Buganda Road tenants.

She, however, noted that the above options ought to be reviewed against the background of the company’s decision to provide alternative accommodation to the current tenants of Buganda Road to relocate to enable National Housing and Construction Corporation to redevelop Buganda Road. 

The National Housing and Construction Corporation, however, informed the committee the current tenants will also have priority to purchase a unit in Namungoona and a one year rent free period. 

THE SPEAKER: Please make us understand; is that the policy of the owner; that he does not want to sell Buganda Road Flats? 

MR OLENY: That was the statement, Mr Speaker. And as I noted, there is a minute attached as an annex where the board took the decision. 

Observations

    i) Parliament does not have the mandate to issue orders and directives compelling the National Housing and Construction Company Limited to act or not act in a particular manner, as the petitioners pray.
 
    ii) Parliament has the mandate however, to scrutinise all aspects in its petition and make recommendations that urge the chief executive officer and the board of National Housing and Construction Company Limited, as well as the supervising ministry and ultimately Cabinet, to act or exercise their powers in relation to the company in a particular manner. 

    iii) There is a 1991 Government policy on the divestiture of Government pool houses meant to ensure that the lives of the sitting tenants are not disrupted, by giving them first priority to purchase their individual residential units.

    iv)  The National Housing and Construction Corporation was bound by this Government policy and so is its successor company, the National Housing Construction Company Limited. 

    v) National Housing Construction Company Limited has sold off houses to sitting tenants in other estates like Bukoto, Wandegeya, Kololo and Nakasero in line with Government policy.

    vi) We also observed that there was an unwavering commitment by both the corporation and the company to sell to the sitting tenants their residential units until 2006 when the company decided to renege on its long held position, which was premised on Government policy.

    vii) The decision by the National Housing Construction Company Limited to renege on its earlier position is contrary to the Government policy of selling to sitting tenants and is recipe for breach of Article 21(1), (2) and (3) of the Constitution, which outlaw discriminative treatment. 

    viii) The final observation by the committee is that the option of relocating the sitting tenants to Namungoona flats, which are only imaginary, and later allowing the sitting tenants to purchase flats in the redeveloped Buganda Road is not supported by any sound legal claim yet the rights of the sitting tenants to purchase their residential units are supported by an existing Government policy that binds National Housing and Construction Company Limited. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that National Housing and Construction Company Limited complies with Government policy and accords the petitioners treatment that is similar to that it accorded to the sitting tenants in the other estates by allowing them to purchase their residential units. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, therefore, the committee has critically analysed the petition and listened to all the key stakeholders and now the committee is convinced that the first priority – the right of the sitting tenants to purchase their residential units - should be upheld as a matter of law and order. 

I now beg to move that this report be adopted by this august House. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Oleny, how do you reconcile your first observation with your conclusion? 

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee rightly observed so, based on the Rules of Procedure of this august House. But also, it goes on to make mention – 

THE SPEAKER: It is not only the Rules of Procedure; it is the law. You told us that the owner said that as far as this unit is concerned, they were not selling and you agree that you have no mandate to compel somebody to sell if the owner says they are not selling; but you are saying something else at the end. In my view, it is causing a problem. 

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, as highlighted in observation no.2, we, therefore, upheld the Government policy and issues of policy reside with this august House. 

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what the committee chairman was trying to refer to is sale or no sale. NHCCL enterprise is a company with responsibility to handle houses and it has the mandate to build and sell; and if it is selling, it will always follow the law that is in place. That is the PPDA law currently. When selling the house, it must do so at the existing value. For instance, if selling at Shs 200 million, it will give the first chance to the sitting tenant, and if he cannot raise the money, then it goes. But we cannot sell public assets at below the market value; we cannot accept that. So, anybody who is in a government house can buy it, but let him do so at the prevailing market rate. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but I did not know anything about this from the report. We are told that this company – the NHCCL – is no longer 100 percent a government entity. There is another third party namely, and I think you have said so, Libya. Don’t you think that this party is also free to sit and decide on policies that they are going to follow? Isn’t this the normal common law? If perhaps they need Buganda road for a purpose and they decide not to sell, can you say you must?

3.39
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the policy to sell off Government houses started when I was the commissioner of lands. And I remember writing a letter to oppose that policy. There was a committee of five permanent secretaries set up to sell those houses. And when they received my letter, they summoned me to appear before them and defend my letter, which I did.

I would like to say that I opposed that policy because in neighbouring Kenya here, old houses are not sold off; they are kept for the incoming employees. What they do is to keep building new housing estates from which they sell the houses to the people in service, on loan for 25 years. The old ones remain assets of the new people into Government service.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on whether this offer to the sitting tenants was accepted. What I am saying is, when the National Housing Corporation gave the offer, was it individually accepted by the sitting tenants? I am asking that because that would constitute an agreement of sale. 

But all that aside, I have not yet known the reason why National Housing Corporation is not selling those flats. But I can guess something. In 1982, Kampala City Council complained that the commercial area had got exhausted. In that sense, the commercial area was extended to include Lumumba Avenue up to the Ministry of Public Service, and it was gazzeted. The reason could be that the plots onto which these flats are, falls under the commercial area; I do not know. Maybe the committee should tell us the reason National Housing does not want to sell these houses. Otherwise, now that we are going to be in partnership with Libya, if the sell is not being made at a loss, we should not stop it. There must be more valid reasons for us to stop it. I would like to seek clarification from the committee on those two issues. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Sebuliba, you have something to say?

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the chairperson of the committee is about a law that he quoted, which said we cannot compare National Housing – I do not remember the section very well, but later he concluded by asking Parliament to come in according to policy and the law. My clarification relates to the fact that he should help Parliament to pronounce itself within the armpits of the law. I am saying this because I was left a bit perturbed on how we are going to act on these issues when actually there is a law that protects its actions and activities. Yes, we have the sitting tenants who want to be given first priority and you have quoted the law, but in your conclusion, you are saying we should come in. How should we come in without violating that law?

THE SPEAKER: You see, with changed shareholding of this company, you can no longer say National Housing belongs to Government 100 percent. You cannot say these are Government houses because this is a matter where the two shareholders have to sit down and decide on what to do with their property. What I want you to appreciate is the fact that this National Housing is no longer 100 percent a government corporation. Decisions have to be made in a company’s meeting and we have to comply with what they decide. If you want to turn them into Government property, we should make a compulsory acquisition, which will require a different approach. Okay, let us hear from the Leader of Opposition.

3.44
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just need to understand this situation well. Now that the Libyan Company owns 49 percent of the shares, at the point of acquiring this percentage, is it likely that the liabilities and assets and other obligations were also carried forward into the new contract? If so, wouldn’t the interests of the sitting tenants be considered in that new contract?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know that. Maybe the chairperson of the committee will tell us more. Okay, let us first have hon. Katuntu and the shadow minister of finance later. Okay, let us first have the shadow minister.

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

3.45
Mr Okello Oduman (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Committee of Finance. However, it appears that there are conflicting laws in as far as the interests of the parties involved in this matter are concerned.

First of all, my belief is that the policy of granting the sitting tenants priority over the disposal of these flats is a good concern; priority should be to the tenants. But that policy is older than the divestiture of the interests of Government in National Housing. The divestiture came later –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, there is no contradiction here. You are talking about the offer being given to the sitting tenants. But for that to be done there should be an offer. If there is no offer, then the question of the sitting tenants does not arise. I am saying that because according to your report, as far as this particular property at Buganda Road is concerned, there is no offer to sale, but that there can be arrangement for people to go to Namungoona and the tenants have a choice either to go there or continue being tenants.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, as far as the committee is concerned, there was an offer to sale. And we agreed that there was acceptance. At that time, we thought the deal had been sealed. But at the time of divestiture, the policy required that the interests of all parties –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member, if there was an offer, why wasn’t it perfected?

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, these questions are falling back on the shoulders of Government because at the time of divestiture of the interest of Government in National Housing, that should have been taken care of and then the liability or responsibility to transfer that arrangement with the sitting tenants should have been taken care of by Government. If Government did not, it is squarely Government’s responsibility. The question we are having now is that, do we have any stake in this matter because it is not purely 100 percent Government-owned.

Government knew there was a policy which we were told the other day even supersedes law. The right was given to the sitting tenants to take the flats. So, the fact that at the time of divestiture, the interests of those sitting tenants were not taken care of, Government must now make good that obligation to the sitting tenants.

This was our view as a committee. I do not know whether the chairman has a different view, but Government should take responsibility to ensure that the interests of the sitting tenants are secured as per that policy, irrespective of whether National Housing has been divested 100 percent or partially. The divestiture law is very clear. At the divestiture time, the interest must be calculated and those who have a stake in that enterprise should be computed and they must be compensated and so should be those sitting tenants.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Katuntu

3.49
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Chair is raising very interesting issues in regard to the legality of our action. It is quite unfortunate that the Attorney-General is not in the Chambers; otherwise he would have assisted us. I have two or three points.

One, this is not divestiture; this is an ordinary business by National Housing and Construction Corporation. Therefore, we need to look at the Articles and Memorandum of Association of this company. We cannot sit here and purport even to advise really something that would conflict with the Articles and Memorandum of Association of this company. We cannot do this.

Two, under general company principles, the shareholders do not have a right or a duty of management. There is a board of directors which executes its duties with the management. We can only talk here as representatives of the 51 percent shareholders, but what right do we have as shareholders? Can we direct the management to do a particular thing? We cannot do it under company law. It becomes a problem. These are our people –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: The information I want to give my brother hon. Abdu Katuntu is that this company, true was sold 49 percent by Government of Uganda and the sale was also not in the open. We do not know how the transaction was done, and they undervalued the company. I know why the sentiments are coming up. When they did it, they got 49; we remained with 51. Definitely, it still belongs to Uganda because we are the majority shareholders. Yes, it is a public company and that is why we are saying 51 percent.

The information I want to give my brother hon. Katuntu is that the objectives of National Housing were carried forward. What we have to find out is, do they have the mandate to sell or not to sell? That is all.

THE SPEAKER: I think there are preliminary issues that we have to determine before we provide solutions to the petitioners.

Obviously, our main concern now would be what the status of this company is. What powers do they have as hon. Katuntu has said, according to the document binding the 49 and the 51? What is it before we can hazardly make a solution? It has complicated it apparently. It is because of the report we have been given. Some of us did not know, but from the facts revealed by the report, it seems it is not easy to solve it just by debating this report and passing this and the other. I do not know what you suggest that we can do.

MR KATUNTU: I thought I was about to complete.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had finished. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: There was some information.

THE SPEAKER: OK.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, my view is, we really sympathise with the tenants, but I would request the committee to sit together with the Attorney-General, examine in details even the shareholding agreement. The share sale agreement is not mentioned anywhere.

We might take a decision that actually contradicts what is in the share sale agreement or what is in the Memorandum and Articles of Association. The committee does not disclose that it actually had an opportunity to look at these very important documents. My advice really is, a company is governed by its articles, that is, its constitution, and so did the committee look at these articles? Is this provided for in their articles that actually it is their policy? Was it also their policy in the share sale agreement between Government and the minority shareholders? It is really quite complicated, in my view.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In presenting the report, it is quite clear that the new company inherited certain obligations from the old company. I also want to say that the committee in arriving at its conclusion, derived information from documents that were presented to it.

I want to agree with my honourable colleague, hon. Oduman, that probably if there is any problem here now, Government itself is also on trial here. In effect, I will attract the attention of the Members to details of the annexes. Annex three is –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, is hon. Mbagadhi Nkayi here? We have in the gallery pupils and teachers of Muguluka Parents Primary School, Kagoma County, Jinja District represented by hon. Mbagadhi Frederick Nkayi. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to call on the honourable members to look at Annex III, the Policy Statement of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on page 78, the last paragraph under projected revenue forecast.

Clearly, it was noted that the company’s key revenue lines had been assumed for the three years to be rental revenue, revenue from the sale of constructed houses and revenue from third party jobs. The rental revenue is forecast to reduce from Shs 6.2 billion to Shs 3.5 billion as the companies sell off the condominium units in Bugolobi, Bukoto and Buganda Road flats. It is mentioned here.

It goes further under Annex IV —

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Katuntu has said, being sympathetic to the tenants and getting a proper solution are different things. I think there are now many hurdles in our way to reaching some of the solutions; and one of them is now to conclude on what the status of National Housing is after it was joined by the Libyan interest. It is from there that we shall be able to move to solutions. Otherwise, unless we remove the roadblock on that issue, we cannot effectively deal with this issue.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, one of the biggest problems public enterprises had in the past, which led to the divestiture, was political decisions that affect them in taking a business sense decision. For example, assuming this company wants to renovate these properties such that the value goes up and then it sells them, how do we determine the value? Look here, do not renovate, sell to the sitting tenants as they are. It does not make any business sense for this shareholder who is 49 percent and invested his money to make profit. If we take this sort of decision, we shall be disrupting their business plans and I think it will not be proper. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, way forward? We need a way forward on this issue alone because apparently the recommendations were made without addressing this issue, which should be addressed first before we reach the solutions. It is a fact and it is a legal one –(Interjection)- is the information part of the recommendation? Hon. Kyanjo, this is a legal question, you must solve it before I start directing.

MR KATUNTU: Can we have the Attorney-General and the committee sit together and come up with something, which is acceptable in the law and which makes business sense?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with hon. Katuntu on the way forward he has proposed so that the parties sit with the Attorney-General and go through –(Interjections)- yes, the tenants and then the committee -(Interjections)- the committee and the Attorney-General not tenants. There are pertinent legal issues, which have been raised by learned colleagues, which we cannot ignore but I also want to register the sympathies of Government to the tenants –(Interjections)- yes, they have raised it. We sympathise strongly with the tenants but there are legal issues, which we cannot just — we accept the proposal for the Attorney-General -

THE SPEAKER: I think that is noted. Hon. Charles Oleny, find out what the position of this National Housing is, in as far as its property is concerned. Do we consider it as Government property and so forth; can we direct? Those should be the questions to be considered.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I agree with what hon. Katuntu has proposed, it may also be useful if the committee in collaboration with the chambers of the Attorney-General could take leave and follow the advice of Opwonya & Company Advocates. It is in one of the resource envelopes that has been given because when you read the second paragraph - I am sorry the document is not paged - but on page one - the letter is addressed to the Chairperson, Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Parliament House.

If the Attorney-General in collaboration with the committee could scrutinise this proposal, then it will ease the process. Paragraph 2 says “Furthermore, Section 33(b) of the PERD Act Cap. 98 ties down the hands of the current limited company to the acts of its predecessor public enterprise.” 

The Interpretation Act, Cap. 3 and the Case Law are also clear on the fact that in case of conflict, a latter Act of Parliament takes precedence. If they could examine that it would probably help us. That is the recommendation we are making.

THE SPEAKER: Let the constituted body consider all this to help them reach a legal decision. They will also take into account this particular provision. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I happen to have been a civil servant and I recall that houses which belonged to civil servants were not National Housing houses. We have to be very careful on that.

For the flats which belonged to National Housing, what government did was to pay rent to National Housing. So, if government was paying rent, does it mean that it is the owner? 

THE SPEAKER: The government was a tenant.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Government was a tenant. Thank you, Mr Speaker. In that regard, what I want to put across is that as the committee goes back to meet the Attorney-General, we would advise the committee to also look at the sales agreement. It is very important. Did we sell for value or no value because it is also one of the Auditor-General’s queries? I think we must first resolve the Auditor-General’s query before we resolve the issue of the houses because eventually, these tenants could get free houses at an appropriate time other than giving them to an individual. 

In conclusion, for the Ministry of Finance to come and beg us that the tenants are worried - you should have resolved this many years ago rather than come here and start doing populist things -(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to impute improper motives that I was on my knees begging the tenants yet I just wanted the record to be put straight that the tenants are crying out for sympathy and mine was to register that sympathy but not to beg? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No. I thought you were acting as a responsible government, which takes care of the interests of its people and sympathises with them. There is nothing wrong.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling -(Laughter)- and Madam Minister I wish you the best - 

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude this. We have concluded that we stay this particular report and meanwhile you go and probe the legal issues that were raised. After disposing of them, we can proceed with the case. But the way I see it, this probe is going to affect many other properties. Once we have found a legal position, it will be applicable to many other properties. The time frame for this to be done is two weeks.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a committee, we are very much obliged to the guidance the House has provided and we will also co-opt some of the legal minds that we have in the House to help us.

THE SPEAKER: The law allows you.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE CREATION OF MUNICIPALITIES OF KASESE, MUKONO AND HOIMA

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have been advised by the owner of the motion, namely, the Minister of Local Government that he intends to expand the motion to include other municipalities so that we do not duplicate our efforts. Let him do that so that when the report is presented, it takes care of other requisitions which the minister wants to make. So, we can stand it over.

MS BYENKYA: No. I am aware but I wanted to find out how soon that will be because Hoima has waited since 2005. We want to be told when.

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, Hoima is not created by Parliament but by a constitutional command because Hoima is the headquarters of the regional government for Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom. (Laughter) So, there is no debate really. Whether we give or not, the Constitution has already declared it a municipality.

MS BYENKYA: Regardless of that -

THE SPEAKER: As soon as possible. (Laughter) I am not in protest.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2003

4.10
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this report was laid on the Table in May. I am going to just present the report for consideration and adoption.

THE SPEAKER: Do Members have the copies?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we delivered them in April. They were here a long time ago –(Interjections)- I want you to act Christian and say that you have received them but you have not read them.

THE SPEAKER: So, what do we do? Do you have your copies? [Hon. Members: “No”.] Do you have spare copies? You present then perhaps Members who will be able to follow it up will debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  Honourable members, let me present and when you go home you will read the reports. I am going to present only the summary; the main information is in the big book. 

Rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament assigns the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament the duty of examining the audited accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. On behalf of Parliament, I report these findings to this august House. This is done in fulfilment of Article 163(5) and 164(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which mandates Parliament to monitor all expenditure of public funds and report excesses of Government as observed by the Auditor-General.

This is a report the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) wishes to present to the august House on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2003.

In the performance of its mandate, PAC interacted with the accounting officers who had queries to answer during the year in question. However, this report is not only based on the findings of the Auditor-General for the financial year ended 30 June 2003 and its final accounts, but also includes close scrutiny of policy matters relating to financial management. 

Compliance with the Constitution, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, the Budget Act, the Appropriation Act and other laws governing the management of public affairs were our points of reference in our discussions with the concerned accounting officers. The committee made an effort to instil the need to uphold accountability in the use of public funds in the delivery of goods and services.

Terms of Reference
 
The committee proceeded on this work under the following terms: 

    • Evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency and economic value of Government projects and programmes according to their set objectives. 

    • Assessing the consistency of budget outlays in relation to the increasing overspending by ministries and departments of Government, which acts amount to violation of the Constitution and the commitment control system.

    • Demanding, in writing from the concerned ministries and departments, information and all public documents deemed necessary in assessment and fulfilment of its oversight function.

    • Assessing the accounts of ministries, departments and the overall management of public funds with special attention to allegations of fraud, corruption, wastage, abuse, diversions and any sort of irregularity that may constitute misuse or abuse of monies charged on the Consolidated Fund.

The committee used the report of the Auditor-General as its primary source of investigations for questioning the concerned accounting officers.

The committee is happy with the additional technical support received from the office of the Auditor-General; the office of the Accountant-General, that is, the Treasury; the office of the Clerk to Parliament and the Criminal Investigation Department during its work.

Let me also thank the members of the committee for their tireless effort to have this work done.  

The committee interviewed the accounting officers of various Government ministries and departments and in the process set out time to meet with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Public Service, the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General to clarify policy matters that arose in the process. 

Observations and Recommendations 

The Diversion of Project Funds 

The committee noted that most ministries had resorted to borrowing funds meant for project implementation to fund their budgets. Although these funds are borrowed for funding urgent needs of the ministries, they are never refunded for the implementation of the activities they were meant for. 

The committee observes that the habit of borrowing project funds hampers the timely implementation of project activities and leads to project objectives not being achieved.

The committee recommends that this act is destructive and costs the taxpayer and, therefore, should stop forthwith. An accounting officer who will act to the contrary will be charged for abuse of office and corruption.

The committee also observed that some accounting officers were yielding to pressure from politicians for activities like travel abroad and they take decisions that are contrary to the commitment control system.

The committee directed that accounting officers should first seek the authority of the Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to the Treasury before diversion of any project funds. The agreed effects of such diversion should be made known to the Secretary to the Treasury who in turn will inform Parliament through the Minister of Finance. 

Advances Not Accounted For 

The accounting officers continue to give advances to various beneficiaries but fail to ensure the accountability at the end of the financial year. During this year under review, over 439 was advanced by accounting officers. The ministries/departments involved include: Gender, Labour and Social Development; State House; Local Government; Prisons; Office of the Prime Minister; and the Police.

The committee observed that there is a tendency by public officials to loan themselves public funds to fund their private activities. Unfortunately, even the political leadership of these ministries and departments have fallen trap to this evil. By the time of writing this report, hon. Ssemakula Kiwanuka, for example, still owed the Office of the Prime Minister unaccounted-for advances totalling to Shs 3,658,012. 

The committee reiterates that all advances should be accounted for by the end of every financial year. On failure to do so, the accounting officer responsible will be held for abuse of office and be made to refund the funds accordingly. The officers who take the advances and fail to account for them or activities to be done will be surcharged for theft and corruption.

The committee observed further that the accountability should be done at the time of the audit. Failing to account at the time of the audit shows the extent of poor management of public funds in the ministries. Note that long delays in accountability undermine and compromise the management of public funds and makes it difficult to pursue any disciplinary action.

The accounting officers should be able to track all the advances unaccounted for in their ministries or departments and appropriately take firm stands where accountability is questionable.

The committee recommends that advance ledgers be maintained to track performance and accountability.

Nugatory Expenditure
 
Substantial amounts of money continue to be lost by Government on payments which could be avoided if right decisions are taken by those that are supposed to manage public funds. These are mainly losses associated with court awards, payments on damages, compensations and defaults on contracts.

During the year under review, for example, Shs 6.1 million was awarded by the court to an individual who had won a case against the forestry department for illegal confiscation of his timber. The case was inadequately defended in court by the Attorney-General who did not even seek information on the case regarding the ministry or who did not ask the ministry to give evidence in court. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Having had experience as I worked in the Attorney-General’s Chamber sometime, when you say “the Attorney-General not seeking details from the ministry”, actually what happens is that when the Attorney-General is served with notice to sue Government, they immediately send this copy to the ministry concerned and seek details. What really happens is that the client ministries are the ones which do not send information to the Attorney-General. Those people in the Attorney-General’s chambers are at times forced to put in a technical defence. It is technical in the sense that he does not have the details, but for purposes of fulfilling the procedure, he puts it in. 

So, when you talk about the Attorney-General not seeking information, I can rightly say that it is not true; it is the client ministries that do not do that. An appeal is made to them that whenever the Attorney-General approaches them for details, they should please assist him and avail them since he is their lawyer. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that information. When the ministry appeared, they were saying that the Attorney-General never sought the information required. So, that is the case now. There will be a Treasury Memorandum which they will deal with under that. 

Of course, there are other instances; for example, under Ministry of Defence alone, over Shs 800 million was lost under nugatory payments. In Uganda Police, Shs 120,339,165 was lost in four cases of breach of contract, unlawful detention, shooting a civilian and loss of a minibus under Police custody. Under the Office of the Prime Minister, it was reported that in order to be able to clear Emirates, this led to payment of Shs 42,558,52.

As noted above, these are losses to Government that arise out of failure by the respective departments to carry out their duties appropriately. The committee condemns the Public Service Commission for these losses that arose out of their negligence in managing public matters. 

Unauthorised Expenditure

Parliament is mandated to appropriate funds, which form the basis of expenditure during every financial year. The Auditor-General, however, reported that during the year under review, various ministries and agencies incurred expenditure totalling to Shs 68,170,763,056 contrary to the law. 

The ministries and departments spent money called non-tax revenue to finance their budgets outside the funds appropriated by Parliament. In this report, the Auditor-General indicated that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), for example, during the year under review financed its operations with Shs 20,034,678,948 without the required audit warrant and approval of Parliament contrary to the law. The same organisation had also retained Shs 4.5 billion to finance its activities without the required authority. 

The situation is not better in ministries and departments that collect non-tax revenue. This act by ministries is illegal and should stop forthwith as it does not reflect well on the management of budgets. Moreover, no effort is made by these ministries in involving permanent secretaries or the Secretary to the Treasury in their operations of this non-tax revenue. It also shows that the powers of this Parliament to examine budget proposals of Government are being taken away. 

The committee recommends that any excess without Parliament’s approval is a crime under the Public Finance and Accountability Act and is punishable. Therefore, accounting officers who violate should be personally liable. Non declaration of non-taxable revenue is theft, and accounting officers should be charged for theft and corruption.

Un-recovery of Loans to Private Individuals and Institutions

The Auditor-General’s report says that during the year under review, the un-recovered loans amounted to Shs 1,487,810,487,861. Over 60 percent of these loans are non-performing loans. 

The committee was informed that debt amounting to Shs 5,843,587,303 had been declared bad debts, most of which were due to companies. The committee was not satisfied and questioned the criteria used to declare these bad debts since most of these companies involved were limited liability companies with perpetual existence and, therefore, the sale of Government interests should not affect the operations of the companies. These were companies basically owned by Government and sold.

The committee was not satisfied with the explanation given by the Accountant-General that Government had waived off its rights so as to encourage the privatisation process to promote private sector development. This type of action serves a small section of the population and is unfair to the taxpayer. 

The committee observes that any other policy that favours the interest of the small population against the national interest should be discarded forthwith.

Accumulated Deficit

During this financial year under review, the statement showed an accumulated deficit in the Consolidated Fund reserve account of Shs 6,449,607,822,187. This figure, however, could not be related to that of the prior financial statement. The opening balance in the cash flow statement of Shs 99,066,729,643 for the year under review could not be linked to the previous year’s account. 

The committee directs that necessary reconciliation of the Consolidated Fund reserve account be carried out to give its true position for the years 2001 to 2003, in fact, we can say up to 2009 now, and give a true position of Government accounts and report within two months. 

Secondly, the committee directs that detailed investigation of all Government accounts held by Bank of Uganda be carried out and a report be produced within six months. 

In conclusion, the decisions, recommendations and most of the omissions raised by the Auditor-General have been highlighted in the body of the report. The committee requests the House to consider this report, taking into consideration these concerns.

Ministry of Finance is expected and required by law to reply to this report by the issue of Treasury Memoranda and the committee expects all its recommendations to be appropriately addressed.

Lastly, I wish to appreciate and recognise the dedication and sound capability of my members and colleagues who worked together with me in the committee and on whose behalf I present this report. I have attached the lists and I beg to move that this report be debated together with the minutes hereto attached.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee, for the report which you have presented. Now we should be considering the report, but since it seems you do not have it, what we shall do is when we reconvene, we shall start the debate. So, go and check in your libraries for copies of the report so that you are in a position to make meaningful contributions. 

Business to follow has also been listed. One of them is the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009. This is a Bill which has been with us for some time. We shall also look at the report of the Equal Opportunities Committee on ethnic minorities in Uganda, as well as the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the situation of children in Northern Uganda and Karamoja sub region. This is the order in which we shall consider the next business. Please go and get the copies and prepare to debate.

We have completed what we were supposed to do for today, but we are going to adjourn prematurely because one item was skipped. As I said, we shall reconvene on Thursday because Cabinet is having a one-day retreat to consider urgent business. Otherwise, I thank you very much for the work done. House is adjourned to Thursday. We should have sat in the morning, but apparently, this is the day when African Heads of State are meeting in Munyonyo, and I think the opening of their meeting is on Thursday morning, so we shall convene at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday.

(The House rose at 4.33 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 October 2009 at 2.30 p.m.) 

