Wednesday, 26 October 2011

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Yesterday, I indicated that I would wish to complete the process of forming the ad hoc committee tomorrow. To that end, I am inviting the members of the Business Committee for a meeting in my boardroom at 8.30 in the morning tomorrow so that we can handle that single agenda item. For the avoidance of doubt, these are the members of the Business Committee: The Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Leader of Government Business, Leader of the Opposition, Government Chief Whip or his or her nominee, Opposition Chief Whip or his or her nominee, other party whips, two Independent Members of Parliament decided upon by the Speaker, taking into account gender and all committee chairpersons who are ex-officio members. So, hon. Members, come at 8.30 tomorrow morning.  

2.45
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I rise on a point of national importance to do with work that is currently taking place on Tororo – Mbale – Soroti Road via Kumi. Information available to me from the ministerial budget policy statement of the Ministry of Works indicates that a contract was signed between a construction firm, Dott Services, and the Government of Uganda in November 2010. Effectively, the contractor took possession of the site in January this year. By the end of March this year, the contractor mobilised and work commenced in April 2011. 

The concern I am raising is about the pace at which this contractor is doing work. It is evident that Dott Services is not delivering. It is almost seven months down the road and this company has not gone beyond five kilometres of recharging the shoulders. 

And it looks like this contractor is a nuisance; it is not happening only between Tororo and Soroti, but also on Jinja – Kamuli Road; Madam Speaker, your road too is a disaster. 

What has happened between Soroti and Tororo is that the prevalence of accidents has increased. That road is very busy, taking traffic from the border point of Malaba and Busia all the way to Sudan –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Indeed, Dott Services has literary got stuck in Kapiri Sub-county. It is a stretch of about three to four kilometres that they have to recharge the road shoulders. And the relationship between Dott Services and the community is now strenuous. The colleague has just talked about accidents. At one point, one of their trucks knocked somebody from Kapiri and it took a whole day – in fact the Police had to work round the clock up to around midnight to handle the situation. 

They are very wild; they are not cooperative with the local community and we are wondering, if they are to continue at that pace of covering three kilometres for every seven months, what time will they complete Tororo – Soroti Highway? The situation is alarming.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much my dear friend for that information. The condition of the road is appalling. When you take a ride along that road, by the time you get back to Kampala, your vehicle will require major repairs. 

As a desperate means to mitigate this problem, young children risk their lives covering the potholes that are on this road, yet we have a contractor. I understand that some funds have already been committed to this particular contract yet even as far as mobilisation is concerned, there is nothing visible. 

Madam Speaker, I appeal to the government to intervene immediately. As political leaders, we are not going to sit back and watch as a contractor causes a crisis on our roads; a crisis similar to the one we experienced on Jinja – Bugiri Road. I, as a political leader, will not hesitate to mobilise my constituents to drive out Dott Services if they do not take their responsibilities seriously. 

This appeal goes to the minister of Works especially; it is important for us to know how much money had been advanced to Dott Services and why they are playing monkey tricks on that road. And not only on that road, but also on other roads like the one Madam Speaker you use as you go to your constituency. Give us an indication as to when we should expect this work delivered.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Minister, just for the record, last week I drove to Buwenge where Dott Services maintains an office and threatened that if they do not work on the Jinja - Kamuli Road, I will bring the Basoga from Kamuli to chase them back to Kampala. 

In fact, if I am to use that road, it takes me four hours from Jinja to Kamuli. If I am to attend my meetings in time, I have to go through Jinja - Buwenda Road, the old Jinja – Kamuli Road. It is a very serious matter, Mr Minister.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my brother Eng. Amuriat for bringing this matter to the Floor of this House. The dates my brother has talked about – November - are correct. However, let me give some explanations as to why things are happening as they are. 

The initial scope of the work in the bidding documents was based on a preliminary survey. In other words, there were no detailed engineering surveys done and designed before this contract was signed in the dates of November which Eng. Amuriat has talked about. In the same document –(Interjections)- can you give me a chance to flow? Why don’t you wait? Be patient please.

In the same bidding document, a consultant had to do a design review; that contract had to undergo a design review to address two issues. One, to verify the concept against the existing road condition and two, to work on the traffic volumes, especially pegged on the axle loads. 

Details of pavement investigations and traffic surveys were required as per the design drawings. The consultant carried out the design review from January to May 2010. The design review when finished was considered and the consultant, subsequently, provided strip maps after the design review, showing what was going to be done. These design review strips were adapted and approved by UNRA and issued to the contractor on the 1st of August 2011. After approving these design reviews, UNRA instructed the consultant to issue a variation order to the contractor.

If we had gone ahead without a detailed engineering design, we were bound to make mistakes and lose money on the way. There were some contractual issues about this matter. The contractor was issued a commencement order when the detailed strips I have talked about were not attached. The contractor maintained that the commencement date is when he received the strip maps. So, the problem here, I must apologise, is with us not the contractor because the contractor was not given sufficient information and a detailed design to go ahead with the works. A good engineering decision was made that work should not go on because allowing work to go on would have resulted into the loss of more money in the near future. 

However, two weeks ago, I had a meeting with a consultant of Tororo-Mbale-Soroti together with the consultant of Jinja-Kamuli, the contractor and UNRA staff. I made it absolutely clear that something has to be done. We have put measures in place. Now that we have all the necessary information, work will be done expeditiously.

When you talk of the Tororo-Mbale contract, already, the contractor has put two fronts to ensure that work is expedited. The same is on the Mbale-Soroti Road. Two fronts have been formed to ensure that work is expedited. The same is on the Jinja-Kamuli Road. 

We have had some problems with this project. The contractor wanted to expedite - getting the crush-aligned stones, especially on the Mbale-Soroti Road, but was stopped because that rock is an antiquity rock. So, now we have got to look for other places. As I speak now, I can confidently inform you and the House that on the Jinja-Kamuli Road, mobilisation is 100 percent - mobilisation of the personnel, of the constructor and the contractor is 100 percent. Establishment of the side camps is 100 percent. And for the quarry at Buwenge, we have already crushed over 12,000 cubic metres of stones which we will need for this work. Culvert installation on the Jinja-Kamuli Road for the drainage works is in progress. Earth works are in progress and as I speak now, we are at four percent taking into consideration that the contractor got final information in August. 

So, Madam Speaker, I sincerely apologise to the people who use that road, but we had to do proper work. I did not want somebody to stand here and say after one year, “You minister, this road has lasted one year and it is breaking down.” It is better to wait for a short period, but get good work and I promise, in the meeting ahead with the members I talked about - I made it absolutely clear that I will be frequenting those sites –(Interjections)- I want work done on time. I want value for money and you will get a good product. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you can also tell them that I will also regularly go there -(Laughter) 

3.00
MR DAVID OCHWA: (NRM, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as the minister is trying to convince the House, I think what is on the ground is quite bad. I want to first of all give the history.

When we had floods in 2007 in Teso, you remember that Awoja Road was washed away and Shs 2 billion was put on that road for a distance of about two kilometres or even less. But as we speak now, the road is destroyed completely and soon, we are going to be cut off again. That was around 2009/2010 when the Shs 2 billion was injected into that distance of less than two kilometres. When you reach there now, the trailers cannot pass that Awoja Bridge along Soroti-Mbale Road. You can imagine how wasteful we are; you used Shs 2 billion. By then, I was still a chairman and I tried to go there to talk to the contractors that what they were doing was not the right work. If you saw the tarmac layer which was put there, it was so thin that any sensible Ugandan wouldn’t have done that one -[MR NSEREKO: “Information.”]- you will give the information; just give me some bit of time. 

When you look at what is happening on the road now - my inquiry to the honourable minister is that even when you are working on the road, if you are telling us that there was a delay because of some technicalities, why not maintain it? At least cover the potholes because the road is impassable now. We take close to three hours - I came from Soroti yesterday and I can tell you that we took close to three hours to drive from Soroti to Mbale.

The contractor is not maintaining the road. Just as hon. Patrick Amuriat has said, it is now the poor children who are trying to cover those potholes. And you see them trying to beg for money from the drivers. Some of these children have actually abandoned school to do this kind of work yet we have a government in place and the contractor who took up the job.

And by the way, from my own investigations, that contractor was deployed there because of votes. It was just to deceive our people to give NRM votes that they were going to work on that road yet it seems they had no money. So, I would like to ask the minister to clearly tell us whether they have the money and if so, why is the work so slow? This should be done because we are going back to mobilize the people to chase away that contractor called Dott Services. I am saying this because Dott Services is on record for never doing a good job. Just look at Tirinyi Road – the bridges that were given to them haven’t been completed up to date. Okay, let me take information from hon. Nsereko.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member for giving way. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable minister for having apologised for and on behalf of Government. However, we have to come out openly and put our country at the forefront. I am saying this because there is a racket being built between contractors and Government workers at the expense of Ugandans. When you look at roads all over the country – and it is widespread. Whatsoever the case, the terms in the contracts are not perfected, but with money playing about in a syndicate between Government workers who approve their certificates and the contractors. Therefore, Madam Speaker, like you have also realised with the honourable members, if we want value for money, all honourable members – and I think it should be a proposal that the honourable minister takes to heart - that we be given copies of these contractors that are doing some work within our constituencies –(Interjections)– they have confidentiality clauses? Okay, but that will help us – the hon. Henry Banyenzaki tried to do it one time but no one has paid heed to his call. And at times –(Interjections)– I know the late Banyenzaki –(Interruption)

MR OCHWA: Madam Speaker, I had given hon. Muhammad Nsereko a slot to give only information. Anyway, there is one issue that the honourable minister has lied to us about. For example, on the issue of stones – first of all, before we start talking about the stones - he says that they haven’t put the murram or worked on the road because they lacked stones; but if you want to get the stones, you will definitely get them. For example, we gave the Chinese firm doing the Soroti-Lira Road stones from Ochuloi. So, if that firm had any issues to do with stones, they should have consulted us as political leaders in Teso to help them in that endeavour - we would help the firm to get stones from Ochuloi; they are very good quality stones. So, if you are telling us that you have failed to get stones, I think, hon. minister, that is a big lie to this House.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you have taken ten minutes. Let us now have other Members contribute, but for only three minutes each.

3.06
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is more on the procurement procedure that the ministry used to give Dott Services that job. If the documentation wasn’t ready for Dott Services to start the work, how did they get to do the job? 

Two, may I know from the honourable minister whether the contract still continues to be for Dott Services. I am asking this because if the terms of reference were in the right order, then I don’t think it is in order for Dott Services to continue doing that contract when it wasn’t written and signed according to the PDDA standards. So, could you please give light to the House on whether Dott Services still has the contract or you are going to re-advertise to give that contract to another company?

Thirdly, we very well know that Dott Services hasn’t been doing good work in Uganda. For example in Kampala, when they work on a road, it will be impassable after only two weeks. For example, they just worked on the road from Ntinda to Kyaliwajala, but it is already impassable. If they haven’t been doing any good work based on that history, do we have any good reasons why we should give such a big job to repair a highway to a company whose reputation is doubtable? Let me take the information from hon. Beatrice Anywar.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the House – as much as we are complaining about the work done on this road – whenever I am going back to my constituency, I travel on Kampala-Bombo-Luwero-Gulu Road. And I will tell you that the work being done along that road is superb. The contractor has given the road another good layer of tarmac. And knowing that the minister has just come to office, he wants us to believe that charity begins at home. He chose to start with that road forgetting that Kitgum roads are not yet tarmacked – yes, he should continue with that, but he needs to know that that standard of roads in his Luwero constituency should spread to other parts of the country in order for us to have better roads.

3.10
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can’t doubt the competence of the honourable minister because he is a graduate of the great Makerere University. And given the kind of degrees that are awarded from that university, I know he is a competent engineer who will be able to follow up on the issues regarding our roads.

However, I would like to emphasise the fact that he should also do a follow-up on the management of these contracts. I am saying this because you find a road whose contract is supposed to run for only six months, but with the contractor every time asking for an extension. Yes, you may give it, but it tremendously affects our economy because we use those roads to transport our agricultural produce to the markets. So, if they are not completed on time, definitely we get affected.

In my constituency, for example, there are new roads that were taken up by the central government, but their contracts expired in July and this is almost end of October with the contractors not getting done with the construction. I would like to ask the minister to follow up on that issue.

I would also like to ask the minister to put on record of Parliament the timeframe within which you are going to fix the bridge on River Muzizi. This is very important because last week I lost one of my great voters – I will not tolerate this as long as I am still a Member of Parliament – to keep losing voters when the responsible minister is seated there -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, I would request that we all ask the honourable minister - I know he has difficulties in his department, but please make sure that you follow up these contracts -(Interjections)- I will take the information from him.

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. We are talking about a very serious matter. When we talk about roads, we are talking about life or lives for that matter. First and foremost, other things follow because it is the human being that produces the economy. The honourable member has just said he lost a relative recently. When we say a relative –(Interjections)- a voter is a relative. When the Bible says, “Man”, woman is inclusive. We must understand this. 

We are stewards of the national economy and, therefore, when we are charged with responsibility, like when you are a minister, you must execute the duties that have been bestowed upon you very seriously; you must monitor. That is the information, hon. Member, that I wanted to give. Thank you very much.

3.15
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much. I would like to thank hon. Oboi for giving way. The issue we are talking about is an issue that is very serious to the development of this country. The road we are talking of is a road that contributes to the economy of this country. I am a little bit reluctant to comment seriously on the minister because the minister has just taken office. However, it is my prayer, hon. Minister, that you make sure that the work of this road is expedited because the road we are talking about, Mbale-Soroti, is a road that is normally used by even international business people. Goods come from Kenya going to Sudan and DRC. Goods come from Sudan, to Uganda and then to Kenya, and we get that revenue. Every year they work on that road and money is allocated by the Government of Uganda and sometimes even from donor funds, but we don’t realise the impact of these roads.	

Secondly, hon. Minister, during the time Teso experienced the highest levels of floods, a road from Opuyo connecting to Toroma-Magoro, was taken over by the central government from the local government. Last financial year, money was allocated by the government for the improvement of this road, but as we speak now, that road is not used by human beings. The road is flooded. It is only used by the water and fish. (Laughter) And they call it a road and money is allocated for that matter. 

It is my prayer that the minister makes this road to be usable by human beings. I have never seen fish using a road, but this time the reverse is very true. I am also losing voters and business. (Member timed out_)
	
3.18
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Colleague, for raising this pertinent issue. When we talk about the issue of roads, I think every Member of Parliament here seated is affected. There is no doubt that roads form an integral part of our existence as an economy. You will agree with me, when we are talking about Prosperity-for-All that if we cannot talk about the issue of roads, then we are dreaming. 

I am rising to move that the honourable minister should make a statement to this Parliament on the status of all roads. Because as we talk now – I was a former chairman of the works committee in Mbarara, but I want to tell you that if you can know the status of community access roads –(Interjections)- yes, they are for local governments, but this is a government. When we are talking about roads, I don’t want us to be deceived that there is one for local government, one for central government, one for district government, one for urban government. This is a government. I want to tell you –[Hon. Member: “Information.”]- I will take the information. You know I always miss when I get information and the other day they called me self-appointed - so I have left that. I want to tell you –[Mr Banyenzaki: “Information.”]– the honourable minister wants to inform me that the District Road Fund and the road committee is made up of Members of Parliament. That is not true. Those people don’t give us information. You actually said that and we got your information -(Interjections)- you informed me and I get it. (Laughter)		
MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you my brother, hon. Kyamadidi. Actually, you are right to say that Members of Parliament have the mandate and belong to the district roads committee. It is not a question of saying it is not true, it is provided for under the law. I communicated to honourable Members of Parliament and I directed the Chief Administrative Officers in every district to make these committees functional and they have been responding. For example, in our district, we elected hon. Musasizi as chairperson. 

Once you constitute that committee, all Members of Parliament in that district, the CAO and district engineer, sit and choose a chairperson amongst themselves. And once you choose a committee, it is that committee that monitors and inspects these roads. [Mr Mujuni: “That is enough.”] (Laughter) About the contracts, you have a duty – whichever contracts are there, you have a right to see those contracts. 

Madam Speaker, even the inspection funds for those roads are provided within the budget. So, hon. Members, interest yourselves in these matters. It is not a matter of saying it is for the minister alone. Thank you.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Minister of Economic Monitoring - but this time round, I think this goes beyond economic monitoring. (Laughter) It needs some element of road engineering, road monitoring and road surgery.

The famous 10,000 kms of road that were upgraded by the central government were formerly district roads; if you moved in the constituencies, most of them are in a very sorry state and you can see this if you move in constituencies. 

I want to give you an example. There was a road that was contracted, it is called Ruti-Kashekuru it goes through Katukuru, Mwizi and it goes to Isingiro. It was contracted at Shs 436 million. There are no drainage channels and murram as it was in the contract and the honourable minister is here. We cannot go on like that; apart from having some of these things on paper, we must implement them.
 
I made a statement here on 8th of September about why we had most of the roads and bridges washed away - Kikongoro in Ndeija, and Kikyerenyo in Rwakishakizi Rugando, but I can tell you that up to now, there is nothing - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have heard our problems, how are you going to respond quickly.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS (MR JAMES BYANDALA): I must thank my colleagues for showing the concern and the love they have for this country. They are in line with me because I love this country so much.
 
Hon. Ochola talked about Awoja Bridge and I thought that he was going to say “Minister, thank you very much.” We are repairing that bridge; it is an old bridge and we are building a new one and somebody comes to say that we are doing nothing. I wish Members could go to Awoja Bridge and see what we are doing.
 
MR AMURIAT: The information I want to give is related to work done by Spencon on the access to Awoja Bridge - this work cost us to the tune of Shs 2.5 billion. What the contractor was meant to do was to install relief culverts on either side of the bridge and also resurface the road. What has since happened is that this investment has gone to waste. There wasn’t sufficient amount of drainage placed from Kumi side to the bridge. There is failure on the road. There is a serious problem on that road and we shall get big potholes if it continues to rain. The Shs 2.5 billion has been lost in our view. 

MR BYANDALA: You see, my brother is talking of road works and so far we have put over twenty piles at that bridge in anticipation of putting a new deck. We could not have piled to put culverts. Hon. Amuriat you know this. There was a very serious allegation from a colleague who said that this contract was given to get votes. I am ready to bring here the adverts - we are not talking about votes; we are talking about giving service to the people of Uganda and we shall continue doing that.

DR ERIAKU: I would like to comment on what the minister is saying that we should be grateful for the work that is currently being done on Awoja Bridge. Whatever was being done in the last few weeks has come to nothing because the murram that had been piled has been washed away. I am not an engineer, but I thought that when they were piling up that murram, there should have been something to stabilise it. To my disappointment, it is all gone.

MR BYANDALA: This is a question of not knowing what is being done. When you are piling, you must dam off and then be able to put a pipe. That murrum has nothing to do with the bridge we are going to build. We have piled enough piles so that murram can go and it is of no substance to us. One MP brought a good idea here and I had already mentioned to my staff that they should be telling the CAO, the DISO, RDC and the area MP of wherever we are working, the scope of work. These instructions have already been given by me and from now on you will be receiving these updates.

The stone the Chinese used is the one they are refusing us to use. We talked about the Muzizi River Bridge. My brother, hon. Tinkasimiire, as I told you last week that we started mobilisation for installation of that bridge and my people are mobilising, I am sure this year that bridge will be there without fail. What we have now is just constructed elsewhere; we bring it and put it together from there.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Whereas I appreciate the information you are giving me to take to my people, hon. Minister, I want you to be specific and tell me when you are going to work on this bridge because it serves over 1.8 million people from Bunyoro region. If you add the people from Toro, Mbarara and Kabale, then it becomes a major bridge. You cannot start telling us of an unspecified period; do you want all my voters to die in that river? I will not take that.

I want the honourable minister to be serious; How long should this mobilisation take place? What is involved in this mobilisation? If it is carrying equipment to that place, tell me how much it costs and I help you such that I save my people.

MR BYANDALA: Let me conclude this. I have heard what all my colleagues have said. Let me take this opportunity to inform you that we are currently having a joint transport sector review at Imperial Royale. All these issues are being discussed there. I and my state ministers are determined to ensure that we give the people of Uganda good service on our roads. 

The last one is about the 1,000 kilometres; this is something everybody has been talking about. Last year, we took over 1,000 kilometres and Parliament appropriated Shs 50 billion for this work. That translates to Shs 5 million per kilometre. But to do re-graveling of a kilometre properly, you need between Shs 20 to 30 million. That shows you that Shs 30 million would not have worked on these roads properly.

What we are doing is to go and do good work on the bad spots so that the road continues to be passable. All of you know that for the last four or five months, we have had excessive rains. I will be coming here to ask for more money to ensure that I make these roads. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Nkokonjeru Boys Primary School from Buikwe South. They are up here, represented by hon. Dr Bayigga and hon. Mpiima. We also have pupils and teachers of Konge Parents Day Primary School. Hon. Kyanjo and hon. Nabila Naggayi represent them. We also have Abugobya Preparatory School, represented by hon. Migereko and hon. Nabirye. You are welcome. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.34
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On October 11 2011, this august House resolved among others that Government produces to Parliament all agreements it has executed with oil companies in the oil industry, including the Memorandum of Understanding executed between the Government of Uganda, the Uganda Revenue Authority and Tullow Oil. I wish to lay on Table the following agreements on the Memorandum of Understanding executed with the Uganda Revenue Authority and Tullow Oil Limited. 

The first agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and FINA Exploration Uganda BV, dated March 1991. I beg to lay. 

The second agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and the Uganda General Works and Engineering Company Limited dated February 1995. I beg to lay. 

The third agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited, dated January 1997. I beg to lay.

The fourth agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Hardman Petroleum (Uganda) Limited dated November 1997. I beg to lay. 

Next is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Hardman Petroleum Africa N.L. and Energy Africa Uganda Limited dated October 2001. I beg to lay. 

The next agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Energy Africa Uganda Limited dated July 2004. 

Madam Speaker, the next agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Energy Africa Uganda Limited dated September 2004. 

The next agreement is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Neptune Petroleum Uganda Limited dated September 2005. I beg to lay. 

The next document is a production sharing agreement for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of Uganda and Dominion Uganda Limited dated July 2007. I beg to lay.

Finally, I wish to lay on Table a Memorandum of Understanding dated 15 March 2011 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Uganda Revenue Authority and Tullow Oil Uganda Limited, and Tullow Oil Uganda Operations Limited.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. minister. I think the minister has complied with our resolution No.3 -(Members rose_)- This is our property. You are free to access them. 

3.40
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister that at long last we have been able to have these documents laid on the Table. I would like to be guided by you and the House, on how we, Members who have been agitating to see this document and find out the details, can soon access it, particularly me, the shadow minister, who does the oversight role in this sector. I would like to know all the details. It is not a matter of waving the documents to us. We need to know what it entails, how soon and how we can access these documents. This is very important because if they are laid here and we have another hurdle to reach the documents and get the details on behalf of the Ugandans out there, it would still be a problem. I need your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: In my view, the resolution of this House overrides any other conditions that were attached to these agreements. Therefore, they are available.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PETITION FROM THE UGANDA RAILWAYS TENANTS ASSOCIATION ON THE INTENDED EVICTION OF TENANTS FROM PLOTS 85 TO 95 PORT BELL ROAD LUZIRA

3.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I rise to present a report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises (COSASE) on a petition on the proposed eviction of tenants from Plots 85-95 Chorley Crescent at Port Bell, Luzira. While doing this, Madam Speaker, allow me to thank members of my committee who put in extra effort to ensure that this investigation was done in a speedy manner. 

You will recall that on 14 July, 2011, we received a petition of Uganda Railways Tenants Association (URATA) requesting Parliament to intervene in the proposed eviction of former Uganda Railways Corporation employees from Plots 85 to 95 Chorley Crescent, Port Bell Estate at Luzira.  In their petition, the petitioners presented four prayers, namely:

i) 	Goodwill compensation like their colleagues on similar neighbouring plots in the same area, who include Mr Locap Phillip on Plots 73-75, Lake Drive; Mr Okwalinga Michael on Plot 94, Lake Drive; and Mr Bongo Eddie on Plot 72, Chorley Crescent Road in Luzira.  

ii) 	Facilitation of exhuming their dear ones buried in the graveyard on URC land in Port Bell and transporting them to their ancestral grounds for burial.

iii) 	Compensation for their crops and plantations.

iv) 	Time for their children who are at school to get holidays for the end of year academic programmes. 

It should be noted at this point that at the time the petition was presented to Parliament, there was a notice of eviction dated 28 March, 2011 issued to the petitioners by URC, and giving them 30 days to quit. 

When the Speaker referred the matter to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises (COSASE) for scrutiny and advice, without prejudice to the position that had earlier been arrived at by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) on the same matter, on the 22 July, 2011, I, the chairperson wrote to URC requesting the corporation to consider suspending the intended eviction for three months to allow Parliament to study the petition and advise accordingly. 

Mandate of the Committee

The committee proceeded under Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 7 and 154 (d) of the Rules of Procedure where we had the following terms of reference:
 
i)	To establish the circumstances under which the petitioners’ colleagues on similar neighbouring plots in the same area were compensated as alleged.

ii)	To establish whether the tenants had legitimate claim for goodwill compensation.

iii)	To establish grounds to facilitate exhumation of dead bodies buried in the graveyard on URC land in Port Bell and their transportation to their ancestral homes for decent re-burial.

iv)	To examine the petitioners’ request for compensation for their crops and plantations.

v)  	To establish whether there was need to allow time for the children who were at school to get holidays for the end of year academic programmes. 

Method of Work

We adopted the following method of work; the committee reviewed several documents submitted by the petitioners and other stakeholders, and also met the following: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Acting Executive Officer of URC,  petitioners and staff of Privatisation Unit. We have all the references in the annexure stated.  

We also made an on spot visit to the former URC Estate in question to assess the situation on the ground and we have some pictures attached to our report.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations 

3.1	Circumstances under which the petitioners’ colleagues on similar neighbouring plots in the same area were allegedly compensated 

In their petition, URATA alleged that some colleagues were given priority to purchase the URC houses they occupied and that others on Plots 73 -75, Plot 94 Lake Drive and Plot 74 Chorley Crescent had received benefits of money value. 

Our findings were as follows:

(a)	As part of the reforms of the Railway sector, some assets of Uganda Railways Corporation were identified as non-core assets of the corporation and there is an attachment that you may refer to, Madam Speaker and colleagues. 

(b)	URC Board of Directors and the Divesture Reform and Implementation Committee (DRIC) approved non-core properties for divesture by public bidding and there is a reference of a DRIC Note for the Kenya/Uganda Railway Joint Concession. 
 
(c)	A bidding document, also attached, dated 16 January, 2007 elaborated the sale of URC properties, which included the plots that are stated there though I do not intend to read them. Others in the document were Plot 976, Kibuga Block; Plot 29 at Mulago; Plot 272 Kyadondo; Block 264 at Mutundwe; Block 465, Kyaddondo; and Block 244 at Kisugu. 

A bidding document submitted to the committee elaborated the general conditions of contract among which were the condition of assets to be sold off on an “as is where is” basis. It was clearly indicated that the procuring and disposing entity would offer no warranty or guarantee to the condition of the assets. 

Transfer of assets

The buyer would have full responsibility and bear all risks and costs associated with the collection, dismantling, removal, transportation of the assets from the location and would bear and pay all associated costs. 

(d) While the above mentioned plots were advertised for sale, Plot 76, Chorley Crescent, was exclusively sold off to the sitting tenant. According to the evaluation report made by the appointed government valuer, who in this case is Bageine and Company Valuers, in November 2006, the property had a market value of Shs 69 million attached to the land and the value of Shs 51 million attached to the building.  Mr Peter Rwabuyanja, the sitting tenant at the time of sale purchased the property in 2007 and in turn sold it to Mr David Kasingwire. 

Likewise, the director of the Privatisation Unit in his letter to Mr Wamono dated 13th June, 2011 offered Mr Wamono first priority to exclusively purchase Plot 4, Nile Avenue in Jinja as a sitting tenant.

(e) Inspection of the premises advertised at Port Bell, Luzira was carried out by interested potential bidders on 24 January 2007 at 10.00 a.m. except plots 73-75 at which security personnel had been heavily deployed.

(f)   Sitting tenants of the houses that had a value that is attached to them were given first priority to purchase those houses. However, the committee was unable to find evidence of any tenant receiving monetary compensation.

Our observations were as follows:

(a)	The committee noted that the properties were non- core assets and that their divestiture was mostly consistent with the DRIC recommended procedures.

(b)	The heavy deployment of security personnel at plots 73-75 violated the procedures laid down for executing the divestiture. The procedures laid down for executing the divestiture were not followed due to heavy deployment of security personnel.

3.2 Claim for Goodwill Compensation

In their petition, URATA requested for goodwill compensation like their colleagues on similar neighbouring plots mentioned above. Legally, goodwill compensation is the ability of a business or other entities being sold to earn income in excess of the fair valuation of its assets.

The excess income is given as payment for “intangible assets” e.g. trademarks, reputation etc. In common practice, it is when a buyer compensates the seller more than their product is worth.

Our findings were as follows:

(a)	After privatisation of URC commenced in 2006, all persons occupying houses owned by URC were doing so as tenants rather than as employees of URC.

(b)	When it visited Port Bell, the committee found that tenants included former employees and in some cases, relatives who claimed tenancy without a former URC worker present.

(c)	In their response submitted to the committee dated 30 September 2011, URC declined to offer goodwill compensation and further stated that URC has never paid such compensation to any of its former tenants.

(d)	Despite the fact that the houses returned zero value, URC continued to collect rent from the dilapidated houses until an eviction letter dated 8 October 2010 was issued to tenants giving them 30 days to vacate the houses. Beginning then, rent collection was stopped.

(e)	By the same property valuation referred above and attached as Annex c, the houses occupied by the petitioners returned zero value.

(f)	The occupants informed the committee that they were not informed that the houses they were occupying were dilapidated, neither were the houses condemned.

(g)	Other than the houses that were assessed at zero value, there were no other developments seen at the estate.

(h)	Other tenants were given priority to purchase their houses at Port Bell because the chief government valuer had assessed the properties as having zero value due to their dilapidated state and, therefore, unfit for human habitation. The land was, therefore, sold off to National Housing and Construction Corporation Limited as bare land without any encumbrance.


Other houses sold to sitting tenants had a value attached to them, hence they were given first priority to purchase the houses they occupied.

Observations

(a)	The committee noted that divestiture was in accordance with the provisions of Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act Cap. 90. However, since tenants were not given first priority to purchase the land before public bidding commenced, it did not follow the procedure established under the Uganda Railways Corporation Divestiture Action Plan.

(b)	When the committee visited Port Bell, it was observed that the houses were actually dilapidated.

(c)	The committee noted that despite the fact that the houses returned zero value, URC continued to collect rent until 8 October 2010 thus legitimising the occupants’ claim of tenancy.

Recommendations

(a)	While the tenants at Port Bell do not qualify for goodwill compensation, the committee recommends that they be granted ex gratia to facilitate their relocation.

Grounds to facilitate exhumation or exhuming of dead bodies

The tenants claim that they had buried their dead ones on URC land. They requested funds to facilitate exhuming and transporting their loved ones to their ancestral lands for decent burial. You will see in the rather poor pictures because of our printing facilities that there were signs that bodies were buried within this estate.

Committee findings 

(b)	Upon visiting Port Bell, the committee saw graves on the said land. Of course, we were unable to establish whether there are actually bodies below, but we saw graves.

(c)	These burials took place without the consent of URC and in violation of the local authorities by-laws regarding burial of the dead.


(d)	In their response submitted to the committee dated 20 September 2011, URC agreed to assist the affected former tenants on humanitarian grounds as they vacate the property.

Observations

The committee noted that while URC had made a positive gesture with respect to this issue, they were not specific in the scope of their assistance. 

We have one recommendation with respect to the terms accepted in the sale of their land. The committee recommends that URC and, therefore, Government is enjoined in this and, therefore, bears and pays all costs associated with exhuming, transportation and re-burying the dead in their ancestral homes as the tenants vacate the premises.

On compensation for crops and plantations, the tenants claimed that some of them had grown crops and thus, requested to be compensated.

Our findings were as follows:

(a)	Some crops were seen on site as pictured below. These included maize, beans, sugarcane and bananas.

(b)	The tenants had 11 months since October 2010 when they received the first notice to vacate and to harvest their crops. Despite that grace period, they continued to grow crops. 

We have one observation on this matter. Seasonal crops like beans and maize should be harvested by December 2011. Perennial crops like bananas can never be completely harvested. However, these exist in minimal quantities.

Our recommendations are as follows:

(a)	Tenants should immediately cease 		planting crops.

(b)	URC should allow until December 2011 		for the harvesting of seasonal crops.

(c)	Ex-gratia should be granted for perennial 		crops.

On time for school-going children, the tenants informed the committee that they had school-going children and requested for time so that their children could complete the academic year.

Our finding was that when URC served the former tenants with the first notice to vacate in October 2010, they complained to the IGG, who dismissed their complaint. However, on humanitarian grounds, URC granted them a four-month stay of eviction until February 28, 2011 to, among other things, allow their school-going children to complete the academic year in the same schools.

Our observations are as follows: 

(a)	The committee noted that the stay was given to meet this request in 2010. However, since the eviction matter had not been resolved, this matter has re-surfaced this year. 

(b)	By January 2012, children will have completed the 2011 academic year programmes, especially those going to primary and secondary schools, and will, therefore, be able to transfer to other schools.

Our recommendation is that a stay of eviction until December 2011 be allowed so that school-going children can complete their academic year programmes.

Finally, we propose general recommendations. This concerns the eviction of former tenants from URC at Port Bell. These include:

(a)	With regard to the petitioners’ prayer requesting for goodwill compensation, the committee found that the claim was falsely founded on the belief that others had received such compensation. Since this alleged compensation did not occur, there is no basis to award goodwill compensation. However, the committee recognises irregularities in the procedure URC followed to divest the properties. In light of these irregularities, the committee recommends that the former tenants be granted ex-gratia to facilitate their relocation.

(b)	With regard to the petitioners’ prayer requesting that their dear ones be given decent burial in their ancestral lands, the committee saw a positive response from URC. The committee has recommended that URC pays all associated costs of exhuming and transporting the bodies of the deceased, including the rituals associated with this. 

(c)	With regard to their crops, the committee found that there were both seasonal and perennial crops and, therefore, recommends that tenants stop all planting and be given until December 31, 2011 to harvest their seasonal crops; and

(d)	With regard to the school-going children of the tenants, the committee notes that academic programmes for 2011 school year should be completed by December 31. The committee recommends a stay of eviction until that day.

Madam Speaker, in light of this issue, the committee also finds it prudent to recommend practices for dealing with similar cases in the future. The committee recommends that Government develops and adopts a comprehensive, humane divestiture process to avoid re-occurrence of similar situations in the future. I beg to move that this report be adopted by this august House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the chairperson and your committee. Hon. Members, is the Minister for Privatisation here? Do you have any objection to this? But before the Minister comes in, I want to announce the presence of the following pupils and teachers: Silver Spoons Primary School represented by hon. John Ssimbwa of Makindye East and hon. Nabilah Naggayi; and Triple H Community Primary School, Tirinyi represented by hon. Kamba and hon. Mwebaza. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the work of the committee in respect to this report, especially on the eviction of tenants from the plots in Port Bell. The committee in its findings was right to find that claims of goodwill compensation did not apply since it was not the policy of Government to compensate people on goodwill. The committee also found that the process of divestiture of these properties followed the procedure and the law to the letter. 

It noted that the divestiture was in accordance with the provisions of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act and that when it was done, most of the houses were in dilapidated form and the divestiture committee had no option but to advertise this land. This is because if a house had no value, a person had to be accorded time to occupy it. However, I can see the committee recommended ex-gratia payment to facilitate the relocation of these people. Strictly speaking, these people were occupying houses that were in a dilapidated state and they did not have any legal claim whatsoever. 

Madam Speaker, it is noted that URC, despite the fact that these people did not have a legal claim on these properties, accepted many times to extend their stay. URC also accepted to pay for burial expenses, although these people were not supposed to bury their dead there. The burials that took place were without the consent of the landlord, who was URC at that time, and were also a violation of the local authority by-laws regarding burial of the dead. Despite that, URC is willing to facilitate the removal of the remains of the dead and their burial in a decent way on humanitarian grounds. The recommendation that URC bears and pays all the costs associated with exhuming, transportation and re-burial of the dead bodies was already accepted. So, it is a welcome position.

The committee also found out that tenants had enough time, since October 2010 when they received the first notice to vacate, to harvest their crops. Despite that grace period, these people continued to grow crops. The committee recommends that these seasonal crops should be harvested by December 2011. Government has no objection to that, except that the committee recommends ex-gratia for the perennial crops.

Madam Speaker, as you know, the word “ex-gratia” means really that you are paying on no basis at all other than saying, thank you. It is not even compensation. It is at the discretion of the person paying, and if there is no basis and there is no budget, I do not see how you can thank somebody who has been occupying your property. He is a former occupant, yes, but he has been allowed to stay on the property even after the lapse of the period and they even stopped collecting rent from these people. I find that the issue of ex-gratia is not tenable. 

We really explained to the committee that there was no basis because time and again, Parliament will query such payments. What was the basis of paying this and not paying that one? So, that one is very difficult.

On the time for school-going children, you will find that the committee on page 10, when they were served notice to vacate by October, they complained to the IGG and the IGG did investigate this case and dismissed their complaint. Despite that, URC on humanitarian grounds allowed them a stay of excision for another period up to 28 February 2011 to allow school-going children complete the academic year. These people still stayed on after, and in the recommendation, the committee recommends the stay of eviction until 31 December 2011 to allow school-going children to complete their academic programmes.

In the interest of the children, Government has no objection to allowing these people to stay until 31 December, but it must be mentioned in this report that this is the last because already, these people who bought these plots are desirous of developing them. In fact, they have turned to suing Government because Government is supposed to give them vacant possession of what they purchased.

So, the committee recommends the goodwill compensation, a claim that was falsely founded on the belief that others had been compensated, but the committee still recommends ex-gratia payment. 

We want to state that this is not tenable within the regulations. We cannot, therefore, allow but we can allow these people to stay up to the end of December when they harvest their crops and when the school-going children can be relocated.

We also allow that we pay these burial expenses, but they should not be exaggerated because that is what happens if you allow something ex-gratia; it is regarded as if it is a claim and allowing this really is also goodwill on part of Government. So, I have no problem with the recommendations by the committee save for the recommendation that Government pays ex-gratia, which is not tenable in the law and in the regulations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, are you very strong on that part which the minister is objecting to? We are the House which appropriates this money, if we have not given him, I do not know.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, we really feel very much constrained to tell these people just to go away because remember that it is this House that made certain laws with regard to land and issues of tenancy.

I thought this was a settled matter between the committee and the minister. I am surprised that the minister has turned around to begin bringing legal issues. In fact, the minutes will indicate that the minister was quite positive about this matter of ex-gratia.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Amuriat, if the houses were dilapidated and it was only land, and if there was a lease, didn’t that revert to the government and, therefore, if reverted to Government, how do these people get a locus standi to claim on that same land?

4.18
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This position was reached by the committee after finding ourselves in a localised way of dealing with official business by the State. First and foremost, the tenants who were in these houses were allowed to continue to pay rent and, therefore, they qualified as lawful tenants and that is the law. 

Two, when these houses were being sold or these pieces of land were being sold, these people were not given the priority and for that matter, they also discovered that the law could protect them because they saw that there were some other individuals who were selectively being given the priority to purchase, at a lower rate. In the city, the monies we were talking about were Shs 60 million for a plot in Kampala, which is a billion.

They said something so we persuaded them and said, let us settle for something in the middle and that is what we are trying to plead with the government rather than saying, we simply rubbish them and they run away. These are lawful tenants in these dilapidated houses.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give - I am a Member of that committee. We met big problems. First of all, Government and URC set a big precedent. These people who were resident and tenants in these houses were not formally workers of URC, but URC let them in the houses for a long time. URC continued after realising that the houses were dilapidated, allowing them to stay in and collected rent from the same people. So, when we went on the ground, we found that as much as we are Parliament, we are Africans. How do you tell someone in whose compound you see about 20 graves, to simply move away and leave his person there?

THE SPEAKER: No, the one of the graves, I think the minister says they have agreed to assist them to relocate. His problem is ex-gratia payment. 

MR BIRAARO: So, those ones became a chain of the recommendations of the ex-gratia payments. We said these people who have even planted their bananas; the bananas will not cease tomorrow. So, we said, Government should get a token to serve these people move out of that place, kindly, so that they do not cause us problems; they do not come to camp at Parliament; and they do not do anything else, and Government looks at it as that.

If we go to the thickets of the law and we get stuck there, we shall get a political and human problem. Madam Speaker, I submit.

4.21
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Madam Speaker, thank you. I wish to comment on this ex-gratia. In Uganda, Government has a lot of property and land that is illegally occupied despite warning over that land or property. If today, as Parliament, we take a decision that ex-gratia be paid by the tenants who occupy that accommodation illegally, we are creating a precedence or a wrong precedence that every other claimant will claim for. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to support the Minister and I request this Parliament that we waive off that idea because in future everybody will go for a legitimate claimant basing on what we are going to take today. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Chairperson, if you come to my house and you just occupy it, why should the State legitimise and even reward you? Hon. Chair? 

MR AMURIAT: Rt. hon. Speaker, I do appreciate your concerns and the concerns of the Minister, but we are in such a difficult situation just as we were as a committee. The first is that the tenants of this piece of land or those houses came about as a result of employment –[HON. MEMBER: “Not all of them.”]– not all of them and I will appreciate that. Some families have lived in these houses for over 40 years. 

I remember interviewing an old lady from Mbale and I asked her how she had come in to that estate, and she told me that it was by virtue of her late husband. The husband had worked in Uganda Railways Corporation for a long time, right from the sixties. He passed on leaving her behind with children, and so this is a poor widow who could not go back to Mbale because she had to take care of the family.

MR EKANYA: I thank you. Chairman, can you clarify? To me the problem I think is the information that we need from you and the petition to Government, which Parliament is having about former workers of URC who have not been compensated. If that woman whose husband worked in URC was not compensated and yet he was a former worker of URC, then she is entitled to buying the property and that should be treated differently. But if somebody who has been living in a house and is not a former worker, but is paying rent – because there was no way you could start living in a government house without paying rent and yet you are not an employee of the organisation. 

So, can you clarify whether that woman’s husband worked there? They did not receive compensation and she was denied a right to buy the house; I think that one should be treated separately.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Oboth. He is just giving information.

MR OBOTH: I thank you. I think I had risen to seek guidance and I still need that guidance in as far as ex-gratia payments are concerned. A tenant who stayed in the house, whether the husband was compensated or not still remains a tenant. I would say that if the husband was not compensated and yet he worked for URC, then that is another legal question. 

Secondly, ex–gratia payments – if we set a precedent that tenants who stubbornly stay in certain premises are paid – even some of you MPs will soon be paying ex-gratia payments to some of your tenants. (Laughter) But if we came on the other side of Government; if it was agreeable - and I do not want to believe the chairman of the committee that the minister had indicated willingness and now the minister is somersaulting. 

I would like to comfort the minister that ex-gratia payments as you rightly said is out of favour and nobody is going to determine for you the amount. If it was the willingness from Government, why don’t you give what you can give because it is not negotiated, and you can never be sued for any amount. Since there is no legal principle or basis of paying such an amount, I think you will also go to PAC and defend every single payment you will make on that basis. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, three minutes.

4.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I thank you. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the expeditious work they handled. I think this is a good precedence being set because for the first time in the six years I have been in Parliament – reports or assignments are given to committees but they take months –(Applause)- but you remember it was tabled in July and here we are discussing the report. 

Whenever petitions are presented to Parliament, it implies that the public has lost hope in other institutions and their only hope is in Parliament, and so, when we offer solutions, we are building better confidence. I want to thank the committee again, that most of the recommendations given are feasible and the Privatisation Unit should learn from this. 

It is not only the Uganda Railways Corporation that is still charging money for condemned buildings. In Iganga we have buildings that were condemned and used to belong to the departed Asians properties, but up to now, they are picking rent and yet these buildings were condemned. Now, if these buildings collapse on people, I do not know who takes liability in as far as this matter is concerned. This is a learning example, that the more you collect rent, then you are legitimising the agreement or contract between Government and the people paying rent. (Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: I thank you honourable for giving way. I come from Kasese and we have a railway station, and there is a very big war between the railway management and the Kasese Local Government. These dilapidated buildings that are in Kasese with no toilets are being rented out and there is a certain firm which is collecting revenue or money from the tenants there. We have complained and the Chairman LC III of Central Division wrote to the engineer-in-general or the General Engineer of Uganda Railway Corporation over the same, and a copy of that letter was given to me. I have bothered to go to URC, but I have not got any response. They have gone ahead and started selling Uganda Railways Corporation land illegally and people have built there. There is a lot of commotion in Kasese and for your information - I wish that Parliament takes a decision today on the management of Uganda Railways land. I thank you so much.

MR MUWUMA: I thank you for the information. Hon. Members, I am happy that both parties are in agreement with meeting the costs involved in reburying the dead bodies. For the 30 years I have attended burials, we normally say, “May their souls rest” in what? –[HON. MEMBERS: “In peace.”]– “in peace”. Since their rest is being disrupted, it is fair enough that those who are disrupting the peace should meet this cost. I thank you.

4.31
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): I thank you very much Madam Speaker, and for the committee for having responded to the petition in time. When I look at the recommendations, I have a feeling that the committee members applied a lot of empathy. They really put themselves in the shoes of those people and tried to see how best they could help them out. So, that is the spirit in which I can interpret the committee’s recommendations. 

From a regulatory point of view, we need to set an example for our people. Time and again, we the politicians encourage our people to break the law when we feel for them. But in Uganda, if we do not set standards – I expected the committee to come up with a disciplinary measure, first of all, for the URA officials who continue to collect rent from dilapidated buildings. I think some disciplinary measure has to be taken on those people because if those buildings had collapsed, we would have lost lives; but I do not see that kind of response from the committee.

But we also need to make the petitioners know that what they did was wrong, especially when it comes to burying people secretly on land that did not belong to them. Now they need to be compensated. So, we need to make it known to them that they did a very wrong act and if they are given any assistance, it is really as goodwill from the government. They should not take it as a must because what they did was wrong regardless of the claims that the spirits will complain. That should be made clear to our people so that we set a precedent of following the rules for the good of our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.35
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I seek guidance from you because I do not know what the law says about this. If the report says that Government should compensate and Government refuses to compensate, what does the law say about it? 

The second point is, if the houses were dilapidated and these people went ahead to collect rent knowing that the houses were already condemned, they should compensate the people. If they had left that money to these people, they would have used it to get somewhere else to stay while they demolished the buildings; but they went ahead to collect the money. So, since they collected the money from the tenants, they should reimburse that money so that they use it to relocate. 

4.36
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report, but more importantly, for the empathy. This Parliament is under obligation, in Article 79 to make good laws for the order, peace and good governance of this country. We must not be seen to set a bad precedent. I know of local governments with their staff residing in dilapidated buildings. And I also know that tomorrow there will be some Members of this Parliament asking for ex-gratia. I know of a situation where – my colleague hon. Wamai will give more information on this later – you find a simple allowance like ex-gratia being used by unscrupulous technocrats to steal Government money –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. Ex-gratia payment, if reasonable, can be good. However, in this case, we do not know how the ex-gratia payments are going to be determined. There is also a risk; if they do not pay, who will be liable for it? This will lead us to a situation in which much money will be lost in compensation. Many people in the past and of now are using compensation processes to steal Government resources. We do not want this same situation to happen in this case.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you my colleague for that information. I was saying that Parliament should not be seen to politicise this case. First of all, we are in agreement that they were there illegally. We are also in agreement that URC is doing a good job. Giving them ex-gratia to help those resting in peace –(Mr Kyanjo rose_) – you will give me that information later; you are a member of the committee, I will get your information afterwards. 

From the report of the members of the committee, it is very evident that they actually resolved on this as Africans. But we must not Africanise this to avoid setting a bad precedent as Parliament. What is killing this country is politicisation of everything. If you want to pay those people, will you also pay the people in Kasese because they are also in dilapidated buildings? Will you pay those in Mbarara District land and the Omugabe builds; because those buildings are dilapidated and there are very many people sleeping there. Those of you who have been to Mbarara are aware. So, are you going to pay ex-gratia to them? So, I am saying, we should not set a precedent because it will encourage more claims. 

Finally, whereas it is okay to compensate those who have lost; we are looking at a situation where people exploit these small cases to their advantage. I want to give you an example. Today, we were in a committee and something shocked me. Hon. Wamai will give you more information later on. We were supposed to give some company our land; I do not whether I should mention its name. That company was supposed to use our land, which was a forest reserve. Later, we declined giving them our forest reserve; so they went to court. In court, the legal counsel on our side connived with the other side and we are now going to pay Shs 36 billion. 

4.40
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to seek guidance. When the people at Naguru were evicted, they were transferred to Nsambya. Why don’t we say that too set a precedent where some are evicted and given a place while others are simply evicted with no place to relocate?

Secondly, Kyegegwa District has a lot of “gazetted” land because we are almost the only district that hosts refugees. We have two gazetted camps. From the time the Rwandese went back after their war, one of the camps has been isolated to the effect that the communities have occupied it. 

Last year, we registered death when Government is said to have sold the same land to some investor. The people who occupied that land went to war with the soldiers who had been placed there by the investor to protect the land. Three lives were lost and others lost limbs. We have NFA land; we are now at war with Kabamba. That institution claims that people are encroaching on their shooting ground. We understand that Kabamba may not have legal possession of that land. 

In such a scenario, wouldn’t Government deliberately try to inspect all their property in form of land and buildings and create a status, and even involve the local leadership whenever they give notice when they are evicting so that the whole thing is understandable to everyone and we do not simply do things haphazardly or things that are not coordinated? I would like to be guided on that. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, after listening to the debate, I am increasingly thinking that we shall be setting a very dangerous precedent. I am thinking about the railway station at Mbulamuti in my sub-county. I am thinking about Kamwana; I am thinking about Namaganda. I am seeing them all and saying, “Oh my God, are you still very strong? 

4.43
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in appreciating the expeditious work done by the committee. However, I have got a few questions regarding the first item or terms of reference where the petitioners wanted a committee or this Parliament to help them in a situation where their colleagues in the neighbouring plots in the same area were compensated. 

When you go to the general recommendations, the committee is a little bit silent because I see an attachment on page 24 where S.P. Bageine did some kind of valuation for these tenants. When you carefully study this attachment, the value of the land, of the buildings and the total are there. That means the people who are sitting on these plots were compensated as sitting tenants. So, we wanted to know from the committee whether these petitioners did not qualify for the same treatment under these circumstances. 

I also want to inform the minister responsible for privatisation that a lot of Government land is exchanging hands without the knowledge of this Government. Particularly in Arua, we have had the Land Commission selling land where the district local government has also had its officials seated on those pieces of land. As I talk, the house which was recently renovated by the district local government is being offered to the current CAO -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate at hand has major issues. It is touching both dilapidated houses of Government and the land. The biggest issue is the land which is changing hands. It is for Government and yet, it seems not to be accounted for. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask the minister to come with a comprehensive report on Government land so that we can exhaustively debate as Parliament and address so many of the problems of land across the country; so that we chart a way forward on how the government will protect its land and let us also know, rather than having it mixed up with this debate and we lose the big problem as it is spreading across the whole country? I beg to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have no problem with having a bigger debate on the major issues, but this was specific. We should dispose of it. The government should tell us how they propose to handle that other bigger problem. Let us separate them. Please wind up.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, I was just trying to elaborate on the issue of land because in Arua, the CAO is taking over the plots on which all the district CAOs have been accommodated. When the district proposed to the Land Commission to take it over as sitting tenants, they refused. It will be important for the responsible minister to inform us on how privatisation of Government properties is taking place so that we are all in the know. When it is done, we should be able to bring out the issues in a free and fair manner, and in regard to a just and transparent manner in terms of exchanging hands or property that belongs to Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.48
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good report.  When Ugandans come to Parliament with a petition, they come for assistance. By the time they come here, they are really in need. Look at these people who have been living on that land for over 40 years, and you just want to throw them out? Where do they go? And with ex-gratia, the figure is not fixed. It is a token in appreciation. 

They have been living and taking care of the property. (Interjections) They have been living on that property and even paying rent without URC; renovating, living in terrible conditions and moreover, they have been paying rent. (Laughter) These are Ugandans and moreover, the government is selling that land and getting money out of that land. Why can’t they just get a token? Get a token and pay these people -(Interruption)

MS AMUGE OTENGO: Thank you hon. Wamanga-Wamai. I share with you the concern you have about the people of Uganda, the fellow citizens who have brought their concerns here. But I would like to get some clarification from you. As we go through the debate and even as I listened to the minister; he made about three concessions, which I thought were good enough. 

One, he said that the crops which were already in the garden can be harvested up to December. The chairman agrees. Two, the children who are at school should be allowed to complete their education up to third term. Three, they accepted to assist in the relocation of the dead bodies to their respective grounds. 

I think that kind of ex-gratia -(Interjection)- if you do not want to listen to that – hon. Oboth has put it rightly. But, I would like to get clarification from you, hon. Member. If we begin compensating people who are illegally occupying our -(Interjections)- no, let me put it this way because, I am looking at the URC kind of facilities. They are not just in Kampala here; some are in Lira, some are in Mbale, others in Gulu, Packwach and so forth. Do you propose that we go along and compensate all these people?  Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the law is very clear. If you have been a squatter on land, first -(Interruption)

MRS KYABANGI: I just want to inform the honourable members why we came up with that recommendation. We based our argument on the irregularities in the procedure that URC followed. In fact, in the beginning, we had recommended that compensation be given, but when the Executive Director appeared, he expressed the same fear that the Speaker is having now about other members claiming compensation. It was then that we agreed to come up with awards, particularly for this situation. That is how we came up with ex-gratia. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, this is not a one-off; it can have a spin-off effect. Yes, hon. Aja Baryayanga.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we need to understand the word “tenant.” If you are a tenant renting my house and I give you ample time to leave, do you get compensated? I want to understand the difference between a landlord and a tenant.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think it is only proper that we handle this debate in the right perspective. These people were at one time employees –(Interjections)– yes, I have a copy of this petition and I shared this idea with the Chairman of COSASE. These were one time employees of the Uganda Railways Corporation –(Interjections)– whether all of them or only a few, the fact is that they should have been treated case by case. I say this because even during this very year, in the Month of June, the Privatization Unit went on to allocate certain properties of Uganda Railways in Jinja, but with priority being given to the sitting tenants and the minister knows this.

So, really, I would have expected that since some of these were workers and served this country, the most honourable thing to be done to them in order to appreciate their service would be to offer them that chance and see if they can pay for it. That has happened to many other corporations’ properties in Jinja as I have said. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would also like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to share some information with my colleagues as regards the Divestiture and Reform and Implementation Committee (DRIC).This is an update on the progress of the transactions and disposal of URC non-core assets. It was agreed that the non-core assets be disposed of to facilitate the payment of liabilities that were incurred by URC. In this document from Government, there are guidelines given for the sale of these properties and I would like to request you to allow me to read them verbatim.

The following specific guidelines are proposed for the different categories of assets. Category one is about properties with sitting tenants. The proposed guideline is that in the event of a sitting URC tenant, who is interested and is not the highest bidder for that property, the individual be given an opportunity to match the highest bidder.

Category two is about properties with squatters. The guideline is that such property be offered to the squatter at values derived from the valuation.

Category three is about unoccupied developed properties to go to the highest public bidder. That is the information I wanted to give to the House.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you chairman of the committee for giving that information. Madam Speaker, you can see that these people were not given a chance yet they have been living on that land for over 40 years. The grabbers rushed to take that land.

Secondly, now that there are people who are going to buy that land, why can’t Government extend a token to these people to help them relocate to their villages? You can see for yourselves that they were not given any chance, yet the law says that a sitting tenant must be given the first priority.

Therefore, Madam Speaker – yes the committee has done a wonderful job by giving very good recommendations. These people have been living on this land for over 40 years. They are going back to their villages, but with the land being sold and Government getting money; why not give ex-gratia to these people for them to ably relocate to their respective villages? This will help them buy a few iron sheets to put up shades where they are going to live. Why don’t you look at these people’s plight with a human heart? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.58
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In looking at this matter we need to refer to the general practice in the country as regards disposal of property that has been previously occupied by officials working for the Government. For example, we had houses of this nature in Kololo and Bugolobi, but in all those scenarios, the first priority has always gone to the sittings tenants.

When you look at observation (a) on page 8 of this report, you realise that the committee observed that tenants were not given first priority to purchase the land before public bidding commenced. It did not follow the procedure established under the Uganda Railways Corporation Divestiture Action Plan.

Once you establish that, Madam Speaker, then you point out the error that those people committed and the omission that was performed. But also, Madam Speaker, it is important to note that not all agreements are written. Some agreements or relationships can be implied; that a person has lived in a place for forty years. He has grown crops including perennial ones and has buried his dead there, which means the relationship is implied. It is a relationship between the landlord and the tenant.

When a plot of land is sold for Shs 60 million – by the time these people came here for assistance, they knew who had bought these properties. The names might not reflect the true owners. But we all live in this Uganda and know that some people are owners of certain properties during the day, but there are also others who own and come to do inspection on the same properties at night. 

On page 6 of this report, Madam Speaker, bullet (e) there is something very important there for us to note; that inspection of premises advertised at Port Bell, Luzira was carried out by interested potential bidders on 24 January at 10.00 a.m. except plots 73 to 75 in which security personnel had been heavily deployed. Who is this tenant who was occupying property in plots 73 to 75? The committee chairman should assist me with that.

5.01
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to give some humble advice to the minister in as far as the ex-gratia payment is concerned. What I observed from this is that both parties are not clean. URC is not clean and neither are the tenants. It is clear from the report that the valuer gave a certificate to URC indicating clearly that these houses are dangerous, if anything, like expired drugs. But they went ahead to sale them. They continued to collect rent from these people. I see a good precedent in this; we can use this to stop URC from going ahead to collect rent from all other estates that are in dangerous state to the people. The people staying in these houses are at a great risk of death. 

What I am submitting is that, in good faith, since URC received a certificate and knew that these houses were at zero value and went ahead to collect money from them, it is proper to refund the amount that was collected from these people from the time the certificate was issued. That would not be a bad precedent because it can be stated that compensation is only upon payment that they had made. If it had not been there, they would not have been given any ex-gratia payment. But because they had paid the money, it is only proper and human that URC refunds the amount of money that they collected illegally from these people. 

And also, adopt as a further recommendation, that Uganda Railways Corporation goes ahead to do the valuation of all their estates and they immediately stop collecting money from houses whose value has reached zero. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let’s close with the two ministers. 

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston  Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for their views and advice. The committee did state categorically that divestiture was done in accordance with the provisions of the law and the due process was followed. 

I want to clarify that in all cases where these properties existed, priority was given to all sitting tenants to participate in purchase of these properties. If it was not done in the first instance, then they were also welcome to bid like many other bidders who bidded. 

I also want to clarify the issue of former workers of these parastatal organisations. I want to state that all employees of Uganda Railways were duly paid their terminal benefits, including costs of transport and relocation to their homes when their services were terminated. For those who were not paid, their claims are being processed and they will be paid by Government. (Applause)  

For those tenants who overstayed in those houses which were condemned, it is clear that they stayed in those houses in illegality and there is no way Government can condone and abet illegality by compensating somebody who has been staying in your property, albeit, illegally.  

The issue of ex-gratia payment. I have made it clear that it has cost implications. It is not budgeted for. It is a thank you. In this case, Madam Speaker, it is not tenable because the Committee on Public Accounts will come and start grilling whoever paid this money. 

This matter was investigated by the IGG and the IGG returned the verdict that these claims were untenable and the committee itself said that compensation was not tenable and, therefore, asked for ex-gratia payment.  

I want to end by saying that Government has done all it can to accord these people – first of all, they overstayed in these houses and some of them are still there; and as we speak, nobody is paying rent. 

In addition to that, we have said as requested, and as recommended by the committee, they can stay up to the end of this year so that they are able to relocate their children for those who have children. 

Further, the government has offered URC to arrange for decent burial for those who were buried illegally on these plots. 

Madam Speaker, I implore Members that we only accepted those expenses on humanitarian grounds and a humanitarian ground cannot be elastic.

Lastly, the issue of people occupying Government land is not new. Privatisation Unit land, like any other government land, has been encroached on. But what Government has been doing is that for those who have been identified to be in illegal occupation, they have been evicted. Others have been allocated land by Uganda Land Commission in error. And some local governments have even been using some of that land in error. So, where those mistakes have been discovered, they have been corrected and land either regularised or compensation made or people restored. An example is the other day when we were evicting the former mayor of Kampala. There was also a house in Kololo which was being occupied by –(Interjection)- should we have continued to pay those people?

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I implore this House to accept this report, except that we cannot pay ex-gratia because it is not tenable and not budgeted for. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the committee’s recommendations have majorly been accepted except that one. Why don’t we agree that three quarters of the recommendations have been accepted and we move on?  

5.10
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (MR Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, reading the mood of the House and given that for us it was our prayer that this report be adopted; and considering that all the other three prayers have been fully addressed. And also aware of the fact there is another petition by the same group with respect to the Nsambya piece of land – we are completing the report and it will soon be coming to the House. I would like on behalf of the committee members to concede on our recommendation. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Members. That recommendation on ex-gratia is deleted by consent of the House. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE INVESTIGATION AND FAILURE TO PROCURE AND DELIVER BICYCLES FOR CHAIRPERSONS OF VILLAGES AND PARISH COUNCILS BY THE MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

5.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Florence Kintu): Madam Speaker, allow me to present a report from the Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the investigation into failure to procure and deliver bicycles for chairpersons of villages and parish councils by the Ministry of Local Government.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on 25 August 2011, while considering the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Policy Statement for the Ministry of Local Government for the FY 2011/2012, the House directed the committee to undertake a full and detailed investigation on the contract to supply bicycles for local council chairpersons and report to the House within three weeks. 

The committee embarked on the assignment and due to the magnitude of work, it requested for an extension of time in order to complete its assignment, which was granted by the Rt Hon. Speaker. The committee now wishes to report to the House as follows:

Background

In May 2010, the Ministry of Local Government received a letter dated 11 May 2010 from the then Minister for the Presidency, Dr Wabudeya Beatrice. The letter indicated that the President had directed that bicycles for all local council chairpersons of villages and parishes in the country should be procured. According to the letter, this fell within the mandate of the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) and, therefore, provision for this item had to be made in the ministry’s budget for the Financial Year 2010/2011. Refer to Annex I. 

Subsequently, money for the bicycles was secured in the national budget for the FY 2010/11 under the Ministry of Local Government vote. The ministry, on behalf of Government, contracted M/s Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd (AITEL) to procure and distribute 70,000 bicycles at the cost of US$ 4,896,500. This figure, however, was later revised. The ministry paid an advance of 40 percent, equivalent to US$ 1,719,419.58. The bicycles were to be delivered in March 2011, but to-date no bicycle has been delivered and the money has not been recovered. 

Terms of Reference

The terms of reference of the committee were as follows:

(i) 	To establish whether the procurement process adhered to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 (PPDA Act) and other relevant laws and regulations;

(ii) To examine the contract management process and the contract performance;

(iii) To establish the circumstances under which payment for the bicycles was made;

(iv) To investigate the causes for the failure to procure and deliver the bicycles; and

(v) To make recommendations thereof. 

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the following:

i)	Ministry of Local Government 
ii)	Bank of Uganda
iii)	Accountant-General
iv)	Stanbic Bank
v)	AITEL directors and agents
vi)	Individuals involved or mentioned in the transaction.

The committee examined the bid documents and copies of the letters of credit, and made reference to the documents tabled by the witnesses. The committee was guided by the relevant laws, regulations, guidelines, circular instructions and policies pertaining to public procurement issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development/Treasury, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA), Solicitor General, Registrar of Companies and Uganda Insurance Commission; plus international customs and practices for handling such transactions.

Findings

The Procurement Process

The tender for supply, delivery and distribution of bicycles was advertised in the New Vision of September 9 2010, following the contracts committee’s approval of the use of Open International Bidding (OIB). Refer to Annex II

Seven bids were received from the following companies: 

a) 	Intercross Agencies Limited of Kenya
b) 	Nile Fishing Company (NIFCO) Limited 
c) 	Shinyaga Emporium (1978) Limited of Tanzania
d) 	Endesha Enterprises (U) Limited
e) 	Maritino Agencies (U) Limited
f) 	Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Limited (AITEL)
g) 	Mmacks Investments Limited

The bids were received and evaluated in accordance with the methodology and criteria that were specified in the solicitation documents for identification of the best bidder. Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Limited, which purportedly had powers of attorney to transact business on behalf of Amman Impex of India, emerged the best evaluated bidder and they were awarded the contract on November 26, 2010. 

The committee learnt that the evaluation team based their recommendation on the merits of the two companies, AITEL and Amman Impex, as a joint venture. Consequently, in accordance with the requirements of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act 2003, the contracts committee approved the evaluation report that recommended the award of the contract to AITEL having emerged the lowest technically compliant and responsive bidder. Refer to Annex III.

Contract Signing

The Solicitor General approved the contract vide letter dated 25 November, 2010 (Annex IV). The Permanent Secretary signed the contract on behalf of the government, witnessed by the Assistant Commissioner, Policy and Planning (also the contract manager), and M/s Nishita Maini, the director, signed on behalf of AITEL and witnessed by Mr Mohinder Singh Chal. Delivery of the 70,000 bicycles was to be made to all district headquarters and this was expected to be completed by 25 February 2011. Refer to Annex V.
Change of Ownership of AITEL

On 25 February 2011, there were changes in the ownership of AITEL. The majority shareholder, Rajasekaran, bought out Nishita and Mohinder and he took over the company with 99 percent shares and co-opted his local driver, Joseph Kyangwa, whom he gave one percent shares. Mr Rajasekaran wrote to Stanbic Bank instructing them to transfer US$ 150,000 to Nishita and Mohinder Singh, being the payment for purchase of their shares. This, however, was to be got from the money to be paid by Ministry of Local Government for the bicycles in two instalments – US$ 100,000 on payment of the first Bill of Lading (BOL) and US$ 50,000 on payment of the second BOL.

Amendment of the Contract

On 3 March 2011, Ministry of Local Government signed an addendum to the contract. It was signed by the Permanent Secretary and witnessed by the Assistant Commissioner, Policy and Planning on behalf of the ministry, and by Mr Rajasekaran witnessed by a one Patrick Bagarukayo for Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd. In the addendum, the parties agreed to extend the delivery period by one month to 25 March 2011. The ministry also consented to the change in directorship of AITEL by accepting revocation of the powers of attorney from Nishita and Mohinder to Rajasekaran and Kyangwa. 

Payment Process

a)	Original Terms of the Letters of Credit

On December 22nd, 2010 the Ministry of Local Government opened a letter of credit worth US$ 4,298,636.46 (Four million, two hundred ninety eight thousand, six hundred thirty six, forty six cents) through Bank of Uganda in favour of M/s Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd for the supply of 70,000 bicycles. Refer to Annex VI. The terms of the letter of credit were as follows:

Payment – 40 percent of the letter of credit value was to be paid to the supplier on presentation of documents confirming shipment of goods, and 60 percent would be remitted on presentation of an original acceptance certificate issued by the Ministry of Local Government. 

Transferring Bank - Citibank, New York, was appointed as the transferring bank.

Shipment - partial shipment of goods (bicycles) was not allowed.

Port of loading - the port of loading was indicated as any port in China. 

Final destination - parishes and village councils in Uganda.

Transferability – the letter of credit was transferable.
 
Irrevocability - the letter of credit was irrevocable.

Consignee – the consignee was the Ministry of Local Government as annexed. 

Amendment of Terms of the Letters of Credit

On 25 December 2010, the Ministry of Local Government made the following amendments to the initial terms of the letter of credit as annexed: 

•	The transferring bank was changed from City Bank, New York to Stanbic Bank (U) Limited. 
•	The condition disallowing partial shipment of goods was waived to allow partial shipment. 
•	The port of loading was changed from China to India. 
•	The consignee was changed from the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Local Government to M/s Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment, who is the contractor. (Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Speaker, she is reading and we can hear her, but we would feel better reading with her. We do not have copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is very important. Please listen. They are running the copies and you will get them. Hon. Nambooze would like to donate to hon. Naome Kabasharira. (Laughter) 

MS KINTU: Failure of Standard Bank, South Africa to transfer the letter of credit to India. 

Amman Tools and Equipment requested Stanbic Bank to transfer the letter of credit to Amman Impex India, who were reported to be a holding company of M/S Amman Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd. Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd requested Standard Bank South Africa to transfer the letter of credit to Amman Impex, Lakshmin Villas Bank. However, Stanbic Bank Uganda informed the committee that the transfer was not successful as Standard Bank, South Africa did not have SWIFT links with Lakshmin Villas Bank in India. So, Rajasekaran decided to handle the finances directly in Stanbic Bank Uganda, as annexed. 

Discrepancies in Documents submitted by AITEL 

On February 28 2011, the Bank of Uganda received documents presented by Stanbic Bank on behalf of M/S Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd, relating to the shipment of 30,000 bicycles with an invoice worth US$ 1.8 million as annexed. However, the documents contained discrepancies, which the Bank of Uganda brought to the attention of the Ministry of Local Government as annexed, and the discrepancies were the following:

i.	There was no delivery note evidencing receipt of goods.

ii. 	The final destination of the bill of lading, packing lists and certificate of origin, was quoted as Kampala, Uganda instead of parishes and village councils in Uganda as earlier indicated by the letters of credit. 

iii. 	The certificate of origin of the goods had alterations which were not authenticated. 

The Ministry of Local Government found these discrepancies immaterial, gave the Bank of Uganda the waiver and proceeded with the transaction as annexed. 

Authorisation to honour the Letters of Credit 

The Bank of Uganda subsequently honoured the letters of credit and paid US$ 1.7 million representing 40 percent of the letter of credit value to M/S Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment Limited as annexed. This was premised on a letter from the Ministry of Local Government, dated 3 March 2011, signed by the accounting officer, head of accounts and head of internal audit, and confirming that the goods for which the letter of credit was opened had been rendered and the ministry was satisfied with the quality and quantity, as annexed. The funds were credited to the AITEL account on 15 March 2011 as annexed.

Payments made out of the US$ 1.7million

On 15 and 16 March 2011, various transfers using outward telegraphic transfers and inter account transfers were made from the account of AITEL at various branches of Stanbic in Kampala as follows:

15 March 2011: 

•	US$ 240,000 to Mr Patrick Bagarukayo for unknown reasons;
•	US$ 85,000 to Amman Impex for share profits; 
•	US$ 110,000 to Vinsara Impex India for unknown purposes;
•	US$ 600,000 to Infinity Exim FZE for unknown purposes;
•	US$ 400,000 to WUYI in Trade Hong Kong for unknown purposes; 
•	US$ 100,000 to Nishita for sale of shares to Rajasekaran.
•	US$ 20,000 to Rajasekaran for personal use. 

On 16 March 2011: 

•	US$ 100,000 to Mr Patrick Bagarukayo for unknown purposes; 
•	US$ 50,000 to Mr Patrick Bagarukayo for unknown purposes 

Madam Speaker, out of the US$ 1.7 million, the balance on account was US$ 14,369 and 58 cents. Our source is annexed. 

The Non-delivery of Bicycles

The committee learnt that the ministry contacted M/s Okello Oryem and Company Advocates, Stanbic Bank and Bank of Uganda and informed them of the delayed delivery of bicycles and requested them to assist with investigations into the transaction, a responsibility which the Bank of Uganda declined. 

The committee also learnt that the Ministry of Local Government contacted Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd. They also sought guidance of the Solicitor General, notified the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, informed the India Chamber of Commerce, inquired from Stanbic Bank and contacted Mr Okello Oryem of Okello Oryem and Company Advocates who was the local legal counsel of Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment, as annexed. 

On 17th May of the same year, Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment (U) Ltd contacted the Ministry of Local Government to explain that they had delayed to deliver the bicycles due to some internal problems in the company, which they had promised to rectify. To date, no bicycles have been delivered to the Ministry of Local Government and the money has not been recovered. 

Termination of Contracts

The PS wrote several reminders and warning letters to AITEL without any success. On 7 July 2011, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government terminated the contract. 

Observations

Identity 

The Ministry of Local Government did not undertake adequate measures to clearly ascertain the identity and competence of the party it was dealing with. Whereas there was an allegation of a joint venture between the two companies, no evidence of a joint agreement between the AITEL and Amman Impex India was tendered. Eventually, the Ministry of Local Government was dealing with an individual, Rajasekaran.

Competence and Capacity of Supplier

The committee observed that Ministry of Local Government failed to exercise due diligence in evaluating the competence of AITEL, hence committing Government to nugatory expenditure. On the basis of financial capacity, distribution chain and experience, AITEL would not have passed the evaluation test. 

Change of Directors of AITEL

The committee observed that within three months after winning the contract, AITEL changed its directors, removing the directors who signed the contract with the Ministry of Local Government. This was suspicious, given that the transaction had not been concluded. 

Changes in Contract

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the agreement between Ministry of Local Government and Mr Rajasekaran of AITEL amended the date of delivery of bicycles by one month, from 25 February 2011 to 25 March 2011.

The committee further observed that the Ministry of Local Government consented to the changes in the management of AITEL by accepting the revocation of the powers of attorney from Nishita and Mohinder to Rajasekaran and Kyangwa witnessed by Mr Patrick Bagarukayo. 

Payment without Clearance from the Accountant-General

The committee observed that the payment for the letter of credit for the bicycle purchase was done without clearance from the office of the Accountant-General in disregard of the guidelines set by this office. It further noted that the Accountant-General cleared payment on 5 May 2011, weeks after Bank of Uganda had authorised payment to AITEL on the 15 April 2011. 

Approval of  Contract by the Attorney-General’s Chambers

Whereas there is approval of one version of the contract, this contract was subsequently altered in a number of material aspects. These alterations substantially amended the original contract in a manner that they ought to have been approved by the Attorney-General; the contract was amended by the letters of credit and alterations to the letters of credit were made to allow partial shipment, changes to port of loading, and the consignee became AITEL instead of Ministry of Local Government.  

The latter changes in the shareholding structure of AITEL present obvious legal questions, and the Ministry of Local Government should not have gone ahead with the contract without seeking the Attorney-General’s legal advice.

The committee observed that any subsequent material changes to the original contract should have been considered and either approved or rejected by the Attorney-General. The committee further observes that such changes are suspect since they depart from the bid document issued out to all the bidders. 

Contract Failures

Whereas the Government of Uganda performed its part of the contract by paying the initial installment of 40 percent of the entire purchase price, was gracious enough to extend the delivery period and tolerated the internal confusion in the management of the company, the supplier did not supply the goods. Despite several reminders and warnings by the ministry, AITEL failed in its obligation, presented forged documents and obtained US$ 1.7 million without delivering a single bicycle.

Drafting of the Contract

The committee observed that the contract was poorly drafted, which was supported by the Accountant-General’s office and Bank of Uganda. 

Management of Letters of Credit

The responsibility of verification of documents in the letter of credit needs to be addressed. The letter of credit leaves this out and no one is tasked with verification of documents. 

Recommendations

Government should seek legal redress from courts of law to recover US$ 1.7 million plus damages, costs and interest from AITEL for breach of contract. 

The committee recommends that the relevant agencies of Government, that is, the Criminal Investigations Department (CID), the Inspector General of Government (IGG), the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) investigate this matter thoroughly to establish the officers and persons involved in causing this loss to Government, with a view of prosecution or taking other appropriate action. 

The following offices and officers should specifically be investigated: The Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer of the Ministry of Local Government, the Principal Accountant of the Ministry of Local Government, the Principal Internal Auditor of the Ministry of Local Government, the contracts committee members, the evaluation committee members, the Accountant-General’s office, Bank of Uganda, Solicitor General’s office and Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd. (Applause)

Bank of Uganda was paid Shs 100 million as commission in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding with Government. Under Section 8.2(VIII), the beneficiary of the MoU, the bank, is supposed to effect payments to the beneficiary in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letters of credit; as such, the Bank of Uganda is expected to advise Government on the technical aspects of payment under the letters of credit system. 

They found discrepancies, which in their estimation would have saved this country of this loss and yet they went ahead and paid on the basis of the Permanent Secretary’s waiver. They were expected to pay on the basis of key documents which were missing, that is, the manufacturer’s warranty, insurance cover of up to 110 percent, and others. The bank should explain its failure to do due diligence and to provide adequate guidance to the Government of Uganda and to protect public funds. 

The committee recommends that there is need to streamline the management of letters of credit under the public procurement process. There is a conflict between the Accountant-General’s guidelines to all Government departments in regard to the management of letters of credit and the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (600) being used by the Bank of Uganda.  The role of banks in letters of credit should be clarified. 

We recommend that Mr Patrick Bagarukayo, who withdrew US$ 400,000 between 15 March 2011 and 16 March 2011, be thoroughly investigated on his role in this saga. Being the person who knows Rajasekaran so well, he should be put to task to find Rajasekaran and to provide all information that is useful in the investigation. 

The committee found out that the Ministry of Local Government had problems of capacity in managing letters of credit and international trade. The staff lacks the requisite experience, skills and knowledge in managing foreign letters of credit. In view of this, the Accountant-General should carry out capacity building for staff of this ministry and other ministries and Government departments with similar problems.  

Government, through the Attorney-General’ Chambers and PPDA, should empower the Ministry of Local Government and other Government departments and agencies to properly negotiate, enforce, manage and supervise Government contracts to avoid wastage of resources. The Attorney-General’s Chambers should strengthen their capacity to advice Government in regard to contracts. 

Government should review its policy on foreign nationals’ involvement in tenders and contracts in Uganda. Work permits should be enforced and on each such tender, including joint ventures, there should be a requirement for the company to include Ugandan nationals and to employ Ugandans to a limit of not less than 30 percent. (Applause) 

Pre-shipment inspection, testing of goods and payment on full delivery should be adhered to as necessary conditions for such big contracts. This should be clearly stated in the general and special conditions of contracts. In case of advance payment, Government should ensure adequate performance guarantees and advance payment security.

Parliament should expedite the enactment of the Anti-Money Laundering Bill to check illegal movement of large sums of money, especially where foreign transactions are concerned.

In our addendum, we observed that the Ministry of Local Government, as the overall political supervisor, is commended for raising the matter in their policy statement. However, the committee observes that there was inadequate political supervision over the contracts. We also recommend that the laws should be revised to give political heads of government, ministries and departments, greater oversight roles in procurement processes.

In conclusion, the procurement of bicycles was necessary to strengthen implementation and supervision of Government programmes by the local councils. The failure by the ministry to procure the bicycles as per the contract has become a matter of serious concern to all the people of Uganda.

The committee notes that this was an important contract that was mismanaged. There was high level of unprofessionalism exhibited by all actors in the contract, particularly the Ministry of Local Government.

The procurement brought out the inherent weaknesses and loopholes in management of contracts and letters of credit in Uganda. The procurement process gave a lot of room for fraud.

The cause of failure to procure and deliver bicycles was mainly due to negligence of duty, inexperience by Government officials, as well as outright breach of contracts by the supplier. Government should thoroughly investigate this case and ensure appropriate action as recommended herein. Government should also study international practice and best examples in management of such contracts, and make the necessary recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am frankly flabbergasted by the findings. I would like to commend the committee for the quality of work and thank them for sacrificing their recess because it is one of the committees that remained here throughout. I think you have done a good job. Having said that, I see that the report is big. I do not know how many annexures there are; they are so many and I would like every Member to have a copy. So, we shall not commence debate until 3.00 p.m. tomorrow. Will the clerk be able to distribute? Will you have read?

Hon. Members, I think we should give Members time to read this report because frankly, I do not know. So, can we place debate for this on Tuesday? It seems to be the consensus.

5.46
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I recognise the volume of the report we are dealing with, but I am also cognisant of the fact that this is a society that is so dynamic, with issues that are huge and tremendously shocking. It is quite probable that by that time, we would have received another thing. Let us go and burn the candles overnight, come tomorrow and deal with the issue. I plead with you, Madam Speaker, so that we do not come here to regret over a report that has taken so much time, and which we have been eagerly waiting to debate. I beg to submit.

5.47
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Colleagues, I want to first thank the committee. As I stand here, I have no copy.

Secondly, however much we are book worms, I know I have that capacity. but not all of us do. So, I would beg that we move with the proposal, which the Speaker made, that we have a thorough debate on Tuesday regarding this matter. I thank you.

5.48
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Colleagues, this is a very important issue and more so it directly affects our leaders at the local level. It would be very unfair for us Members to rush and give our input in this huge document without necessarily putting our time and minds to it.

Even as Beatrice, I would like to consult the LCs of Kitgum District. I do not see the rush to crush the document half way. We have a saying that one night cannot make food go sour. I pray that on Tuesday we come back fresh. I would have gone to Kitgum and come back - and you too - and have real input in this document. Please colleagues, let us accept the position. I beg to move.

5.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the committee for the thorough work they have done. As such, it is a very important report, which needs proper study by each one of us, in a sober way, and not emotionally, because this cuts across partisan lines.

We need to have time, and I agree with the proposal of the Speaker that we start debate on Tuesday next week. Whether there will be a caucus on it or not, that is not the business of the House, that is our business.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said, I really want to commend the quality of this report and we should do justice to it. So, the debate will commence on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. I direct the Clerk to ensure that all the Members have copies. Members, you have those small bags. Put them in your little bags; the ones I gave you after you took oath.

We may not have business for tomorrow, but let us meet tomorrow at 3.00 p.m. so that I can announce the ad hoc committee. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 October 2011 at 3.00 p.m.)
