
Wednesday, 28 October 2009

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. In the public gallery we have guests from Kigulu County South, Iganga District. You are most welcome. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Milton Muwuma. 

Hon. Members, you must have seen an exhibition of photos on disability issues in the main lobby. The exhibition has been organised by hon. Nokrach and his group. You should familiarise yourselves with the issues concerning persons with disabilities and that is why they have put the exhibition there.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF CABINET MINISTERS AND OTHER MINISTERS AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 113(2) AND ARTICLE 114(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION

2.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 113(2) and Article 114(3) provides for the establishment of a Cabinet whose role is to determine, formulate and implement the policies of government and to perform such other functions as may be conferred by the Constitution on any other law; 

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 113(2) and Article 114(3) puts a limit on the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers who can be appointed by the President; 

AND WHEREAS Parliament on the 19th day of May 2006 passed a resolution to increase the total number of Cabinet ministers from 21 to 25 and ministers of state from 21 to 44; 

AND WHEREAS the President has considered it expedient to separate the office of the Attorney-General from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and, therefore, create an additional Cabinet post and also to create the position of the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs in order to enhance effective political supervision of the sectors affected;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the total number of Cabinet ministers be varied as provided for in Article 113(2) from 25 to 26 and the total number of other ministers be varied as provided for in Article 114(3) from 44 to 45.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Migereko.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The justification appears on page 3. Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, as you are all aware, the Constitution in Article 119 provides for the position of the Attorney-General who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. 

In 2006, His Excellency the President decided to combine the Office of the Attorney-General with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Experience has shown that it is difficult for one person, or be it with a deputy, and the Minister of State to perform the functions of both the Attorney-General and also Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

His Excellency the President seeks your approval to separate the two offices and appoint an additional Cabinet minister to hold the said position. Under the proposed arrangement, the ministers will have defined roles but broadly, the Attorney-General will be in charge of litigation, legal advisory services and legislation. 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs shall be broadly responsible, in terms of policy guidance and coordination, for all institutions and bodies allied to the ministry namely, the Judiciary, Uganda Law Reform Commission, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Law Development Centre, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. At the institutional level, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will handle matters of the Law Council and the Administrator-General. However, this is without prejudice to where the enabling legislation or other policy measures demand action to be taken in either portfolio by the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

The proposed arrangement is intended to create greater efficiency in government. In May 2006, government, with the approval of this Parliament, created the Ministry of East African Affairs. This was in keeping with Uganda’s obligations as part of our participation in the East African Community. His Excellency the President accordingly appointed hon. Eriya Kategeya the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Affairs.

Since the establishment of the Ministry of East African Affairs, the schedule of duties of this ministry has enlarged and expanded as we move to a full customs union in 2010, the common market and monetary union negotiations. One ministry cannot discharge all these duties singly. Therefore, it is now deemed appropriate to have a minister of state in the Ministry of East African Affairs. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I rise to second this important motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In so doing, I base myself on Article 113(2) and Article 114(3) of the Constitution, which provide that the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers must not exceed 21 for each category except with the approval of Parliament. This motion is, therefore, seeking approval of this Parliament to exceed the constitutional number of Cabinet ministers of 21 in each case, though currently there are 25 Cabinet ministers and 44 ministers of state.

This request goes to demonstrate further that this government has total belief in the rule of law and constitutionalism. The motion seeks to separate the Office of the Attorney-General from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Also, it seeks to create, under Article 114(1) and (3), a new portfolio for a minister of state for East African Affairs.

Why has it now become necessary to separate the Office of the Attorney-General from that of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs? The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has come out with clear reasons. However, I also would like to add the following: 

The Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor to government as per our Constitution. This role requires full time attention. The workload of this portfolio is very heavy. Indeed, this Parliament has, through its Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, already made an observation to that effect. Therefore, for the Attorney-General to also hold the portfolio of Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is to heavily load that office.

The Attorney-General handles all matters relating to litigation for and against government. In order to improve access to justice and to reduce on the backlog of cases in courts, government recently increased the number of High Court Judges. This was a good move and a step forward. However, it cannot be done in isolation. There is need to have an Attorney-General who is not bogged down by other functions envisaged under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hence the need to have this separation.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, as we approach the next general elections, there are demands from many stakeholders for amendments to these electoral laws. In order for these demands to be responded to in a meaningful manner, there is need for a minister responsible for justice and constitutional affairs to give this exercise the necessary attention and urgency it deserves. This will ensure that the necessary laws are passed through Cabinet and Parliament in an expeditious manner, as some of our colleagues have been demanding over time. Everybody here is talking about the need to have these amendments handled by February 2010, which is just next year. This separation is a clear response to this call.

Further, the minister will be responsible for managing and supervising the electoral process to its final conclusion. We all would like to see the exercise of elections well managed. The Attorney-General, whose roles and functions are clearly spelt out in the Constitution, may not be the right person at this stage to continue presiding over the management and supervision of the electoral exercise.

I would like to point out further that there is need for government to review the laws that have been passed and enacted by this Parliament, to gauge their efficacy and see whether they serve the purpose for which they were originally intended. It is no longer prudent to have laws that have no purpose. This is a function that can effectively be carried out by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I would like to submit that our country has been experiencing increasing, if not rapid, economic growth. This development creates a very heavy workload for the Office of the Attorney-General since he or she is expected to provide legal opinion on all important contracts including those in virgin areas such as petroleum, nuclear, public-private partnerships and others that you are familiar with.

The Attorney-General is also expected to provide legal guidance and advice on all critical national and international matters affecting Uganda. When we had a problem involving Migingo Island, the Attorney-General was called upon to provide guidance.

I have carried out comparative research and studies in Commonwealth countries with which we share the same legal regime. What we are proposing has already taken place in countries such as United Kingdom, Tonga, New Zealand, Australia and Kenya among others. They have separate officers for the Attorney-General and for Minister of Justice. In Ghana, which we visited only recently, and Nigeria, they are also in the process of separating the offices of the Attorney-General and that of Minister of Justice. 

This shows that what is being requested for here is generally an acceptable principle - to have a separate office for Attorney-General from that of the Minister of Justice. It is a commonly shared view right now that not separating these two offices will compromise the level of output in terms of quantity and quality of services that are supposed to be delivered. 

As earlier mentioned, this motion also seeks to create a new office for Minister of State for East African Affairs. The Council of Ministers of EAC recommended to the Summit that there should be resident ministers of the East African Community based in Arusha in order to effectively monitor implementation of programmes of the community by the secretariat. This recommendation was approved by the Summit. Our partners in the EAC, in this case Kenya and Tanzania, have already nominated ministers of state to be based in Arusha. It is only Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi that have not. It is therefore important that we implement the decision of this summit. 

Our Parliament and its Committee of Foreign Affairs did recommend that there was a need for a minister of state for East African Affairs to assist the First Deputy Prime Minister who also doubles as the Minister for East African Affairs. The argument of the committee was that it was necessary to have a resident minister in Arusha because there was weak political supervision at the EAC as the ministers responsible for East African affairs were in most cases visitors in Arusha and were not on the ground. So in bringing this motion, we show that the NRM Government seriously considers reports and recommendations from this Parliament and endeavours at every stage to implement them.

His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda have been steadfast in calling for the integration of East Africa. Studies carried out so far testify to this. Four stages underline this process of integration. The first one is the customs union, followed by the common market, monetary union and then the political federation. We are currently in the customs union and we are heading for the common market as we get to January 2010 as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has already pointed out.

Discussions, dialogue, negotiations and implementation of agreed programmes is the agreed approach to realising progress to the common market and ultimately to the political federation. Most of the critical decisions in this process require input of each of the partner states at ministerial level. Unfortunately, the senior minister, given the level of activities under his purview, cannot be in Arusha and Kampala at the same time. It is this need for participation in decision making in all these places that creates the imperative to have a minister of state to provide appropriate representation for Uganda as and when the need arises in these matters. 

Arguments are bound to be raised regarding the increased cost of administration arising out of creating these additional ministerial positions. It has, however, been established that the benefits and gains associated with these additional Cabinet posts in light of the output expected of them - enhanced levels of delivery of legal services; justice and governance offered by the separation of the office of Attorney-General from that of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; the increased prospect of East African integration and the associated economic gains related to being part of a market of 150 million people; the appointment of a Minister of State for East African Affairs to help fast track this process - do justify this request by His Excellency the President for these two additional Cabinet positions. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I second this motion. I thank you. (Applause)

3.12
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened very attentively to the motion and to the very passionate speech that has been made to second this motion. I would like to put it to this House that we in the Opposition are opposed to this motion. 

The reason the Constitution makers provided for parliamentary approval under Article 113 and 114 is so that we are able to check the wanton expansion of the Cabinet. It is the mandate of this House to ensure that this is done. How do we explain to ourselves that we were able to move from 42 to 69 and you still want to make the number in Cabinet 71! 

It is important to remind this country that we have in place a Minister for Regional Cooperation in a Cabinet of 42 to 69. We already have the Minister for Regional Cooperation. We have the First Deputy Prime Minister who is also in charge of East African Affairs. The Attorney-General and Minister for Constitutional Affairs already has a deputy. There are lots of other deputy ministers also. Therefore, when a motion is brought here to create additional two ministers of Cabinet and ministers of state, then we think this is not fair to the taxpayers of this country. 

It is good that the seconder of this motion pre-emptively said that he too was worried about the increasing cost of administration. We should be worried –(Mr Migereko rose_)– please, let me make my point; I listened to you. Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Kahinda Otafiire who once said that tomorrow he may become the minister of crocodiles. In fact, since we are creating more ministries, I do not know why we have not come up with the one for crocodiles as well. (Laughter)

The cost of public administration should indeed worry this country. We already have over 105 presidential advisors, hundreds of RDCs and deputy RDCs, over 69 and now you want to reach 71 ministers! Don’t you think the taxpayers feel the burden of public administration? Every minister creates a need for an additional powerful car, additional facilitation. We should be worried because this is some of the money which should go to service delivery.

I have heard the argument that we are making progress on integration of East Africa. What the motion seeks to put in our minds is that as we started the integration process, we needed one minister, when we move to the common market, we will need another minister and when we move to the political federation, you will need another two ministers. That is not fair to us. Can’t the Executive re-organise the available 69 ministers? Do you want to tell this country that many are necessarily effective? 

Actually, I am now more convinced than ever that the ministers are not effective at all. How come you want to keep adding numbers? Why don’t you deliver? You already had the mandate to come here and tell us to divide these ministries. This is very worrying. 

I am also worried about the selective implementation of parliamentary recommendations. He says that because we are keen to implement the parliamentary recommendations, therefore, we have to split these ministries. In 2001 this Parliament told you that the Ministry of Agriculture needed to be split, that agriculture sustains 80 percent of this country, but you are not bothered about it. Now you are selectively applying the recommendations of this Parliament. I find that argument ill intentioned; it is not a very sincere argument. 

Mr Speaker, I have also heard that the proposal is brought here in order to help with the electoral reforms. Honestly, this country should not be taken for granted. How can you say that you are appointing a minister to cater for electoral reforms? We already know that what is lacking is the good will to move in the line of political reforms; that is what is lacking. You do not have the sincerity to move in the direction of political reforms. You do not need an additional minister to tell you to move the army out of politics and stop intimidating the voters. You do not need another minister to tell us the politicians, and especially you in the ruling party, to stop the bribery of voters. 

You do not need another minister to create an independent electoral commission. We have an electoral commission mandated under Article 61 of our Constitution to organise and conduct civic education. The trouble has been with you, the Executive; you have not facilitated the Electoral Commission to do its work as provided by law. Instead, you go ahead and even compromise the Electoral Commission. That is why you have been to the Supreme Court twice and they have said that the elections were not free and fair. So, why do you think that bringing in another minister will solve those problems? This argument is very diversionary. 

I know that you want to create another two slots in the Cabinet so that you can increase the patronage. You go on patronising small communities towards elections so that they say, “In our village, we have the Minister of State for East African Affairs, so we should vote for them”. That is what you want to do. (Laughter) 

On the other hand, you want to keep us on our toes. As we go towards this critical debate on electoral reforms, you want all of us on the Back Bench to keep wondering whether they will appoint us to Cabinet. You want us to sit back and speculate: “If I say this, will they appoint me? If I say this, they will not appoint me”. That is the motive, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

So we very sincerely oppose this and I hope my colleagues from the NRM will help save this country the burden of additional ministers. Actually, what we should be discussing this afternoon is how to reduce this size of the Cabinet. At one time the President was quoted to have said that ministers are not working, that they are lazy and letting him down. So, we should reduce the size of the Cabinet instead of creating an additional burden to the taxpayers of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for presenting this request. 

I would like to submit that it was a mistake for Parliament to violate the Constitution. We do not need the number of ministers we have today. All of us came or have come from rural areas of this country. We all know the level of poverty of the ordinary Ugandan in this country. I think we should not sit in this air-conditioned hall and make decisions, which negatively affect the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that efficiency does not depend on numbers otherwise all countries would have moved to have several heads of state for efficiency. (Laughter) So, let us not dwell on numbers to effect efficiency.

We have ministries which are there and I do not know what they are doing, but they could have been amalgamated to form one ministry. Why do we have the Ministry of Information and National Guidance, for example, and the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity as two different ministries? Why should we have a minister without portfolio in the midst of the poverty we have in this country? Let us not deceive ourselves that Uganda is a rich country; it is not. 

On the basis of my observation, I would like to submit that if this Parliament is going the right way, it should start by getting rid of some ministries. I am agreeable that there should be a separation between the Attorney-General’s office and the Ministry of Justice; that is fair. I think the government should have seen this right from the beginning instead of creating unnecessary ministries. As for the Ministry of East African Affairs, it is reasonable to have an assistant there; that is agreeable, but why do we have four ministers of state in some ministries without specific duties that they are doing?

I want to end by saying that efficiency does not depend on numbers, otherwise all our ministries would have been very efficient and yet they are not. Thank you.

3.27
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start from where hon. Prof. Anokbonggo ended. Efficiency is not synonymous with numbers. Efficiency is synonymous with quality and professionalism. 

One of the problems this country has today is the cost of public administration. What we expected is for the Prime Minister to come up with a motion to reduce the number of ministries. (Applause) That is what we expected of you. 

This country has got the highest number of ministers in the entire world -(Interjections)- it is not about shouting at each other. Let us listen to each other. Let us talk about countries that are proud to run governments efficiently. Start with the biggest democracy, the United States of America, with a population ten or 20 times more than that of Uganda; how many secretaries does it have? Let us go to Russia, how about China and Britain? Then you get to this banana republic, struggling under the yoke of debts –(Interjection)- I will take the information.

MR OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I thought my friend, Katuntu, who is a learned friend, had done his research. He is referring to big democracies but take the United States, the number of secretaries we hear about is small but do you know how many assistant secretaries of state in charge of different portfolios the United States has? Britain –(Interjection)- excuse me, I am giving information. Wait for your turn. Mr Speaker, some people have left their heads at home. 

I understand America much better than most of you do. Take Britain; the ministry of foreign affairs in Britain has got a deputy minister for every region in the world. Is it in order for the honourable gentleman here to start deceiving us? (Laughter) Hon. Katuntu, I want to inform you that you are deceiving this House and you should stop deceiving us. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I do not think my friend, hon. Otafiire, warrants a reply. He is even laughing at himself because he knows what he is saying is not worth parliamentary attention.

Having said that, I think the most important thing to do is to advise the President that if you want to increase efficiency in government at the political leadership, appoint quality. 

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. I would like to give hon. Katuntu and the House at large information in regard to the quality of our ministers. 

I had an outbreak of Cholera in my constituency. When I came and consulted with the Speaker, she advised me to approach the Minister of State for Primary Health Care. I got the opportunity to meet with that minister of state and he promised that within 24 hours he would to come to Namuwongo with medical experts and with the entire Cholera team in his ministry to handle the crisis. Having had a meeting with the minister - I later began looking for him for one week, to this day. And the matter became lamentable during two occasions. The first occasion I called, he told me he was attending to important state matters. Then somehow I got him in Serena Hotel accidentally; he was having tea. That is when I realised the importance of state matters he was handling.

The other moment -(Interjections)– I am giving this information to support what hon. Katuntu has said about numbers not being synonymous with competence. We have got many ministers, the majority of whom are very incompetent. I want to thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Well, I think you need to also look at my second line of my argument. If you want to run efficient ministries then you need a better and professional civil service. The problem is that even in the civil service, we are seeing politics of patronage. If somebody loses a seat somewhere in Kabale, tomorrow he is appointed a commissioner in the Ministry of Health. Somebody loses an electoral seat today and tomorrow he is appointed an ambassador. This is the problem. If you want to improve on efficiency, you need to look out for the best that this country has, not necessarily about just increasing numbers.

Lastly, the issue of ministers being appointed – there is a gentleman and a good friend of ours - he has been a Member of this House and he passes as a Minister of State for Defence yet the process of his approval by this House is not yet complete. Despite the fact that he has never been formally approved, he is busy addressing meetings and seated in a ministerial office. This is part of the inefficiency and irregularities going on in this government. So, if you must talk to me about efficiency, the factors are very different. 

We have ministries with many ministers who are like commissioners, for example the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - to the extent that some of us do not know the portfolios they hold. It is –(Interjections)– yes, that is the truth. The other day I had to ask a colleague the post one of the ministers holds. This is what is going on. This is not about increasing efficiency really. If Members of Parliament cannot even know their colleagues because of numbers, then that is a problem. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to implore government that this patronage should end. Can you try to run an efficient government? You remember in order to improve the efficiency of the civil service, we had to cut it. Some of these ministries are really idle. I would like to congratulate my honourable colleague on the Front Bench of the government side for attending the House today. Even the civil servants are saying some of you just sit in the offices with no work; civil servants are talking about –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. The information I would like to give is that in the Sixth Parliament there were four ministers in the Ministry of Lands. One of them was a very close friend of mine. I would like to inform you that this minister one time told me that in that ministry if you did not grab a file from a messenger from the corridors, you would never sign any letter for months. And that is what is going on.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is quite unfortunate that this debate sometimes goes into discussing the roles of our colleagues yet we need to accord them due respect, but some of these things are now unavoidable. You have got a Cabinet of tens of ministers. You have got a long line of presidential advisors, who really never advise the President anyway. Then you have got RDCs and the personal staff of the President that make up another almost parallel Cabinet in State House and not President’s Office – secretary for this and that. 

How are we running a government? You cannot create efficiency in government by duplication of duties; you do not have to do that. Instead you streamline. Even when you look at what they are proposing - tomorrow they will come here and ask for a Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs whose portfolio has not been provided for under this motion - this motion is providing for only two slots – the full Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of State for East African Affairs. But now that you have created a Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, you will need a minister of state too. And once you create a minister, you must also provide for other staff: personal assistants, political advisors and whatever and all these are a burden to the taxpayer.

My plea as I end, Mr Speaker, is a prayer that you save this country and the little resources it has by not having all of it wasted in public administration. This country does not deserve this sort of administration; it is very bad. This is extravagancy and does not make any sense to me at all. I thank you.

3.41
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. The issues we are discussing go beyond the slots of the creation of the Office of the Attorney-General and Minister of State for East African Affairs. 

I personally had the experience of working with international organisations a few years ago, and I would like to inform you that the Ugandan delegation at one time, I think in 1994 and 2001, happened to be the smallest in the WTO negotiations; they were only three people: the Minister of Trade and Industry, our ambassador in Paris then and one other staff. When I compared this to the delegates from USA and Rome where I was working, I noticed that the Ugandans were fewer. Those delegations had 100 people. There were different conference rooms from where different members from those countries attended to the issues –(Interjections)– yes; they have different ministers in charge of different sectors. 

Recently when we were discussing EPAS, things that we want to undo, different countries sent 50 or 60 people each, even our neighbour Kenya sent 60 experts. The issue goes beyond numbers. It is about responsibilities and how we want to attend to the challenges of a changing world. I think it is very important that the Attorney-General’s chambers that is in charge of formulating contracts, negotiating them, dealing with new emerging areas in ICT, electronic fraud and many other areas that affect our country - we are not living in isolation. When the Attorney-General’s chambers is created separately and empowered to handle these issues, I hope that the structure of the Attorney-General’s chambers will be such that it will have different staff handling those issues that affect our country.

Efficiency is a mathematical and an economic term. If you want efficiency, for example in education you have to increase the number of teachers so that the teacher-pupil ratio should come to 1:40. In Health, if you want efficiency you will have to have more doctors, that is, one doctor for every 500 patients and not 1:10,000 or one million. Efficiency is really about numbers.

Hon. Members, I have come here a few times but I have not had the opportunity to get your support. I want to be recorded in this Parliament as having said that the Opposition has not supported anything that comes to this House. Sometimes it is very important that we agree on important things that go beyond numbers and people. 

Efficiency is about numbers. There are many things that you can maximise –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, as you well remember, on the day this House had no substantive Speaker, this House in unison determined that you were going to be the Speaker of this House; both the Opposition and Government side were seated here. Is the hon. Member therefore in order to say that the Opposition has never supported anything?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you can do is to give him information. (Laughter)

MR ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If he listened, I also qualified that I said, in most cases. We need to go beyond two ministers. I think we should focus on the broader issues for which these two departments are being created. My appeal to government is that in creating the Attorney-General’s chambers, they should go further to create different departments to deal with different issues that are emerging and that are affecting our country. For example, why is America sending another 40,000 soldiers to Afghanistan when there are 100,000 soldiers from the same country and from different organisations? It is about numbers, really.

Efficiency needs numbers. Hon. Members, we need to look beyond these two people and think wisely. The argument should be that beyond the Attorney-General, what different departments or structures and staffing are we looking at? What resources do we need to get to the Attorney-General’s chambers so that it can deliver the kind of work that we want it to?

On East African affairs, to argue and labour about a Minister of State for East African Cooperation is to create a level of misperception to our people, neighbours and member states. They have gone ahead to honour the commitments of creating ministers of state, so what are we opposing? This is creating a level of misperception that we are half hearted towards the East African Cooperation process and the Community. I beg that this House supports this to show our level of commitment to the East African Community. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The next motion is for approval of creation of a cabinet post and one minister of state. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I respect your chair but there was no part that the question be put and nobody seconded the motion that the question be put. Nobody moved the motion that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: I have put the question to the motion and the motion has been carried. Let us go to the next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2003

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion we are dealing with is to discuss the Public Accounts Committee report, which was tabled by the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. He presented it but we did not have the debate; any contributions?  

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I move a motion that you put the question to the report for efficiency.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, move the motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I move a motion that the report of the Public Accounts Committee for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2003 be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted.)
 
PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE SITUATION OF CHILDREN IN NORTHERN UGANDA

3.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Amongi Lagada): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I have the pleasure to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the situation of the children in Northern Uganda. The Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children tabled to Parliament a report on the situation of children in Northern Uganda in 2006. This report was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration.

The committee conducted a four day field visit from 19th to 23rd January 2009 in the districts of Oyam, Amuru, Gulu, Kitgum and Pader to update itself on the current situation of the children since the return of peace in the region. 

The committee considered it important to make this follow up visit on the earlier reports to establish the changes in the lives of children since the return of peace.

When the committee went there, we had meetings with Chief Administrative Officers, RDCs, chairmen LC V, councillors, community development officers, representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations, sub-county child protection committees, the school children themselves and the Teachers’ Association of Gulu.

The following were the observations that were made:

The committee noted that whereas the UPFC mission reported children as the main targets of abduction with approximately 25,000 children abducted since the beginning of the LRA insurgency, at the time the committee made that visit, reports of abductions had scaled down due to the relative peace that was being experienced.

On reintegration of formerly abducted children, it was noted that there are few institutional mechanisms in place to receive and reintegrate child returnees. The children stay in reception centres for an average of two months, which proved insufficient to address trauma. But even when children were reunited with their families, often the families and communities themselves had not been sufficiently prepared on how to handle the ex-LRA captives. Therefore, careless references like, “you are Kony’s wife” or calling the children of these returnees “Kony Junior” proved to be very painful and made the returnees feel rejected by the communities -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we have just been convinced and forced into a vote where we lost on the explanation that efficiency went with increased numbers. I see we are debating an important report of Northern Uganda but the Minister for Northern Uganda is not present in the House and there has not been any substantive explanation by the Prime Minister. Is this procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: I thought this is a Gender matter since we are dealing with children.

MR KYANJO: But Mr Speaker, these are specifically children of Northern Uganda. It is not for nothing that Northern Uganda has a minister. I would have preferred to hear the Prime Minister explaining the whereabouts of the Minister for Northern Uganda.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a portfolio in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development called the Ministry of Youth and Children and they are not specifically for one region. That Minister of State is in charge of the children of the whole country. Therefore, we are responsible whether these children are in the North, Central or West. The study was done in one region but this does not mean that we are not going to attend to it. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. You know one time I told you that I was a slow learner in class. When you say that you have got a portfolio that caters for all the children and yet this specific consideration is for children in Northern Uganda, what are you attempting to mean? (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think in our statue books we have a law on sectarianism. Is the hon. Member going against this law by being sectarian? A child, whoever it is, is a child of Uganda. In this case, there was a specific study –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo is saying that the Minister of State for Northern Uganda is not here but the Minister of State for Northern Uganda works under the Prime Minister’s office and the Prime Minister is here. He is in charge of those sectors because he is working under him. Let us hear the Prime Minister but I know he works under the Prime Minister’s office.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: What is more is that hon. Wakikona lost a relative and has gone abroad. However, his absence is compensated by the presence of the Minister for Gender and I am also around and reasonably knowledgeable. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, let us hear the report.

MS AMONGI LAGADA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the situation of children in the Internally Displaced Persons’ camps: 

Camp decongestion programmes have seen many families relocating to their original home villages, leaving children in IDP camps. Many such children have as a result been lured into immoral behaviour - which endangers their lives - usually as a means to find basic necessities like food.

The villages to which the families are returning lack infrastructure like schools, safe water and health centres. This discourages complete relocation from camps to the villages. Many families, therefore, go and dig in the villages but are still based in camps, which have the facilities.

The Challenges of Camp De-congestion on Children

Whereas government embarked on a mission to de-congest all IDP camps, the exercise has succeeded with those families, which have adults. The child headed families have remained with unaccompanied children. While it is easier for adults to be screened and to trace their home villages, child headed families are not accompanied and, therefore, re-settlement efforts have proved futile.

Child Education and Affordability

The committee observed that whereas other regions have registered commendable success in education, education in the Northern region has continued to deteriorate. The performance of children in the national examinations leaves a lot to be desired. 

In the 2008 Primary Leaving Examinations, performance was very poor with the region lagging behind its counterparts and some districts like Amuru got only one pupil in first grade.

The schools inspectorate function was noted to be inadequate and too weak to enforce minimum standards required to facilitate proper education.

The districts reported difficulty in raising facilitation for fuel for school inspectors with vehicles and the districts having different priorities.

Teacher absenteeism was very high and this has affected standards in the region. This is attributed to long distances, lack of staff quarters and schools relocating to their original sites, which lack adequate facilities. 

Joint community initiatives had constructed staff houses near schools but teachers have deliberately refused to occupy them.  Also, the breakdown of the cultural norms due to the war, which offered informal education to the children in the family and community setting, has greatly affected the region. Not much emphasis is placed on informal education anymore, yet the family structures in the African tradition are considered paramount in contributing to the education of the child.

Children’s attitude towards learning is negative due to misunderstanding of the Child Rights Policy. As a result, children have become rebellious and consider themselves free to do whatever they want, leading to low and non-attendance of school. They prefer watching films in makeshift video halls and drinking crude liquor, which has reduced the number of children who attend school.

On the other hand, parents have interpreted child rights as a prohibition to disciplining children. There is lack of parental guidance and concern for the children. This was reported to be serious in Pader District.

An alarming percentage of girl-children were reported to have been defiled by their teachers in Pader District. This has led to emotional and psychological torture, leading to high school dropout rates. 

Their parents too, fear to report these cases as they lack trust in the Police and lack money required to pursue justice.

Low staff ceilings were also cited to have contributed to poor results in the education system in this region. Many schools are under staffed. We got reports of schools with as few as three teachers managing an average of over 300 pupils. This was very evident in Amuru District and it was reported that the Ministry of Education and Sports has insisted on those same staff ceilings even where a teacher is sick over a long period of time like in the case of HIV/AIDS. The teacher cannot be replaced and the children end up missing lessons.

The government policy of mass/compulsory promotion has encouraged promotion of children to the next class even when they are not ready. When they reach primary six, they are blocked from proceeding to primary seven because the school administrators fear reaping poor results in PLE. Primary six numbers have, therefore, become abnormally high and this has led to frustration of the children and many have dropped out as a result.

The stopping of the School Feeding Programme in this region has had a direct negative bearing on the education of children. Not only has school attendance dropped, but poor performance has also been blamed on it. Children come to school hungry and study the whole day without food. 

There is also a general lack of facilities to cater for disabled children, yet they have special needs. This category is left with no choice but to attend the same schools with their able-bodied counterparts. Most of these schools do not have special toilets for disabled children or provision of sign language as scholastic aids for visually-impaired children. This discourages disabled children from continuing with their studies.

The teenage girls lack sanitary pads. They have no option but to stay away from school during menstruation days, to avoid embarrassment. This impacts on their performance, leading to high dropout rates.

The committee observed that there are no special facilities provided to enable young teenage girls ease and compose themselves during their periods. This has led to embarrassment and absenteeism.

Educational institutions meant to cater for former abducted children were noted as also enrolling children with “normal” background.

There is a School of War-Affected Children (SOWAC) in Gulu. This school teaches children of both categories whether you are from the bush or you were not abducted. They are all taught concurrently, yet there is no special method, which is adopted in teaching these children. So, although the government is commended for putting up this big vocational skills training institutions for war affected children, it was disappointing to note that this institution is being run without a syllabus and with insufficient and unqualified staff. Interaction with the Ministry of Education and Sports officials revealed that the ministry had interdicted the principal and was trying to take corrective measures. 

Political interference has watered down the morale of teachers and interaction with teachers revealed that the district politicians go on air and out rightly blame teachers for poor performance in the region instead of convening meetings with these people to find solutions. This has earned the teachers blame even from among their own pupils and parents and as a result, the pupils despise the teachers and have no respect for them.
 
Child Health and Sanitation

The committee observed that children often scavenge for food and other items in garbage or litter bins. This has exposed them to risks and ailments associated with toxic waste and expired food items. District authorities too confessed that they lack adequate resources to manage solid waste. At home, children particularly in child headed families lack beddings to warm themselves during the cold nights.

Child Labour

Child labour is an accepted norm. Parents keep children out of school to work in gardens, baby sit and engage in petty trade like ferrying water to brick laying sites. Parents regard children as a source of wealth. Girls are married off as soon as they reach puberty. We came across a case of a 12 year-old girl who was married to a 13 year-old boy in Amuru District and due to lack of remand homes in the region; the probation officers sometimes have to keep these children in their homes while awaiting court decision. But even if they are sentenced, the Police are resource constrained to transport them to reformatories, which are far away. 

Total Orphans

There are scores of child headed families resulting from death of both parents. Such children have no one to turn to for guidance and support and only rely on food supplies from NGOs like the World Food Programme, good Samaritans, as well as proceeds gained from offering their labour. Unfortunately, districts do not have specific programmes for this category, and they do not benefit from government programmes like NUSAF.

New and Emerging Issues

Children in conflict with the law:
The committee observed that a considerable number of children have come into conflict with the law. Institutional weaknesses and challenges have made it difficult for the district authorities to handle persons convicted of crime but are below the minimum age of criminal responsibility.

Child neglect and abandonment:
There is general lack of parental and community responsibility about the welfare of children. Many parents and guardians have abandoned their obligations to offer protection and guidance to their children. Children reported having been abandoned by their parents in the huts in IDP camps without necessities like food, soap, while the parents go for weeks to their home villages to cultivate. This brings them into risk of abduction, human sacrifice, child trafficking, and drunkenness. For example in Kitgum, eight children between the five and eight years were reported to have got drunk at a disco only to be discovered unconscious the following day in the bushes.

Human sacrifice:
We found quite a few cases in Northern Uganda. There were reports of missing children and some found dead with body parts like tongues, genitals, liver, kidneys, and the heart missing.

Recommendations

Education
A special catch-up programme should be introduced at the School of War-Affected Children, which will allow those children who wish to continue with formal education to join normal classes.

District Service Commissions should mount considerable pressure on the schools. Inspection officials should ensure quality delivery of services in education institutions.

The teachers’ code of conduct should be enforced.

Government should establish psycho-social rehabilitation and abuse treatment centres in every district to help provide support and counseling services to victims of trauma resulting from the war. The trauma is widespread and cannot be effectively handled by a few Non-Governmental Organisations. 

Districts should make by-laws on social evils like consumption of sachet alcohol, video shows during school hours and discos. Ordinances and bylaws should be formulated and passed by district councils and guidance sought from the central government on their appropriateness.

Districts should establish and facilitate task forces and communities in all sub-counties to enforce attendance to school by all school-age going children.

Child protection committees should be established in all parishes in the war affected areas.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should introduce special catch-up methods to equip teachers to handle disadvantaged children.

Local governments should make a deliberate move to empower the child headed households through government programmes like NUSAF.

In conclusion, we note that while the physical war has ended, its negative effects are glaring in the whole region. The communities have been terribly weakened; gender roles considerably altered and domestic violence is at its highest in the region. The effect of unstable families on the children cannot be over emphasised. It is, therefore, imperative that even as we try to find solutions to the problems of the children in Northern Uganda, the family setting in which these children live should be looked at critically. The environment in the whole community should be evaluated for it takes a whole village to raise a child.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report on the situation of children in Northern Uganda. I am moving on a procedural matter - I can see on the Order Paper that item No. 6 is also dealing with a report into the situation of children in the Karamoja sub-region and we are aware Karamoja sub-region is also part of Northern Uganda. I propose that if the report on the situation of children in Karamoja sub-region is ready, we could probably also get it delivered and then we debate the two reports simultaneously.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I was going to ask about this Northern Uganda because it has caused a lot of problems in the past. What is Northern Uganda? I also saw there is Karamoja – when in certain circumstances we take Karamoja as part of Northern Uganda but the idea to separate – I think there is a problem and I do not know who is going to tell us what Northern Uganda is. Or, we could leave that and we just receive the report although it is going to cause problems in future.

MS LAGADA: The committee dealt with two reports that were referred to it. One report was on the situation of children in the Northern region; and the second report was on the situation of children in the Karamoja sub-region; and the second report is ready. 

I am aware that Karamoja is part of the Greater North, but there is this debate I keep hearing of, about the Karamoja sub-region; and sometimes government places Karamoja in the Eastern region and sometimes it is placed in programmes of the Northern region. I am not quite sure where Karamoja belongs, but the report is ready. 

4.18 
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I think the issue of Northern Uganda has changed with the dynamics that have taken place, especially with the new programmes. When it comes to NUSAF and PRDP, it becomes a different thing, but I think Karamoja needs special focus. If we could call it the Karamoja region or sub-region in the future –(Interjection)- they even wanted to be a region on their own at one point. I think when we keep on shifting them -(Mr Kyanjo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, let her finish. I will give you an opportunity to elaborate on that.

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, we have a problem, which is also causing conflict because of where to place Karamoja. Does it belong to the East or to the greater North which is coming up? But I propose that Karamoja be given special focus as a sub-region. 

THE SPEAKER: How about West Nile? When reading the report, did she have West Nile in mind?

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we must understand that a body has got different parts and although all of them contribute to the human being, each has got specific problems. The report about Northern Uganda, which comprises of the Acholi sub-region, has a specific problem because of this war and, therefore, if we want to do a thorough job, we better consider it separately. And because of its historical background, Karamoja, which is not related to the war in Acholi sub-region as we know, needs a different prescription. So for better perception, it would be wise to debate each differently so that we find proper recommendations as to how to handle them.

THE SPEAKER: Where will you place the Teso area?

MR KIVEJINJA: Well, I do not know about Teso, but this was mainly for the Acholi sub-region. 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, you can now see, and this is the encyclopaedia of this Parliament and the country. I think government should come out so that we authoritatively know what we are talking about. 

The Speaker has asked about West Nile and at one point Teso was completely out, yet they were also affected by the war. Are we going to use the problems in the area, or are we going to use the geographical area? I think government should tell us so that we know how to move -(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are we still on this subject? 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I intended to give information because we must be careful when in this House. This is the Order Paper; the official document of this House and the procedures of today. 

The report says: “Presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the situation of children in Karamoja sub-region.” They have already classified it as a sub-region and it is an Order Paper item that we accepted. The fear in this is that subsequently, we are going to find ourselves debating children of direct regions differently, which I think is queer. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kyanjo, this is coming up because I recall that in the debates, which were here, especially those that were brought by the Members from Karamoja, there was an outcry that sometimes they lump them in the Northern region, and sometimes they forget them, and it may cause a problem. 

On the Order Paper we separated Karamoja from Northern Uganda although sometimes we treat Karamoja as part of Northern Uganda. That is the only problem. But I think we can receive the other report and then have a debate. Hon. Minister, do you want to say something?

4.23 
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker and members of the august House. Karamoja has its own peculiarities. When we talk and try to lump it with Northern Uganda or any other place, it loses all its characteristics. So, we need to see that this area is ethnically different. It is one of the big sub regions because it is one tenth of Uganda in area size and it is backward in its own very nature. 

Recently, when we held a meeting at State House, we did present the issue of Karamoja and the motion said that Karamoja should be treated separately, which most of the members of the august House recognise. Because of those peculiarities, even when talking about these children, if we try to put all of them together, we shall lose the identity of Karamoja. 

So, I beg to say that since there is even a Minister for Karamoja, when that minister comes, he will present the matters of Karamoja and not of Northern Uganda. So, Karamoja has that real separate identity. Even here, whenever matters of Karamoja are talked about, other people just disassociate themselves and leave you alone. They call us very funny names, cattle rustlers, and associate us with all the funny words that you can associate a bad person with at times. So, I beg to say that we treat Karamoja in its own merit. Thank you very much. 

4.25 
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What we are looking at now is the capacity of the members of parliament to be able to distinguish during the debate. It is basically the issue under contention. 

The committees have already synthesised the reports and they have made recommendations. What we are going to consider is an already synthesised process and we are going to see whether those recommendations are workable or not. 

To say that we do not have the capacity to debate the different reports together would be to demean the capacity and integrity of the members of this House. I would rather suggest that we receive the reports as members of parliament and deal with them together because we are talking about children. We have the capacity as Members of Parliament, to deal with these problems all-together. 

4.26 
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I worked with NAADS for sometime during the difficult times of the introduction of NAADS in Kitgum in 2001 and 2002, and for the first time, I thought that Karamoja was much better than Northern Uganda we know as written here. 

What comes to mind when they talk about Northern Uganda is, most of the areas affected by the LRA war - Acholi, Lango and Teso -(Interjections)- yes, although it is in the Eastern region, but in the context of the war, and there are words here that you read and by perception they mean a lot when they say the roles have been altered, the cultures have been affected, and these are things that are specific to those areas that have been affected by this war of LRA. 

It is important that we give this region that we call the Northern sub region special attention. Maybe from there, we can develop the model to deal with the impact of war specific to those areas that the LRA war has affected.

THE SPEAKER: Should we use the colonial zoning of Uganda into Northern Province and Eastern? I think Karamoja was part of the Eastern Province. This is something that we should think about because I see people becoming sensitive when something good is being done for Northern Uganda. They say, “Why not us?” 

I have seen it and, therefore, it is necessary really, to agree on how, because last time we were talking about electricity and some people in Karamoja said, “When good things happen, you don’t include us in the Northern region.” I mean those are the kind of contributions we have been having here.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I made the proposal that the two reports be presented today because we are talking about the plight of children; that is the common denominator. I am not talking about regions and we have had a precedent in this House where two reports are presented by the same committee and then when debate ensues, Members are able to comment on the two separately, and we shall come up with specific recommendations.

The other fear that I have is that, really, dealing with the situation of children, we needed an urgent intervention. I noted that this report presented today on the situation of children in Northern Uganda was after a field trip conducted in January this year, and we are now considering the report at the end of October. I would not like to see a situation where the Karamoja report may run a risk of delaying. I would propose that the chairperson of the Gender, Labour and Social Services Committee presents the situation of children in Karamoja as well, and then we debate.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the consensus?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, let her present it then.

4.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. This report was also referred to us by the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Children, and the committee conducted a field visit from 20th to 24th April 2009 to Karamoja sub-region. 

We wanted to update ourselves on the current situation of children. Particular emphasis was given to Government programmes such as disarmament exercise, Universal Primary Education, food and nutrition and in particular the programme for resettling Karimojong children back in their communities.

The committee held meetings with various stakeholders, members of parliament from the region, the district leadership of Moroto and Nakapiripirit, also Busia District leadership because the children are also there; the leadership, of Iriir sub-county, representatives of Non Governmental Organisations, and the leadership of the Catholic parish in Iriir.

In addition, the committee visited resettlement camps in Lomaratoit; we visited Kobulin Youth Rehabilitation Centre; and Lorengdupe in Namalu sub-county.

General Observations

The committee observed that there is uncertainty of mandates and roles between Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and local governments, about the responsibility for resettlement of former street children and adults. Once screening and resettling is done, there is no further assistance rendered from the government. Ministry of Gender claims the district takes responsibility whereas the districts still expect the central government to continue with responsibility.

Secondly, we observed that there is general lack of facilities in the settlement camps. Most shocking was the discovery that these children are there without beddings; we found children sleeping completely on bare ground, especially in Lomaratoit in Iriir.

Government institutions meant to help in addressing the unique needs and concerns of children are in dire conditions. The Kobulin Rehabilitation Centre meant for screening and eventual resettlement of children is non functional, yet government is on record to have given Shs 76 million to rehabilitate this centre.

We also observed that the institution’s land has been encroached on.

We observed on the issue of food and nutrition that whereas non-governmental organisations like World Food Programme and Samaritan Purse have endeavoured to meet nutritional needs of children, the demands are just too overwhelming. Priority in accessing food rations is only given to already registered children and adults. The ones who are newly arrived find themselves in a problem.

For instance, families that had been resettled in Iriir sub-county were found to have been abandoned faraway from the host community without any facilities like safe water, schools or health centres. They had been given food once, over a period of four months, and we found these people living on wild leaves and roots.

Child Labour

Child labour is practiced in this region. Scores of children were seen engaging in odd and petty jobs and this has led to serious exploitation. It has kept them away from activities like education.

Karimojong Children outside Karamoja

The committee visited Busia town council and had dialogue with the leadership as well as the Karimojong children and adults. It was observed that the majority of children are engaged in cross border trade, making them vulnerable to ills and evils such as trafficking, prostitution and kidnap.

Whereas the district authorities have battled to keep them off the streets, they are constrained with resources to address the situation. The district is staffed with only one Community Development Officer to handle all matters related to street children.

Children in Conflict with the Law

A considerable number of Karimojong children have come into conflict with the law. At the Mbale Remand Home, Karimojong boys in custody confessed to having committed crimes such as petty theft, shop breaking, murder and aggravated defilement. 

Institutional weaknesses have made it difficult for the courts to dispose off cases of minors remanded because, for example, probation officers were reported to lack resources to travel from districts as faraway as Abim or Soroti to take these juveniles to court in Mbale. The juveniles, therefore, stay in remand homes. 

The committee visited Busia also and interacted with children living outside their region.

Inadequate Education Opportunities

Whereas the majority of the children treasure and express willingness and desire to go back to school, educational opportunities in the region were noted to be inadequate. There is general inadequacy of infrastructural establishments in the region. The majority of the structures are in a deplorable condition; some children study under tree shades.

While the desire for education exists, setbacks such as poverty, culture and tradition have all worked to keep Karimojong children out of school. The committee, however, noted that few boarding schools available were doing a good job of retaining children in school.

Insecurity through Cattle Raids

The committee established that young boys are sent out to keep cattle while adults engage in other domestic activities. This has exposed them to risks of encountering warriors, particularly from one group - the Jie, that have raided neighbouring areas of the region. 

The Land Question

Lorengdupe Settlement in Namalu sub-county is one of those successful stories in Nakapiripirit. However, this land belongs to Uganda Wildlife Authority. There exists a dispute between the local politicians and the resettled people in the area. The committee was happy to note that these people were farming successfully.

Disarmament

The committee was happy to note that disarmament had brought positive change to the lives of Karimojong children. There was security, although the committee received reports that some young warriors were still hiding guns and occasionally raiding villages in search of food and cattle. 

The Limited Impact of National and Regional Projects

Whereas the region has attracted attention and support from both local and international institutions, the impact of such support is not very evident. For example, the committee found at Irir sub-county offices, huge supplies of farm implements such as hoes and machetes. They also found cassava stems. All these had been lying in the stores for weeks. Meanwhile, the rains had long started, but bureaucracy had halted distribution of materials supplied under NAADS. 

In September this year, the chairperson of the committee travelled through the areas and was disappointed to note that fields that had been opened in April when the committee made the visit, had not had second ploughing by September, and yet there was a lot of rain falling.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:
    a) The ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Local Government, should ensure habitable and friendly reception centres in Karamoja;
    b) More boarding schools be built in Karamoja to ensure more school retention;
    c) Agents that handle food in Karamoja should be consistent in food distribution;
    d) In order for children to have enough food, everybody working on the NAADS programme should work tirelessly to ensure increased food production;
    e) Where people are resettled, the Local Government should ensure that facilities such as health units and schools are made available; and
    f) The ministry should work closely with district authorities to ensure that Karimojong children on the streets are returned to their respective homes. District authorities should ensure that conditions which lead to their return to the streets are dealt with.

Conclusion

The committee appreciates the USAID Linkages Programme that supported the committee to do this work and calls upon all categories of leaders from Karamoja region to work together with Government to ensure total transformation of Karamoja. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson of the committee. 

Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Theresa Little Way Primary School, which is represented by Hon. Kasule Robert Sebunya. You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.41
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the two reports. 

It is ironical that we should be reading or receiving the two speeches after the Prime Minister’s motion, which we have just debated. Perhaps, if we had received these reports before, we would have considered the motion differently. It is a very sad state of affairs for our children in this country. But I wish to consider the wider implications of the situation because the chairperson of the committee has ably presented the immediate or current implications. I wish to consider the wider implications of this situation. 

During the Second World War, Nagasaki and Hiroshima localities in Japan were bombed. This was nearly 70 or 80 years ago. Today, they are still dealing with the effects of such bombing. We need to look at the implications of the war in Northern Uganda and the immediate effects that we are discussing now. 

I am looking at the generation of children that we are looking at now. What kind of children are they going to bring up themselves? They are the next generation, and thereafter, what kind of children are their children going to bring up? It is a very big thing that we need to consider as a country. 

This generation of ours, or the mothers of these children, could be the last generation in that part of the country, who have known a stable home, culture and values. They could be the last if their children are the children that we are reading about in this report. And where will the country go if from today we have a generation without a culture, family values or anything? It scares me, Mr Speaker, to think of the children and grandchildren of these children 100 years from today.

In addition to the recommendations that have been made by the committee, I would like us to consider and to review our policy which we passed. It was last year when we were discussing the question of religion in schools. We agreed that we should leave the question of religion as optional to the child. I think, even as we were discussing that, I went away with a doubt in my mind. 

My generation, people of my age and our parents, were not really built on options and personal choices. We are a generation that was built on bylaws, requirements imposed on us by culture and by religion, and so many dos and don’ts, which the children of this generation do not have, especially those that do not have strong adult support like the children we have read about in this report. They need a substitute and that substitute may not be a complete substitute, but we could find some sense in rebuilding religious values in our education system.

This country is not a secular country, it is a religious country; it may not be a Catholic, Muslim or whatever, but it is a religious country. Hon. Members, leaving these children on the streets the way they are without bringing them back in the fold of religious instruction, might be a bigger disaster, than leaving them with a choice of not having any religion at all.

I would, therefore, like to recommend that in addition to the recommendations of this committee, there perhaps needs to be a special commission to bring to this country the wider implication of this war and what we must do as a country. Because we are looking at people who might have the next 50 years, but they are people who are going to have children and grandchildren - I am not sure that I am making myself intelligible, but I am looking at the future of Uganda; the endless future of children, who did not have adult support; who did not have religion; who did not have culture. We are looking at 200 years of such a community; it is such a big thing.

In conclusion, in this budget year, we are estimating to spend about 7.3 trillion shillings, and we are planning, if I got my statistics right, to send back to the people through the local governments about Shs 1.7 trillion. We are planning to keep about Shs 1.6 trillion in the centre, in line with our recent culture of keeping about 70 percent of the budget in the centre, and sending back to the people only 20 percent. 

As we consider what needs to be done, in response to a report like this, we need to seriously reconsider our budget priorities and our policy priorities.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lagada, on the last page of this report, the last paragraph reads, “The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work closely with the district authorities to ensure that the Karamoja children on the streets are returned to their respective homes.” I see these children on the streets of Kampala everyday, but those we see are about two years old; they have been trained to put their hands up for the whole day. If you come across such children and you are an authority, and you collect this child who is two years old, how do you take him or her to his/her home? Do you think this child of two years would know her home in Karamoja or her parents for you to be able to take this child? 

MS LAGADA: The children on the streets in Kampala, Jinja or Busia are there because they have been sent by adult Karimojong people, or their parents. What we discovered, especially when were in Busia is: it appears we are developing some bad practice like I came across in India where you have a big man who then recruits other people, who must collect money and give so much money to him by the end of the day. So, it is not just children by themselves. It is a racket, and I believe it is a criminal racket, because I think it is criminal to exploit children in the manner in which we see children being exploited.

THE SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that authorities who come across these children who are two or three years old should call the adults who brought them there; will they come? Maybe they are in hiding; do you think they will come? Because my question is, how do you take these children to their respective homes? They cannot possibly identify their homes in Karamoja.

MR BYANDALA: When they collect these children from the streets, they should first do some homework as they are in retention centres. They should use this time to look for their families so that the moment they leave the centres, they are joined with their families; they should not put them anywhere. They should be kept in the centres and then moved to join their families.

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, you would see in the recommendations that we strongly recommend that the Koblin Centre be made functional. We could be able to collect these children of Karamoja and take them there; have provisions there where even the young children are looked after like in an orphanage, sort of. It would force these parents here who are using children to make a living, or those people in that criminal network, would think twice because if a child of two, three or five years is taken back are you going to be comfortable in Kampala?

I really believe that we should get a centre and get rid of these children from the streets, because we are not being helpful by leaving them there, Sir.

MR DOMBO: Yesterday I received an e-mail from a young boy who is studying in Ghana under the sponsorship of the Kakiri SOS. I met this young man when he was still very young in a workshop and he made a remark, which I thought he would share with my family. He confessed and said, “Children who do not work when they are young will be forced to work very hard when they grow.” 

When I asked him what he meant, he said, “When you work hard now, in future you will earn as a big man; but if you do not work hard now, you will be forced to do manual labour in order to earn”. I thought this was positive information and I became friendly to the young man. I later put the mother in the SOS in Kakiri and the child has been coming to visit me when on holiday from Ghana. 

This is a street child who has been transformed and he is an extremely brilliant child. If government would find development partners to link up with so that we create appropriate homes, which can help to change the attitude - most of these children don’t have a family setting, which would inculcate family values into them. Many of them would be very helpful but we want to find out whether the Ministry of Gender would want to take up such an initiative and solicit for funding.

Secondly, most of the intervention programmes that we make either in Northern Uganda or Karamoja are ad hoc. We have never conducted a comprehensive social study to find out what the problem is; what the required appropriate interventions would be, and what the required funding is.

Somebody is talking about NAADS in Karamoja; to do what? NAADS would work in an arrangement where the government systems and peoples’ attitudes are very stable, but you cannot replicate a parallel NAADS programme the way it works in Butaleja and you think it will work in Karamoja. The other time I heard the Minister for Karamoja complaining and lamenting.

Can we, therefore, task the Prime Minister and Government that it is high time we solicited and funded a comprehensive study? So that the methods of intervention, activities and programmes that we initiate are based on research findings and not ad hoc programmes with short-term benefits. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.57
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to follow up from where you left. Hon. Dombo’s information in respect to that child is one dimensional, but there is the other dimension, which was hinted on by the chairperson, that there is a clique that is responsible for sponsoring or transporting these children from Karamoja to Kampala for purposes of collecting money. 

The chairperson suggests that we collect these children and take them back to Karamoja. What are we doing about the clique? Why don’t we find out ways of identifying this clique and dealing with them so that we switch off the tap, which brings these children to Kampala? This is because, however much you send them back to Karamoja - I was listening to the Deputy Speaker this morning in respect to this matter. She says it is not only Kampala, but it is now a national problem and she also hinted on the existence of a group of people who are making money from these children. Why doesn’t the government find out who these people are that are benefiting from this slave trade mentality? Why? 

4.58
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Parliamentary Forum for Children for initially bringing up the reports to do with the plight of children in Northern Uganda - in the LRA affected areas of Northern Uganda; and also the plight of the children in Karamoja. 

I would also like, secondly, to thank the committee for the due diligence done on the two reports.

I would like to make a few comments on the first report on children in Northern Uganda. Some of the recommendations that the committee made are really not limited to Northern Uganda, but affect the whole country. The committee dwelt at length on the dire need to reform our education policies. We have, time and again, made spirited arguments here about certain policies, which keep our children in darkness such as that of automatic promotion. The committee has pointed out that upon reaching primary six, the children meet a dead end because most schools do not accept to register them for primary seven for want of academic standards. 

I would have loved that the Ministry of Education takes serious note of all the recommendations regarding education issues. As I said, they are not limited to Northern Uganda.

I also want to state that the girl child in this country is the worst affected in terms of education, because of the embarrassment that they fear especially when they approach adolescence. There is need for government to reconsider support in order to encourage girl child education, especially in areas which are badly affected by war. 

There were comments on orphans being in big numbers, not only in Northern Uganda, but also in Teso, West Nile and Karamoja. There are a number of orphans and I think government programmes should also come out specifically to give some affirmative action to orphans and persons living with HIV and AIDS. 

Indeed as reported, the majority of the children who were abducted by the LRA were defiled and it is even reported that some teachers defile girl children. So, I think the issue of persons living with HIV and AIDS ought to get some affirmative action in government programmes.

Let me turn to the Karamoja issues. First of all, the committee chairperson was I think either dealing with hearsay or some imagination about a clique of persons who are dealing in human trafficking so to speak. I don’t know whether the committee bothered to interact with heads of families. Hon. Byandala described the process; that the children are collected from the streets and reunited with their heads of families in various towns. This is because it is not only in Kampala, but all the towns are now flooded with street children, mainly from Karamoja sub-region. It would have been in the best interests of this nation for us to dig deeper and iron out that myth; whether there are any persons dealing in human trafficking or not. 

Allow me to also comment that if we bothered to take specific statistics of the street children in the towns of Uganda and found out where they come from, I bet that about 80 percent of them come from Bokora, and the next percentage is from Pian. Hardly will you find children from Dodoth and Jie. That would be the starting point for us to find out what the driving factor is. Why is that particular region the most affected?

The process of ridding streets of children has also been a matter of concern. My understanding is that the various local councils, the KCC, they just go bundling up children. As we speak now, about two weeks ago, there was a mop-up operation here in Kampala -

THE SPEAKER: I think the circumstances make it justifiable for them to say there is somebody behind this. There must be a chief cashier who comes to collect the money from these two, three year olds, otherwise do you expect this two-year old to get the collection and go with it alone? There must be somebody hiding.

DR EPETAIT: I beg to submit on that matter. I have been in Karamoja a number of times and the majority of the people in Bokora County have abandoned their villages and are stationed in trading centres. Some even stay in classrooms and on the verandas of trading centres. The reason for abandoning villages is insecurity. These days by 5.00 p.m. the villages become insecure. 

Some ravaging warriors come around looking for anything and if they do not find cattle, as is the usual case now because most animals have relocated to other places, they end up raping women, confiscating clothes and relief food. So the villages have become extremely insecure to the extent that many people have had to run away for their dear lives.

I am still yet to be convinced that there is a clique of people who are dealing in human trafficking. I totally doubt that myth.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I hesitated to participate in this discussion because the problem is a bit more complicated than is being made out.

First, if you look at the children who are even on Kampala Road, there is no way they can find their way here without somebody enabling them to be here. 

I have participated in this with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Gender and we scheduled a meeting with some of the MPs from those areas. Unfortunately, the meeting has not yet taken place. But there is a pattern.

Earlier on, we organised to get the children and their parents from here to Kampiringisa and we got quite a few of them. We also organised their return. They are in really and we continue to send food there. 

But the participation of the local government, how these people get into buses, at the Police and so on is something that should be studied carefully and it can be handled. But it needs the cooperation of local governments. It needs the participation of Members of Parliament from areas where these children, where these people are coming from. It needs a change of attitude because there are people who will say, “Come to Kampala to also benefit from the richness of Kampala.” That is not saying it cynically, people have said it; people who should be responsible and who should be stopping this inflow. 

There are even NGOs who are part of this and if you try to touch these kids, they come up in defence of their rights. So it is a bit more complicated, but it is being addressed quietly and at the end of the day, the solution will be found.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I said, there could be several reasons but I have cited the major one being insecurity. A study should be commissioned, as the minister proposed, to dig deeper and find out the driving factors that make the street children come to the streets.

I was commenting on the mop-up operation that took place recently in Kampala where the Karimojong – whether from the street - in fact, it was rather disappointing that everybody was bundled up and taken to Kampiringisa and I support the committee on the recommendation that in case we are trying to get rid of street children, there must be a concrete network of the local governments and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The local governments from Karamoja should be involved. Let them come up.

In that operation, they ought to be available here. When the children are taken from the streets, they should be relocated to the Koblin centre and you do the screening there rather than taking them to Kampiringisa. We are getting reports that there is a lot of -(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, honourable, for yielding the Floor. In line with the operation hon. Epetait is talking about, it was indeed last weekend. I was coming from Masaka and we met three trucks, Lorries of KCC. They were ferrying these children from the streets to Kampiringisa. Yet one month ago when we visited Kampiringisa Rehabilitation Centre, the centre was overwhelmed. It had over 400 children and they were surviving on one meal a day.

Based on the budget that the Ministry of Gender offers them, they had no option apart from providing the one meal. So, there is need for collaboration between the local governments, KCC and the Ministry of Gender as they execute these operations. I thank you so much.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, hon. Milton Muwuma, for that useful information. There is a lot of suffering and I think government should take interest in finding out what is unfolding in Kampiringisa now. More lives are at risk of being lost and there was the issue of confusion between the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the district local governments.

We are all aware of what we appropriate to these local governments. I do not see where the district local governments can get the capacity to sustain those resettled persons. I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should support the ministry. I call this a disaster. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should try to support the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in seeing that those resettled persons get certain sustenance rather than just abandoning them there.

In fact, I think we would be very wasteful if we bundle up people and abandoned them there. They will have that as a strong reason for looking for ways of getting back.

I would also like to agree with the committee on the issue of setting up more boarding schools in Karamoja region. Even the current schools in Karamoja should all be made mandatory boarding schools in order to at least attract more and retain them at school.

There is a big problem of children being diverted from school in order to do domestic chores, looking after cattle and doing all sorts of things. Emphasis on education in Karamoja would be a better answer for the future because this is a generation, which if we transformed today, would help us transform Karamoja even better in the short run.

Lastly, something was mentioned about land. There is a looming, heated disagreement once again over the land dispute, the border dispute between Katakwi and Moroto districts. You remember the government commissioned a survey to determine the exact border point between the two districts. I think the survey was concluded but government has not come out openly to clearly tell the two district local governments that, “This is where the border lies and the outcome of the survey should be respected”.  

I have raised this because some of the centres where the street children are resettled in Karamoja around Iriir are reportedly part of Katakwi and the local government of Moroto is not amused. So, I urge government to help us resolve that impasse and declare the outcome of the survey so that the two local governments can respect it and live in harmony. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

5.14
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the two reports. However, I would like to register my disappointment again that by the time we debate these important issues regarding our children, the ministers concerned are not present. 

I fear to raise this issue the second time for the Minister of Karamoja because the Prime Minister had convinced me at the beginning but I think it is important that these ministers also walk an extra mile to show that they care. Otherwise, that is why there is a misinterpretation that these ministers simply want to occupy positions and be given titles. This is the business we are supposed to be transacting. Everybody has something else to do; and we debate in the corridors sometimes and say, “Don’t the Speakers have the life to go out even for a short call?” You sit here diligently and transact this business. It is unfair for these ministers to keep away all the time under the excuse of a capable Prime Minister.

I don’t want to divert – 

THE SPEAKER: Could you make your contribution on the other issue we decided?

MR KYANJO: That aside, I want to go to the report and I am referring to the second report page 3/4: Karimojong children outside Karamoja.

The reason I had apprehension even at the beginning to say “children of Northern Uganda”, or “children of Karamoja” is that these are children and when they come to Kampala, they are rightly out as the report has indicated and they are in Kampala. 

I have got a bulk of these children in Katwe II right across the railway line. These children have two Karimojong guardians. This is where we need to sit quite clearly and determine what to do. When I asked these two ladies who are taking care of the children - they were given shelter by one Mr Muhindo who said, “Do not pay any rent but keep clean.” 

They feed on rotten goat skin. So, frequently I find food from good friends and take it to them. It is not enough! But when the reports are deliberating, they are talking only about leaders in Karamoja. Sometimes you find that there are operations in Kampala and they are hauled and taken away. When they return, they have been severely beaten and I have complained every time to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. For whatever crime, why do you beat these children so severely like this? So, they return and even if we made a prompt visit right now, we would find them there seated around a sigiri waiting for a meal. If you take something, they will welcome it.

My proposal is that when we are considering these issues, let us include everybody who is affected everywhere. These are not children from Karamoja only, they are children from the first North, which we deliberated upon, then the greater North, which includes Karamoja and some are from Teso.  Strangely, others are from Rakai and some are from Butambala because they are persuaded by these young kids that the Speaker referred to as, “Getting into the culture of begging.” So, they are not exclusive. We need to pay field visits there; see the conditions and see the children who are there.

These two ladies informed me that they only became brave; they wanted to arrest them that they are the people who are responsible for bringing these kids to Kampala. But everybody had abandoned them until these two – I have the pictures – fairly older ladies took charge. By the time they went there, the female and male children were mixing together and they were doing all sorts of businesses day and night. These two volunteered and said, “Okay, we shall be able to explain to the Police every time”. And I told them that if there was an operation, please refer to me; I will come and give some assistance where possible.

My appeal is, please, do not look categorically at leaders from given regions, let us see where the children have gone and deal with them. Also, find out from the bus operators because the bus operators have also been cooperative in stopping some of these children from coming to the city without specific and genuine reasons. I have a good story to tell, which should be helpful to this committee and to this Parliament.

Regarding the centres, page 6 of the report talks about reception centres in Karamoja. But let us admit that some of the conditions in Karamoja and the first North - what I have decided to call the first North - are so difficult for these children to stay. They are like refugees. 

It is the same thing you will find in the home office in London where Ugandans do not want to come back here. When they ask them: “Is there anybody who wants to kill you?” they say, “Everybody wants to kill me,” when actually nobody wants to but it is because of the conditions. And I think it would be prudent to find a mechanism of resettling them in some of these areas as it is not prohibited. 

Why should we force them to go back to Karamoja if they cannot go anyway because there are no arrangements over there? I have been able to secure places for them to go to school and every headmaster of a primary school is willing but they have nowhere to stay. Go to Kamwokya, there is a lady who cries with children – a heap of them. Her problem is residence and food, not school. So I would propose that instead of concentrating on taking them back to Karamoja, we also consider having them settled in places where they have gone because we shall find a mechanism. 

Lastly, this is an appeal – probably I will need to make a correction or an amendment to the report on page 7(f) that instead of saying, “The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work closely with district authorities,” let us call them “relevant authorities” to ensure that Karamoja – I would pray that we delete this word “Karamoja” and say “children” because they are not specifically Karimojong children, these are children. My last appeal was that it is not late for us - 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot change “Karamoja” because this was a specific report on these children in Karamoja. So you cannot make it for people in Kisoro.

MR KYANJO: Most obliged.

MS LAGADA: I would like the honourable member to clarify something; he says we should not insist on resettling these people in Karamoja. But do you realise that the numbers we are talking about are great numbers and that we can easily encourage all children in Karamoja to evacuate to these other areas? What will we do with them? What will we do with Karamoja? There are areas in the report where we did say we found people in Karamoja who had been resettled somewhere in Nakapiripirit and there are definitely areas there where people can live and survive. What would you do with many, if all decide to come away? 

MR KYANJO: My appeal was very honest and I brought it in good faith. If there were facilities in Karamoja, I would have no problem whatsoever. What I am saying is that on top of what is supposed to be done in Karamoja, it is not a bad idea to have reasonable centres where we can look after these children in areas where they have gone when we still have to put up a campaign to stop them from coming to the city. I was making an appeal that it is not late for some of us and it is an appeal to honourable members to pick some of these children, verify with their families and adopt some of them. 

You know, it is like the story of kaveera - we come here, ban kaveera and when you go to a supermarket, Members of Parliament have heaps of them and when I reject buveeras in supermarkets, these salespeople shudder and they say, “Why don’t you want buveera?” And I say, “The bread is already in a kaveera, why do you give me another kaveera?” But many of us do not take this responsibility of saying, “No. We banned buveera and we shall not take numbers of them.” 

If we went out and said, let us commit ourselves – for each one of us can take up a child, that would be 300+ and I think it would be a great contribution to this nation –(Laughter)- I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us start with this side with the shadow minister in charge of gender.

5.25
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for these two reports. During the insurgency in Northern Uganda, children were a target and many children were affected. Many children were subjected to rape, defilement, abductions and many of them had their rights abused. There is a lot to be done to address the plight of these children. The case for Karamoja is totally different. The situation in Karamoja is totally different and appalling. Unless there is government commitment to totally address the plight of these children, the problem will remain. 

We should get very concerned about the state of children in Karamoja because it is a different case. Remember it is a region, which is under developed, poor and most marginalised – that is why children decide to go to the streets to look for a better living. 

Government should scrutinise the NGOs working with children in this region. They should register all NGOs working with children in Karamoja. I do not think we can address the problem of children from Karamoja unless we involve the children themselves in formulating strategies, plans and programmes –let us hear their voices, let us listen to them, what do they say? What problems do they face? Unless this government realises and acknowledges that there is a problem of street children to find a lasting solution for it, nothing will be addressed and our children will continue to suffer. 

Government should also continue to mobilise these children to go back to school. It should try to explore the retention strategies and how they can be retained in schools. In my constituency, I have a Good Samaritan who tried to resettle nine Karimojong children from the streets of Kampala. When we tried to interact with these children, they told us that what they want in life is education. So, if they can go back to school, I think their problem will be solved. The government should emphasise taking back these children to school and they should also emphasise vocational training for these children, especially the youth.
 
I would also like to request government to put up measures of addressing this problem. They should categorise these children into the Karimojong children and those from other regions. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.32
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for presenting these two reports. Every time we talk about Northern Uganda and the Karamoja sub-region, I am really touched because these people have suffered the wars and these people are slightly behind the rest and whenever we discuss about them, we should really put emphasis on balance so that they come to the baseline with us. 

What really bothers me is that, I know that a lot of assistance goes to the Northern region and the Karamoja sub-region but when you go on the ground as it was stated here in one of the reports, you cannot see it. I think it is high time that those involved, and those in charge, ensured that whatever comes, no matter how little, is put on the ground. If you add up the amount of money that has gone to the Northern region till today, it would be a different Northern Uganda. If you add up what has gone to Karamoja so far, it would be a different Uganda. So, let us at least be religious enough and leave what is for that region there.

Secondly, they have talked about education. Education is very essential both in Northern Uganda and in the Karamoja sub-region. I appeal to the Minister of Education that special conditions need special specifications. They talked of having few teachers and that they cannot reach the ratios needed but if there are special conditions, then the Ministry of Education needs to forget about what they do in Ankole, in Teso and other areas because these are special conditions. Give them teachers and facilities. We want our colleagues in the Northern region and the Karamoja sub-region to get on well. 

What also bothers me is that most of the kids on the streets of Kampala are from Karamoja. We have had a war in the Northern region for over 20 years but you cannot see the Acholi boys on the streets and you cannot see the Langi children on the streets. Why are they from Karamoja? I think this is something that we should dig deep into. I wouldn’t rule out the notion that people are doing business out of this because the war has raged on for 20 years but you cannot find Acholi kids on the streets. Something must be done to find out why it is the Karimojong. Are they not proud like the Acholi or is somebody misleading them? I think we need to look into this very seriously. 

I have also noted that these NGOs, which are pretending to work for these street children, are actually making money for themselves and as one of the honourable members said, we have to investigate this. When I was in Kampala City Council, we had to chase away some of these NGOs because they were making more money than looking after the kids. So, I think even these NGOs which pretend to do work for these kids must be investigated.

Let me take this opportunity to try and explain what happens when we remove these kids from the streets. Before you take those kids off the streets of Kampala, welfare staff from Kampala City Council interacts with these kids and get a lot of information from them such as where they are coming from and who their parents are. After getting this information, they interact with the relatives and local authorities there. They tell them that, “We have your kids from your districts they are here; we are trying to bring them back …” and after making arrangements between the two local authorities and the families, then they collect them and put them in the detention centres like Kampiringisa and then take them to their respective areas because you may find that some are from Karamoja, Teso, Tororo, Ankole and others. So, you have to put them in a detention centre first. That is how they are taken out of there.

Lastly, let me thank the Members of this committee because if you look at the two reports, they are the same Members who signed. I thank them that they are the only ones who could afford to sign these two reports and not the rest. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.36
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would also like to thank the committee for the report and to also inform them that through the efforts of the First Lady, vacant land was recently opened in Karamoja where people were engaged on some productive work but all along, we were discouraged by the rains. Most of the seeds did not germinate and that was part of the problem. It is not that people are lazy; people are trying their best but because of the weather conditions, they can’t do anything. 

Some Members were concerned that most of these children are from Bokora and to answer their concerns, Bokora is one of the counties, which was loyal enough to hand over their guns during the disarmament exercise and these communities have remained vulnerable to attacks from the neighbouring counties and Moroto District in particular has lost livestock to a tune of 50 percent. So, that is also part of the problem why these children have left their villages and as one Member said, the villages are also not safe for them to stay. 

The committee recommended for friendly reception centres in Karamoja, aware that Koblin is one the reception centres in Bokora County, which lacks all of the facilities to accommodate some of these children. So, whenever these children are taken there, they are just dumped there and sometimes it seems as if there are officers in the ministry who are doing business with these children. These children are taken from here and when they reach home, they are given Shs 20,000 each and they take off. Are we doing work? We need to be serious.

Government needs to come with a plan to ensure that these children once they are taken are resettled with some resettlement kits. It is not also fair to only pick children from Kampala; what about other towns? The committee chairperson has been talking of children in Busia, in Mbale, in Tororo, why only in Kampala?

The Karimojong children are also Ugandans like the rest of the children in Uganda so there is need to respect - if the exercise is to resettle these children, it has to do with all other towns not only Kampala. And to add on that, Koblin Reception Centre does not have the staff to handle these children. The centre only has one staff who is not even there; I do not know whether the committee chairperson got some staff there. She can answer that question.

Let us not waste time; it is not that these children are refusing to move from here, it is because of the push factors that are bringing these children here -(Interruption)

MR OPIO: The honourable member should give us evidence to show that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development provides Shs 20,000 once they have taken these children back to request them to come back. Can she give us some substantiation otherwise she withdraws because that is a very big - is it in order therefore?

THE SPEAKER: Would you help us to understand that Shs 20,000?

MS NAMOE: Mr Speaker, I am not a visitor in Moroto District; I am the Woman Member of Parliament there and this is the information I get directly from those children. (Applause)

I would also want to urge government that to be on the safer side, there were children and families at Lomaratoit, the committee visited this place, these people were taken there, the mothers and the children but there was no assistance. The place is fertile enough, if these people were given a tractor, they would have engaged in productive work. 

The Ministry for Disaster needs to work together with the Ministry of Gender to ensure that when these people are taken there, they are really resettled and they can also have some enjoyment of the place. Thank you so much.

5.42
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with the Parliamentary Forum on Children’s Affairs for the detailed report and analyses of the plight of the children in Northern Uganda.
 
I totally support the report considerations and I concur with some of the provisions of the recommendations. However, I would like to urge government and more specifically the Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister that we need to critically review the approaches we are putting in place as far as implementing government programmes in Northern Uganda and in Karamoja are concerned. It is not business as usual. For example, NAADS as my colleagues have said, it is not impossible to implement NAADS programmes in Karamoja region as it is in Rakai, Masaka or in Wakiso District. Let us consider irrigation mechanisms, let us aggregate all the funds in Karamoja and consider irrigation. There is no reason of open up land like how the First Lady is trying her level best and we do not have mechanisms for irrigation, at least at pilot level.

I would like to specifically request government on the issue of Northern Uganda specifically the LRA war - during the 20 years of the insurgency, how many doctors have we produced specifically for Northern Uganda, children trained and educated from Northern Uganda, who have gone through the education system to ensure that they became doctors or health professionals who are capable of going back down there? Given the education system where you must compete and go through schools like Buddo, Namagunga and the children of the well to do who qualify to go for the most professional sectors cannot go to Northern Uganda to work in health centres down there. 

Can we think of mechanisms of having special interventions to have well identified, intelligent children in sub-counties of Northern Uganda and Karamoja? Identify them at an early stage, train them in various fields like teaching, like social work, community work, doctors and health professionals, planners and surveyors so that they are able to go back and work in those areas. 

That is why you find a district like Amuru and you find one first grade in the entire district and you find in a school there are three teachers. Teachers, who will be trained in these other normal education systems, will not go back to those areas, until there is stability, the infrastructure is good and the environment is adaptable for them to be able to work there. You know the education system we are going through in this country.

I appeal to the Leader of Government Business, the responsible ministries of Education and Gender to ensure that there are special analyses of how we can bring about special programmes for those affected areas. Otherwise, if we are to go on like this, business as usual like we say, when you send funds to districts, they will trickle down to schools. When most of the schools were nowhere in Northern Uganda, children were living in camps and in trading centres; it means those are the funds which have been brought back several times. Ministries and districts have been remitting back funds to the centre because they had failed to utilise those resources, because they cannot afford to account to the normal accounting system. 

I think there is need for us to consider how we can think through to ensure that the children of Northern Uganda do not totally lose out. Even in Karamoja, special interventions are needed for them to be availed opportunities to access education so that they can be able to go back in their areas and develop those areas. It will be the most applicable mechanism. I thank you very much.

5.46
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the two reports. I am happy that the committee took special interest to study the effects of war on the children of Northern Uganda and this report applies to all the children of Northern Uganda including West Nile, including Eastern region; those who suffered from the war because they have the same problems.

The effects of war are long lasting and if we can take the children who had been abducted by the rebels and were brought back, the committee mentioned very clearly that the rehabilitation is not sufficient. It is true, it takes long to be indoctrinated to be a bad person and also it takes long to remove that mentality of bad behaviour like killing, prostitution and so on. I would like to give an example. At the peak of the war, there was a child who was rehabilitated and brought back to the family. When the mother went to fetch water, her baby started crying and the boy got so angry and killed the baby because that is what happens in the bush. When you misbehave, you are killed. The parents were also angry that they killed the child. That shows clearly that rehabilitation, which is not sufficient, is very dangerous.

And that means that we must have continuous psycho-social training for the children, the parents and even the teachers. These are the people whose mindset has been changed because of the war. I suggest that psycho-social education continues for all the communities in the war-ravaged areas and also in schools so that the children can be trained and their mindsets are changed gradually. 

Mr Speaker, for the girls who have been subjected to defilement at an early age, it is normal to engage in prostitution. It takes time to convince them that it is dangerous, and as a result, they contract HIV/AIDS, which is rampant in Northern Uganda.

I am very surprised to find that infrastructure in education is not sufficient in Northern Uganda. When we talk of rehabilitation, the first thing should be to rehabilitate the schools in Northern Uganda. But today, the children are still studying under those mango trees and in those dilapidated classrooms. What is the Ministry of Education doing? I expect that today in Kitgum, Gulu and Pader, there should be very good classrooms to attract the children to school. That means you have not done enough for Northern Uganda, and all the funds which are meant for Northern Uganda have not done the right job.

When it comes to the children with disabilities, I do not think they are receiving any education, because their education materials and the teachers who are trained in special needs are not ready to go there. As such, the children with disabilities are left out. I would like the Ministry of Education to come up with a special policy for the education of children with disabilities; the blind, the deaf, the physically handicapped and the mentally retarded. 

Currently, we have a general policy for our disadvantaged children, but this encompasses very many children and little attention is paid to children with disabilities. We demand that the policy for education for children with disabilities be put in place.

The issue of child sacrifice has spread everywhere in Northern Uganda and even in West Nile. Recently in Arua, two babies were taken and one was found dead. In Koboko, one was taken, but luckily enough, was found in a kaveera alive. Child sacrifice has become rampant and it has scared the population. I do not know what we must do. We have the law on child trafficking, but it is not helping. What is happening? Our people are scared; the children are scared. For example, they fear that when they are going to school, they will be abducted. We must do something. 

Child sacrifice has become excessive and it is very dangerous. We need to find out those witches that are doing it. They are doing their work and not being arrested. We must scrutinise all the witches to find out those who are true herbalists and those who are engaging in child sacrifice, so that they are stopped. 

I would like to talk about the Karimojong children who are found on the streets of Kampala and everywhere in other towns. These children were brought here; they cannot walk all the way from Kotido or Moroto to these towns. Some people must be behind these children’s coming here. To address this issue, we need to find out from the children, who brought them here and when they came. For sure, we shall get these people and we shall put them right. Without that, the children will continue coming. They come in a bus, but who put them on that bus? Who brought the babies and mothers who are brought to sit on the roads? There must be some people behind this.

When we are collecting the children, we must talk to the mothers and the parents so that they become responsible. Some people have really relegated their responsibility of bringing up children. They bring them to the streets so that government can take over. That cannot work. We should find out those people and those NGOs who claim to be helping children and yet our children are suffering. They have workshops in good hotels where they spend a lot of money, move in big cars, but our children are suffering from Kwashiorkor. 

Let us identify such NGOs and ask them what they are doing and their impact. They just take one sub-county and say, “We are working on children.” They produce very good reports without anything on the ground. Let us get hold of such NGOs who are encouraging children to come to the streets.

When you are scrutinising these street children, some are genuine orphans. I think government must come up with a proper programme to support these genuine orphans even if it means building boarding schools for orphans and we fundraise to bring them up. But for those who have parents, the parents must be counselled and made responsible. They should be helped to fundraise and grow food enough to take care of their children. Otherwise, if we keep on removing them, we will have a vicious cycle of bringing children in and out of the city. 

We have to work hard on these children. These children are the future of tomorrow and when those ones who have been on the streets grow up, they will claim to be adults who know things when actually they will be doing the opposite. We shall have more thieves, rebels and more killers. It is our responsibility as leaders to ensure that we have proper programmes for these children when they are relocated. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.55
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I thank the committee for a job well done. However, I will ask for their pardon if at some point I am a bit critical of the report. 

In May 2006, a team was appointed by the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children to go to the North on a fact-finding mission. Again in May 2007, another team was sent to Karamoja. Now the time that has elapsed calls for a thorough analysis of what has transpired since then, and an update needs to be given.

The report we are debating today sounds like a report of a new situation, and it hardly makes reference to the original report of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children.

I recall the committee invited me to make a submission; I also discussed a draft report, which we are discussing today. I remember clearly that I observed that the committee should have studied the report of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children (UPFC), and made a benchmark of the issues that they needed to consider. I would have loved this report to cite an issue raised by the report of the UPFC in 2006, and juxtapose it against the new findings. For instance, I remember we recommended that the data of children who were abducted by the LRA and those who have returned to the country, be established, and at that time we found out that at least 25,000 children were reported missing. To date, the number of those who have returned is quite low and so many are still unaccounted for. I expected this report to tell us what has happened to the unaccounted for children. If they were not able to find that out, they should have recommended to us what needs to be done. That is why I said I would be a little bit critical of this report. 

They went about as if they were doing a completely new study and yet they were talking of a follow up. I think in future we need to take certain things very seriously, because since 2006, three years down the road, we are still just considering and yet at that time, even the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children team was supposed to be following up on something else. You remember when you were campaigning, UPFC made you sign some manifesto; and so that manifesto was something that we were going to asses. What has changed since that time? I feel that today, we should be discussing what has changed.

I remember in the recommendations - and I have the report here - we recommended that the budget of the Amnesty Commission should be enhanced to enable them ensure that children who are returned are properly reintegrated. What has happened since then?

I remember we also recommended that a judicial system be established in the affected districts to ensure that there is a legal system that handles children’s issues. In some of the districts we visited, like Pader, there was not even a normal court, let alone the children’s court. What has changed since then? Are the probation workers doing their job? Are children’s issues being properly addressed in the courts of law?

That is the only flaw that I see in this report. They did a good job, except they did not format their report as a follow-up report.

6.02
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Uganda is described as a country with a young population, because we have more children than adults. Therefore, the report of the committee should be taken just as a case study to inform us about what is taking place in the entire country. 

The committee mentioned on page 7 of the first report that compulsory promotion in schools is reducing the quality of education. But we have always talked about the automatic promotion they are giving to the children all over the UPE schools in the country. We should take this as an eye opener to the rest. 

I believe that with Northern Uganda and Karamoja, the children can be encouraged to go to school by probably reconsidering the issue of feeding the children at school. That is one area that we could revisit and see what can be done.

The committee also mentioned that in Gulu, they found the formerly abducted children being mixed with the rest. I do not see a big problem with that. If these children are first prepared before being integrated in the other schools, then there is no problem. I do not want these children to be treated differently. That has been a very challenging area with some children being taken aside and others keep calling them “Kony”. But if you integrate them with others after preparing them, so that they behave in a reasonably normal way like other children, then it is fine. 

I do not believe in the orphanages where we keep children. I have worked with such children and I know it affects them negatively. I believe in putting these children in families. I do not also believe in putting them in different schools. I want the schools, although made for them, to have other children too so that they grow together.

The Minister for Gender should help us in the area of neglecting children. In other areas like Northern Uganda, we have cultural norms and these cultural institutions fall under your ministry. They have structures which you can use. Some of these things can be locally handled.

On page 12, the report talks of child protection committees. These are in place; the LC Is and LC IIs at parish level have these committees. We just have to enhance them. The Ministry of Gender together with the Ministry of Local Government should not create other structures when these are already in place.

I have never believed that relief can sort out problems. We must make our people productive. This brings me to the programmes being introduced by the government. Taking an example of Karamoja, the people were not ready when we gave them NAADS. We were shocked to get a sub-county chief who had misappropriated Shs 82 million from a sub-county in Karamoja. She had no reason and could not even tell where the money had gone. It was obvious that the money had gone and that is just one case. Most of these funds that we are sending when we have not done enough research, are going to dry up and this is where we are lacking. I insist that Uganda’s problem is no longer finances, but management and organising the programmes that we need to give to our people.

I want to state my worry. The children in Karamoja, Northern Uganda, West Nile and maybe Teso region, are very many and unfortunately for this country now, technology has escalated. The chairperson told you that they do not go to school but to video halls. What they see there encourages them to leave the villages to go to urban areas and also seek to have better lives like the ones they have seen in the videos. The transport system has improved - the costs can be high but they are not too high - and so the children can afford to travel. If we do not handle these children well and prepare them for the future, this will be a time bomb for this country. They will come to the urban areas, fail to cope with the situation and become a big problem for this country in future. 

If you do not prepare somebody by giving them skills now - I know some of them have lost out in formal education, but still they can be prepared by just giving them skills so that they are productive and can become independent. But if we insist on keeping them as another team of children and not integrating them by giving them skills and educating those who are able, I am telling you, they will move. If it means HIV/AIDS, they are the ones going to spread it. You cannot fight the disease on one side and leave another. They will come and spread it to the rest.

The case of Northern Uganda and Karamoja is one that will be regrettable in future if we do not handle it today. It is worse than what we are seeing today. What we are seeing could just be a symptom of something worse to come in future if we do not give these children education and skills so that they are able to become good citizens.

Finally, I am glad the Minister of Gender is here. It has been said now and again that we need homes for the children in different areas. But what is happening is that these children are mixed up with adult offenders and they become hardcore criminals. Every district or at least region needs a remand home for us to manage and cope with what is coming up. This conflict has even made the children criminals at a very early age, but you cannot mix them with adults.

I was shocked that when the formerly abducted children came back, even if they were ten years old, they were given amnesty cards. How do you give them amnesty cards while the commanders are also getting the same cards and you handle them the same way? I think even if these children fall under amnesty, because they have been victims of circumstances, they should not be given the same cards as those we are giving those commanders who abducted them and took them to the bush. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, curtail your contributions.

6.11
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the two reports on Northern Uganda and Karamoja. As a country, we are signatories to the UN Convention on Children’s Rights and the African Charter. I am also aware that it is these two instruments that should actually be informing us and government on how to handle children’s rights in this country. Our commitment to handling children’s rights can only be judged by how we adhere and comply with these two instruments.

Of course, I am a bit surprised that the committee has properly observed that the failings are within government. If you look at what the committee says from pages five to 11, it is citing government as having failed to cope with what it is expected to do with the two instruments. Providing education for the disadvantaged children in the North; feeding these children; and addressing the problem of the poor educational standards; are all obligations and the responsibility of government. I think government has the ultimate responsibility to protect, promote and respect the rights of these children.

As much as their rights continue to be abused, as the committee has observed on pages five to 11, I am yet to hear from the committee how we should deal with individuals and especially government and the relevant desk officers who are responsible or should be held accountable. I have not heard of people being prosecuted because they have neglected or abused children’s rights. What the committee has presented is tantamount to abuse of children’s rights.

Specifically, on education in the Northern region, I am wondering what government is doing to ensure that the region does not continue to lag behind. Has it considered affirmative action in one way or another as some Members have proposed? We are aware of the poor performance standards, especially education standards. Pass rates are so poor that even if these children were to access higher education - they cannot continue to access higher education as observed by hon. Mathius Nsubuga. We are not going to see doctors, engineers, social workers and other professionals who can go back to work in that region because there is no deliberate effort by government to prepare for that kind of arrangement now.

The affirmative action is an issue the committee should have identified because why is it that up to now, the government has not excluded these children from these prohibitive fees that are being demanded by higher institutions of learning? A course in engineering, or law and name all those courses, cost Shs 2.5 million per semester. This is unimaginable by parents from the Northern region. It is not an issue that we should leave to the donor community. The government must come out with a serious commitment on how to further the education of the children in that region.

The committee should have observed what commitment government has put in place in terms of resources because there is always an excuse of pleading availability or lack of availability of resources. Yet we know that is not the real problem – the problem is because of our prioritisation. We tend to prioritise other issues that will not directly affect the child, while issues of child health, sanitation and education are neglected. 

We have left our children at the hands and mercy of the donor community and we are continuing to pay just lip service as a government. That is unfortunate! We must do more than that. The committee should have come out very strongly on that.

On the recommendations - 

THE SPEAKER: But as I said, you have to reduce your contribution. From now, you will be allocated not more than five minutes.

MR EKEMU: Just this last one. I was not also satisfied with the general manner in which the committee made recommendations. We expect the recommendations to be actionable. For instance, when you talk about building more boarding schools in Karamoja, what is more? What are you talking about? The children we are talking about are actually known in terms of numbers and we should be budgeting for a specific number of children and knowing the resources we must have there. When you talk of more boarding schools, it means you are not actually committed. You do not know how much resources you are going to put there and, therefore, nothing is going to be implemented in that regard.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the recommendation of more boarding schools was to facilitate retention of these people rather than a day school, which may not. But if it is a boarding school, I think you are sure they will be there. The purpose was that the other details come afterwards.

MR EKEMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The recommendations seem to be glossing over the problem. They should address numbers because we are dealing with numbers of children; we are dealing with a real situation and the money will come from those numbers. We cannot plan with those general recommendations and implement them. Thank you.

6.20
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for giving me five minutes whereas others took ten minutes; but I will try to make it in that time.

THE SPEAKER: No, we had to adjust because of the demands.

MRS OGWAL: I appreciate, Mr Speaker. I appreciate what the committee has done and in particular separating the two reports so that we focus on the plight of the children in Karamoja differently from the plight of the children in Northern Uganda. 

My first concern with the report on Karamoja is that we have not dealt with the root cause. What is the root cause that is creating influx of these children into the city? It is very important that we get the committee to dig deeper so that we understand. How do these children get into the buses and taxis to town? Who pays for their fares? Who receives them in town? Who distributes them to strategic points where they beg from? We would be running in a circle if we do not get a grip of the actual root cause of this Karimojong problem.

We, who live as neighbours to the Karimojong, know certain cultures. Karamoja had never been a beggar in the past. Never! They have always been very independent and very proud people. How come that today, in a modern Uganda, Karimojong have become beggars in town and moreover children? There is something, which is very serious and deep-rooted that must be unearthed. That is my concern.

I am more concerned about the report on Karamoja on page 2, where the committee said there is uncertainty of mandates and roles between the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Local Government. Parliament should address this seriously by sending groups of people to go and find out the problem of these children. There is no specific ministry taking authority and responsibility. Something is wrong somewhere and that is what Parliament should be focussing on. It is not about talking about the problem of these children; we already know they are there. But somebody should be held accountable for this. There is no government ministry that is taking direct responsibility.

What is missing again are the statistics? We want these children to be assisted, but what are their numbers? Numbers are lacking. We want the ministries to take some responsibility. We want some planning to be done for them, but we do not have the numbers.

You remember - I do not know whether this has happened in other parts of the country, but we know it has happened in Lango - if you want to go for a short call, you do not ask for “the toilet”. Instead you ask, “Where is your by-law?” In other words, when the British came here, they thought we were primitive by not using toilet facilities. But for us we did it and there was nothing wrong with it. They forced us to change our behaviour to use toilets and, therefore, a by-law had to be passed, and that is why today, we still call it by-law. I believe that there is a way we can change the social behaviour of the Karimojong. Allow me to end there as far as the Karimojong are concerned. 

But let me just take one minute to look at the plight of the children of Northern Uganda. I thank God that the chairperson comes from Lango where I also come from, but she could have helped Parliament by giving us specific categories of the children we are dealing with. There are different categories of the children we are dealing with here and we need to know them so that we can plan for them. 

First of all, there are children who lost their parents during the Lord’s Resistance Army rebel problem. Some of them are heads of families - how many of these categories of children are there in each district and in each sub-county? Can we be told? And then, there are other groups of children who were abducted and made to get engaged in the Lord’s Resistance Army rebel activities - these are not normal children -­(Member timed out_)
 
THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not have the control. Sorry.

MRS OGWAL: Do you want me to continue? 

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much. I thank the committee for these two reports. Let me make a few comments and maybe some suggestions to my colleagues. It is very unfortunate that children and women are normally victims of circumstances. They are very vulnerable when there is a war situation, poverty and where there are scarce resources. In Northern Uganda, for example, the children and the women were actually used as a tool in the conflict because the children were particularly very easy to indoctrinate. I have interacted with the children who came back from the LRA war and they tell you a lot of stories, and some of them enjoy some actions which are inhuman because they got used to them and they became part of their practices. It is very bad because this has caused a lot of trauma that is still going on. 

There was a boy who was abducted at the age of three and when he came back, he went through the Amnesty Commission and was sent to Adjumani. He did not know where he was abducted from; he did not know his parents and so a Good Samaritan had to take care of him. When they went to dig in the garden with the children of this person who was taking care of him, they picked a small quarrel in the garden and he took the hoe to cut his friend on the head – that kind of trauma is still going on. I remember when we received the UNLF II people in Yumbe, some of the children who came out of the bush were even fearing to be noticed and were wearing masks. Those masks I think are still in their hearts and minds. 

As leaders of this country, we still have a lot of work to do in order to properly rehabilitate these people. In order to re-integrate them properly; what has been done is not yet enough. But most importantly, as leaders and political actors, we should desist from inciting conflicts and wars. I mean, teaching our children or our groups words that continue to bring conflicts because those who have gone through these conflicts have really suffered a lot. 

I thank the leaders of Karamoja and other people for working together with government on disarmament because arms are a very big problem. I also thank government for having extended the control of these issues by working together with our neighbours - Sudan, Kenya, and Somalia - so that we can reduce these small arms from infiltrating the region. This disarmament should be done everywhere because I believe that in Northern Uganda and West Nile, there are people who still have some arms, because once in a while, these keep coming out. I also thank the efforts of the security people and our development partners for de-mining – removing the mines, unexploded arms and grenades. Mostly, it is the children who suffer because when they see these things, they do not know what they are and they play with them. You have heard of stories where children are blown up by these grenades. 

Most importantly, in our region of Northern Uganda, I appeal to my colleagues here and I know that they also agree with me that we have a problem ourselves and particularly the women. When we have bumper harvests, we waste this food by cooking too much food – and the Simsim - you know how we grind it and cook plenty of it and waste it and within a few months, the food is over. And when there is hunger, what happens? So the same thing happens in Karamoja - our parents need to know how to at least contain what they have and use it carefully so that it takes a longer time. 

The issue of substance abuse is a very big area. My colleague, the Minister for Gender and Children needs to address this. I have spoken to youth – children in my constituency and some of them do not care – they do not even listen to their parents or older people because they say, “After all, I know how I got this and I did not even write application for you to become my parent. So leave me and let me do what I can do.” They move with these sachets in their pockets and they call them “magazines” and so forth. Substance abuse is a big problem and particularly with these children who have lived in the camps. Even as they go home, some of them go with these things to the schools. I would like to concur with the committee on the recommendations to reinstate school feeding in these regions where we still have a problem. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We are concluding these contributions. Please, bear with me.

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITIES (Mr Sulaiman Madada): I thank the committee for the report that they have produced. 

My first comment is about the methodology. On page 1 on each of these reports it shoes that the committee met a number of stakeholders. I think it would have been prudent for the committee to have met the ministry responsible so that we are able to establish the missing gaps in the existing programmes so that Parliament can now address those missing gaps. When I looked at the stakeholders that were met, I saw that the ministries responsible for the issues that were being raised were not met. I think here, we are likely not to have specific focused recommendations based on the existing programmes that we need to give out. 

I am aware, for example, about a programme on peace, recovery and development for Northern Uganda. That programme is comprehensive and looks at Northern Uganda as three sub-regions: West Nile, Central North and North East. This programme has a lot that could be mentioned here. Perhaps if they had studied this programme and realised the gaps in that programme, then it would have been important for us as government and ministries implementing to be able to see what is missing in these programmes. 

We have programmes for the landmine victims under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for Northern Uganda. They may not be very perfect but if Parliament has not looked through them to see what is missing, then we have a problem. There is a programme in education called ABEK, which is about alternative basic education for Karamoja. These programmes do exist but what is missing, which maybe Parliament would have assisted us to see, is the evaluation of those programmes. We would have seen exactly what is missing and then the research would have been complete by looking to the stakeholders and having the missing gaps plugged. 

As for now, if the ministries responsible were not consulted and the report is here to be discussed, we have a bit of a problem. I just wanted to say that there are a number of programmes existing and they may be having gaps, which we needed to look at as people who are looking at facts, and then we would look at the gaps so that Parliament is able to answer. Thank you very much.

6.36 
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much for considering me because it looked like time is against us. I would like to say that I support these motions concerning the plight of the children of this country. Before I comment a lot, I would like to inform the members that the hon. Minister of State for Karamoja is in Karamoja working very hard and that is why she is not here. 

The scattering of the children, especially from Karamoja, is due mainly to two reasons: One is security within and without Karamoja; it can be paraphrased. Two is food insecurity. At times you cultivate very much and the rain disappears and when there is no food, you look for where to go, which is where your parents are. Where the parents are, we have discovered, is outside Karamoja but within Uganda.

This puzzle started around the 1979 wars. You find us, the children of Karamoja, in Busia, Mbale, Jinja and Kampala. Where were the people on the streets? They were in Jinja but are in Kampala now. Why have they disappeared from Jinja? In 2000 I was invited, when I was the Minister of State for Karamoja, by the then Town Clerk of Jinja, Naluwero. He told me there was a menace caused by these children and he asked, “What should we do?” I would like to graciously thank the people of Jinja, the Basoga, because they decided to set aside one school called Masese School for all the children of Karamoja. They requested me to do only one thing, to look for food. I came to the World Food Programme and they decided to give food to Masese and as I speak now, there are 500 children studying in that school. Because the food is there, the neighbours also said, “What about us; we are going very far, why don’t you accept us?” We decided to say – I am the patron of that school – “You are also accepted.” Because of the availability of food, the neighbours have also come and the school enrolment is 1,600 children now. 

In Kampala, I tried to think about the same but I could not get a school. I would like to at least thank hon. Kyanjo, even if he is on the other side. You know, for us in the Movement, we are very positive where you make positive contributions. We thank you for saying, “Where do we place these children because they are now with us?” They have come home, to the centre of Uganda – Kampala. Where else did you want them to go - to Nairobi or to Dar-es-Salaam? They are supposed to come here. Now that they are here, what do we do with these children? It is a problem. 

What I really think is that these are our children and we should get centres, which will be turned into boarding schools. Whether you keep them in Kampala or take them to Karamoja, we should provide for them very well. These children are brilliant; those who are in Jinja are passing in grade one although unfortunately, I did not know where to take them after Primary seven. 

I was going to Dokolo last week to see a school of destitute children but when they called me as a patron, I asked them whether they had invited and notified hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Felix Okot Ogong and they said they had not. So I said, “If you have not called these veterans, they may misunderstand me.” So, we have now decided to postpone this because it is easier to handle people if you have a human heart. We can just get these people and put them somewhere. 

I know the parents could be here. They are not really alone; there could be some people with them. Some of them have developed bad habits by asking these children to go and beg and they also get some money. I was told one child sent Shs 600,000 home to some parent and the parent was very happy. We want to remove these children and put them somewhere and make them study so that when they grow, and they go back home. They just need to be assisted. 

We are here so we must plan on how to assist these children. They will be a menace in this country and we shall not be complete and dignified if there are some of our children begging on the streets. In Karamoja, we have got what we call a hardship allowance for teachers; here, government has done a good job. Teachers will go there if there is some money above the normal salaries of the rest of the teachers of the country. 

His Excellency has written to the Minister of Education asking the ministry to quantify the numbers in form of a budget - how much will be involved in feeding specific boarding schools in Karamoja. If the budget comes here as drawn by the Ministry of Education, let us all support it. So, I think these children should be assisted and I am very happy we have discussed this. This should go to Northern Uganda as well so that the dignity of this country can only be achieved if everybody looks well. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In view of the fact that the honourable minister is in Karamoja, as hon. Lokeris has said, and the report has come to you, maybe you look at it so that we only get contributions. 

6.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you. I wanted to respond to a few things that have been raised. On the issue raised by hon. Madada that the committee actually discussed some of the things that they found during their field trip, during the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper for 2009/2010 and the policy statement of the social development sector, this was raised. So, it is not that the committee ignored the other ministry and before today, we submitted copies of these reports to the minister so that when he comes here, he is able to respond.

Secondly, when the committee came back from the field trip, we also interacted with the Ministry of Education to get some answers to some of the things that we found in the field. Mr Speaker, I want to say that the committee is aware of the programmes that government has in place – the PRDP programmes - but you will note that in the paper, we said that what is in place is inadequate. For example, the issue of psycho-socio support, which is there under PRDP, is being handled by a few NGOs and we are saying that it insufficient. This report has been made so that the relevant ministries can take action. It was not possible for this committee to be able to state the number of children who were abducted and those that have come back, and I believe that information is with government as they design programmes to address what the committee has raised.

I want to say something about the mix-up in the teaching of the children. The committee is not recommending that these children be isolated. The issue is that some of the children who were abducted are already over age for the classes and when you teach these children together with the other children who have been at home without using special methods - the catch-up methods for these affected people to rejoin at their level - then the way it is being handled disadvantages both those children who have returned and the ones who are younger because you will have a mix-up. It is really a difficult classroom situation for any teacher and the teachers do not have the methods. 

Whereas it is true that there should be child protection committees in these places, what the committee noted is that the child protection committees are only active in places where NGOs support them, like in Kitgum. In places like Oyam I am sure there are LC Is who are supposed to be responsible for children but the committees are definitely not there. So what we recommend is that these committees should be activated throughout the districts because we found that they are useful in the protection of children. 

What resources have gone to those areas? Mr Speaker, resources have continued to go to Northern Uganda normally like any other district of Uganda under the normal programmes. Our problem is that the problems are so great that you cannot handle them in that way. I suppose that is why there is PRDP for those areas but still, if government does not come up - as Members have said – to focus on this particular plight of the children –(Interjections)- resources have gone under NUSAF but when districts sit down to do their things, they do not remember that there are children. They look at adults and they forget that there are many child-headed families and they ignore them like they do not exist. We interacted with these people and we asked them what their programmes for these children are and they were not aware. What lobbying skills do children have to be selected under NUSAF or under NAADS? So, we are saying that special provisions should be made for these children.

Mr Speaker, in regard to the format of the reports, the honourable member is disappointed that we did not take his recommendation to format the report against the line of UPFC but the committee really sat and considered and said that the report was made so many years ago when the war was going on. The situation is now different and we chose to present our report as we did. I beg your pardon, honourable member, for that. 

Lastly, the committee thinks that it is important to relocate the children back to their communities. Why? When we interacted with the children in Busia, we heard some of them crying and they wanted to come with us. They actually grabbed our dresses. These are children who are being made to collect bean seeds and maize seeds in the market places. When they have laboured for this long, the bean seeds and maize are then sold across to Kenya. Some of these children were with their parents but the parents were not interested in going back but the children want to go to wherever they can study. They cannot study in Busia because the schools there ask the parents to pay certain monies and the parents insist that they do not have the money. So, what do we do with the children who want to study and the parents who do not want to pay the fees in those other districts?

Rehabilitation centres in Karamoja; make Koblin a model centre and take children there. It is a big centre by the way but I think it must have been last rehabilitated in the 70s. It is completely inhabitable as it is. So, put there places where Karimojong children can be supported and be given skills, where they can be trained and grow up like normal Ugandans, instead of being on the streets. Somebody said that I must have heard rumours to say that people are mobilising these children and I am glad an honourable member asked a question that how do they come back all the way from Karamoja to Kampala? How can they be collected today and then two weeks later, they are back? Hon. Members, you will recall the CHOGM time. During CHOGM there were absolutely no children on the streets. How did they all come back again from wherever they were taken? Shall we have another CHOGM to clear the streets? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the issue that he raised about not considering the report doesn’t matter because the ministries concerned take these documents differently. They study them and use them to find solutions. So it is not true that when we have this report, the other is discarded. The two documents will have to be looked at by the ministry concerned.

6.51
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for doing such a good job. I would like to accept that as a ministry responsible for Gender, Labour and Social Affairs, we are going to take these reports, study them and even interact with the chairperson and members of the committee on how to implement some of the recommendations. I would like to make one or two comments.

The preliminary report that we have about the study of street children shows that over 90 percent of these children come from one district, Moroto, and from only three sub-counties. We are not just saying that all these are Karimojong children; yes they are all Karimojong, but they come from specific districts and from actually three sub-counties.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the point which she made and which you have to consider as government is that those people in those areas volunteered and helped you in disarmament, and having done that, they were left defenceless and as a result they feel insecure. They accused you as a government that after using them in the disarmament, you did not go to protect them. I think that is what she was saying.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is why we are also going to study it more. Did we only disarm people from one district and three sub-counties? We need to do some more study on that one because disarmament is for the whole of Karamoja.

If it comes to famine, are we only saying that one district and three sub-counties have famine? We need to do more and we need to work with the leadership in Karamoja. We also need to change the attitude because if someone says Kampala is for everybody, so our children can go on the street, it becomes very difficult. We get very many hostile telephone calls saying, “You people in Gender, you think Kampala is yours, why are you harassing our people who are also in Kampala enjoying the streets of Kampala and the life in Kampala?”

We all need to sit and come up with a solution. I would like to say that it is not possible that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development or government as such, takes these children back to Karamoja and then gives them money and says, “Come back to Kampala”. I do not think any government worth its name can have such a programme. How do you account for it, that you take these children, pay them money and then they come back? I think we shall study and find out who are responsible for the children coming to Kampala. If some of the leaders are involved, we are going to expose them and discuss with them —(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for allowing me to seek this clarification. We have a government in this country; for 23 years, one government. These children have been coming to Kampala here for a very long time. Is there anything being done by government to find the cause of these children being on the streets? Is there anything being done or we just come to lament what both government, MPs and everybody - is there anything being done? How can a national government keep on saying the same thing, “We are going to find out?” When are you going to find out? Why are these children here?

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a responsible government. We would like to say that some of these people asking government were once in government. We would like to make them know that we are having problems because some of these problems have been there for a very long time, and some of us who are talking have contributed towards them. We are going to work with these people to make sure that we handle this problem accordingly.

The question of remand homes; we have already opened one in Gulu; we are planning to open one in West Nile, and the other in Lira. When I went to Gulu the first time, I found that the children and the other grown-up people are in one, but we have worked hard. Last month, I went and opened up the remand home in Gulu and we are going to open one in West Nile and the other in Lira.

The other aspect of education; I will talk to the Minister of Education and Sports, but definitely, there are problems in the Ministry of Education and Sports, which are geared towards alleviation of the problems of the children. I would like to ask the leadership, especially those who talk with the —(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has always had budgetary problems, and all these things are now falling on the desk of the ministry. The minister responsible for that ministry is now telling us that he is in a position to handle this matter. Can he assure us that actually, in terms of budgetary provisions, you are in a position to do all that, or you are just giving us sedatives so that we just forget about it hoping that you are doing something? Can you assure me on that please? 

MR OPIO: Thank you very much. I would like to assure you that I am not carrying any tablets for that effect, but what I am saying is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has had problems with regard to funds, but there is a change. For instance, the previous financial year, the Ministry of Gender had only Shs 21 billion. This financial year we have had Shs 37 billion from government and Cabinet is going make sure that we have that increments, but we must also consider other programmes of government.

What I have seen and what we have done is that there has been an increment from Shs 21 billion to Shs 37 billion and we are going to work hard in Cabinet to articulate our needs and come up with more budgetary allocations. A jump from Shs 21 billion to Shs 37 billion should be appreciated by government.

As I was saying, we shall interact with the Minister of Education, but what I know is that the Ministry of Education has programmes. For instance, in Karamoja alone, the Government of Ireland working with the Government of Uganda has put in place Shs 24 billion, which is to construct boarding schools for Karamoja apart from the budgetary allocation.

In the North, there is a programme for making sure that all primary school teachers there will be housed. They started with West Nile - and this is the Government of Netherlands and the Government of Belgium - so that we make sure that the teachers are in schools. 

One of the reasons why we have poor standards is that of absenteeism of teachers. The teachers tell you, “We cannot be walking long distances to go to school”, especially those in areas where we have had civil war. We told them to move out of the IDP camps and that is where we had developed some of the education facilities, but when they go to where we have got schools, they find that there are no houses. They have to strive to put up grass-thatched houses. It is a very difficult situation. 

So it is very important that we leaders, when we are discussing plans at the district level and we are told that by that time, all of us Members of Parliament and council members have to prioritise what is under PRDP, we must go and say, “For Gulu or for Lira, in the PRDP for this financial year, these are our priorities”, and these are the priorities which the Prime Minister’s office receives and they became part of government. We should, therefore, take our good ideas to the district as well so that we do not get very poor plans, which come from the district. You will find them. I am sure you have been receiving copies this week of what your districts have sent to the Prime Minister’s office, and what the Prime Minister is going to implement. Are those the priorities you want? If they are not, what happened? Did you attend the council meetings? If you did not, let us try to do it next time.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Members for the contributions.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, chairperson of the committee and honourable members, for the contributions you have made on these two reports. I think they will help the ministry concerned and the government to improve the situation of our children in Northern Uganda, Karamoja and elsewhere. Thank you very much.

The question is that we adopt the committee’s reports on Northern Uganda and the report on Karamoja children, subject of course to the comments, which we have made. I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Reports adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m.; be prompt if you can. 

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 29 October 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
