Wednesday, 26 October 2005

Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for turning up for business. I would like to appeal to you to communicate the same appeal to other members to come so that we can finish this important business on the four Bills that are relevant to the transition and the elections next year. A number of you have been sent to Canada for capacity building and I am glad to say that the Rt hon. Milcan, the Speaker of the House of Commons, has communicated to me that he intends to visit us on 9 January 2006. I hope you will be around to welcome him.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister here? Well, that is the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill; we can skip it.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

10.48
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also start off by thanking the committee for the precise and concise report. You have read the report of the committee and the Bill and I have also noted their observations. I have also listened to my colleagues’ comments about some of the observations namely; the verification and description of the equivalent of A’ Level education. I thought I should add a comment as an education planner. 

It seems colleagues have misgivings about people with equivalent to A’ Level education and I thought it is from the misunderstanding of the “equivalent”. We should note that it is possible for a person to study up to nursery and get out of the system and then come back under different arrangements like complementary opportunities for primary education, adult literacy and all that. Others after primary seven go to other institutions, like training schools and they proceed with other training schools. Then others join training institutions after senior four. All these get qualifications, which are not necessarily called A’ Level. Colleagues may be looking at qualifications, which reflect a straight academic career from pre-primary through to university. For sure these qualifications need to be evaluated and equated to A’ Level.

It is also true that some people study outside Uganda and the systems are quite different from the ones we have in Uganda. The issue of equivalent should still stand like the people who were in the Constituent Assembly, who came up with that idea had suggested. The only problem is that there are so many accrediting bodies in other countries. You might find in one country there are about 1,000 examination bodies. So, it is necessary for someone to verify the course content and the question is who should do it best? Is it UNEB or is it the Higher Education Council? 

For verification of the examining body, may be the Higher Education Council can do it very well, but when it comes to verifying the course content, in case it is not after A’ Level then I think UNEB will be in a better position to equate the course content of that certificate. 

I would like also to comment about the recall of MPs -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But do you not think you need to be categorical on this? Who should do it if not UNEB? You cannot leave it hanging. What is your position?

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw a grey area between what is supposed to be done. Is it verification of the certificate or authenticity of it? Or is it the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you say equivalent you are saying when you combine five certificates of attendance, you credit them and see what is there and say, “This is equivalent to O’ Level or A’ Level.” The A’ Level we are talking about is a preserve of UNEB because UNEB, which sets exams, knows the curriculum. I am not proposing to you that you say UNEB, but I am just giving you what has to be done.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a matter of fact –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, unfortunately this is a constitutional affair, which we overlooked when we amended the Constitution. There cannot be an equivalent to the high school certificate unless somebody spends two years in university preparing for a higher academic course. What used to be called intermediate level at Makerere is the equivalent of the high school certificate. But saying that when you study after a school certificate, you have acquired an equivalent to HSC is unreasonable. Who should verify this? We have a list of institutions and every administrative structure like UNEB should have that so that they know when somebody goes to such and such a place, there is a kind of education he acquires. When they come back here, their qualifications should be very easy to compare and verify. 

Next time we deal with the Constitution, we should just remove this because it is irrelevant. Some people used to come from J3 - I remember a Karimojong, Lobune, was a very constructive member of this Parliament and he had stopped in what they used to call J3. He was a teacher, very constructive and we used to come here to listen to him. The education requirement has reached a stage when it is irrelevant. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, what you have said is true. There is a person we know in Uganda who did a course while in prison somewhere outside Uganda and he was given a certificate. When he came back, his certificate – was it a diploma – was equated to primary seven. So someone should be responsible for the verification of the content. 

However, in Uganda we only have one examining body. In a country like Britain, they have about 1,000 examining bodies and their certification is recognized worldwide, whereas we have only one in Uganda. We tend to think that it is only UNEB that can handle examinations whereas it is possible to have more than one examination body. The National Council for Higher Education should do it, but in consultation with the examining body.

THE SPEAKER: What difference does it make? Is it not one body also?  

MR MUGAMBE: I beg your pardon!

THE SPEAKER: Is it a question of numbers that this thing should be hiked? If it is numbers, we have one examining body and we have one body called the National Council for Higher Education. What difference does it make? 

MR MUGAMBE: I am saying there is one examining body at that level, but there are other examining bodies like the university. Makerere University examines –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We are not dealing with the university; we are dealing with the equivalent to A’ Level.  

MR MUGAMBE: Mr Speaker, there are people who do courses at the university, which can be equated to A’ Level also. They do short courses for three months, like in project management, but someone can say this is equivalent to A’ Level. Someone should be able to compare the course content.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

MR MUGAMBE: I think the National Council for Higher Education should be in position to consult those examining bodies.

On the issue of the recall of Members of Parliament, much as it is said that under the multi-party system it is the function of the party internal arrangements, we are aware that there are independent candidates. Who should recall these people who are standing independently? The issue of the recall being left to the parties is still a question and I need to be assisted on how we should handle a person who has stood independently.

Another issue, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When a Member of Parliament is elected in a given constituency, even though sponsored by the party, is he a Member of Parliament for his party? He is a Member of Parliament for a constituency and therefore when you give a recall to his party, it seems as if it is the party which chose him to go and represent the constituency in Parliament. The recall is so because a Member of Parliament has not served his constituency, not only members of his party. If the recall is to be hinged on a party, it poses a problem there.  

MR MUGAMBE: But this is what section 7(2) says; “The right to recall a Member of Parliament only applies when the Movement political system is in force.” Then again the committee makes a comment that they noted that recalling of a member –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you not think hon. Aggrey Awori, a member of UPC is representing even those who are not UPC members in his constituency? So, don’t they have a right to ask him to account for what he has done?

MR MUGAMBE: That is still a problem although he has persistently been on the opposition side at least and he wants to represent the opposition.

Mr Speaker, the report is not clear about the conditions under which one should stand as an independent candidate. For example, if I participated in primaries of a certain party, am I free to stand as an independent candidate after I have lost in the primaries of that party? And if that is so, will that be good for our young democracy since whoever might lose will go and stand independently? I thought the committee should come up with concrete advice on what we should do. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. I just want to give Malawi as an example. Right now they have got a crisis whereby the President who was elected on a party ticket disowned the party when he got into power and took on the opposition to support him. Now they are in the courts of law. Does the party have the right to impeach him? The man says, “I was elected to this office by everybody, including those in the opposition who may not have declared their political status. So, you as a party cannot remove me from office although you are the body that collectively promoted me, campaigned for me and voted me into office. But now that I am there, you cannot remove me.”

MR MUGAMBE: That is extra information he has given.  Before I wind up, Mr Speaker, there is the issue of the campaign period. It has been defined under part I of the Bill as the period determined by the commission under section 23, as the period during which the campaigning may take place. But the practice shows that the campaign period starts well before that time and people use government resources even during the time outside the stated period by the Electoral Commission. Should this time not include a specific time well before the nominations, say three months, as it has been stated about the resignation so that it does not only apply to public officers after nomination but even before nomination? This is because that is when intensive campaigns take place. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.04
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a precise report and for consulting extensively. I have several concerns in this report that I would like to express my views on. 

One is about observation 5 on page 4. The Bill maintains the gender and special interest groups’ representation in Parliament as provided for in the Constitution, Article 78. The committee, however, received petitions, which were against the representation of the UPDF in Parliament in a multi-party setting and they submitted that the Army should be neutral. First of all, I agree that the Army, particularly now that we are professionalising it, should be neutral, impartial and should respect the wish of the population. Accordingly, I agree with the recommendation. 

However, I would draw the attention of members that since independence we have had so many disbanded armies. If I can list some, we had UA, UNLA, UD, NRA, UPDF and we have so many police retired officers, prisons retired officers and their concerns are never articulated in Parliament. I would like this House to recognize that we have so many men and women or veterans who have contributed to the development of this country and who have sacrificed for democracy and have fought for the rule of law and order. Therefore, I submit that as you recommend scrapping the representation of the Army, we also introduce representation of veterans. 

Mr Speaker, I have had so many of my colleagues saying that there is need to increase women representation in the effort to recognize gender equality as provided for in the Constitution and also to give affirmative action to special interest groups. I represent Isingiro County North and I do not remember the last time a woman representative visited my constituency. I represent all women, disabled people, workers and everybody –[Ms Wonekha: “Point of clarification.”] Can you hold on and I develop my point? What we are seeing in this Bill is that we have 76 districts out of 214 seats and 30 percent affirmative action is given on a sliver plate. Now you also want 50 percent of 214, which means 80 percent. Is this gender sensitive?  Really, my colleagues must be scientific when they are articulating these issues. Leadership is not thrown to people; people must be ready to tender.  

The enrolment ratio of males and females at university now is almost 50 percent. The last time I read the data it was 48:52. People must have a right to choose which office they want to occupy. Therefore, I tender my support for the provision in the Constitution to prevail because it is more than adequate. We have so many women here who have contested with men and defeated them. In the interest of efficiency, women representation should be at regional level and the rest should be left as they are. 

The other observation is on No. 8. The appointment of election constables by presiding officers was noted to be vulnerable to abuse. The committee, however, noted that due to the shortage of police constables, this would be a stopgap measure. If there is anything I fear, it is use of untrained people for professional jobs -(Interruption)

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from my honourable friend who said that the representation of women should be at the region. This country is now administered under districts; does he want to amend the Constitution now?

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we are making laws and when you are making laws, you look ahead. We know we have people with disabilities and they are represented regionally and yet there are districts. The same formula should apply. I had left that point; he was a bit late really. 

I was looking at constables. I want to restate that I fear use of non-trained people to do professional jobs. This stopgap can be a disaster. Where are you going to get this pool of constables? What skills are they going to have? I would urge government to use trained people. We have a lot of security agencies now in the country and the Government must look around and tender for people who are trained in the job. This stopgap can escalate into chaos. 

Finally, there is need to isolate and separate party issues from national issues. I want to inform honourable members who were arguing about recall of Members of Parliament by their own parties that party constitutions are subordinate to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, if somebody has been elected by the people to represent them in this House and it happens that later he crosses to another party, the party should dismiss you and wait until that time ends. It is also important to feed the candidates who have a backbone. There must be criteria in the party to sieve and get people who are credible to represent the parties here.  

Mr Speaker, I still consider and maintain that party discipline should be an issue of the parties and representation in Parliament is for the people of the Constitution and of Uganda. I thank you.

11.14
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have a few observations on page 9 under qualification and disqualification of Members of Parliament. Yesterday, I listened with dismay to hon. Banyenzaki saying that Members of Parliament who have been dishonest and have been found to have moral negligence, who have been disqualified from elections, who have presented forged documents, that because the law is retrospective that means clauses 2(e), (f) and (h) should be deleted. This House is made up honourable members and if we have to protect our names, if we have to be called honourable members, we must appear to be honourable. How do you legislate that someone who was cancelled by court or the Electoral Commission because of presenting forged documents should not be barred from being an honourable member? I do support the spirit of this Bill and I uphold that if you have been dishonourable, you should not come to this House because otherwise, you will encourage other forgeries. It is not the right place for such a person and I think we should all uphold these clauses. 

Mr Speaker, there is also an issue on universal suffrage for women. I am happy the women support it but I have heard mixed feelings from my constituency. These women will be looking for votes throughout the district. It is a big job and maybe it will encourage these women to come and compete with us in the smaller constituencies instead of pushing for 40 percent or 50 percent. I think it is a spirit that is going to encourage them to leave the large constituencies and go for the constituencies where men are. I remember in 1996 I was here and hon. Miria Matembe almost moved, actually she moved that this women’s seat should be an affirmative action seat and women should stay in those seats for a maximum of two terms so that they can allow other women to learn and compete and get to the stage. But we stopped her. But what have we seen today? The women have got stuck in those affirmative seats. After ten years really, you no longer need affirmative action. You should go and compete with men and then leave this seat for the new ones to come in and also train. I would encourage the women to look at that very seriously and consider it. After all, with adult suffrage, you have huge constituencies because we are looking at districts. So you should now instead of pushing for 40 percent, push for joining men in the constituencies and you compete since you have ably shown that you can compete with us. 

Then the clause on polling procedure on section 33; I have looked at the procedure and it seems they did not put into consideration that on one day we are likely to have presidential, Member of Parliament, district chairperson and most likely the woman Member of Parliament elections. The way they have put the procedure seems to provide for about one or two people who will be elected on the same day. I think that procedure needs to be looked at and more details added. 

Concerning the issue of a presiding officer writing on the ballot papers to indicate the station, we should all agree that nobody should write on the ballot paper because he can decide to tick when you give him the opportunity to write the name of the station. After all, the ballot papers are sent in serial numbers and at the beginning of the voting, the ballot papers are displayed and so the serial numbers are known. It is dangerous to tempt the presiding officer to keep writing the name of the polling station on top of the ballot paper because he can easily even tick. He may claim not to know if he has ticked or not. 

Yesterday, I also listened to contributions from hon. Loyce Bwambale and hon. Salaamu Musumba. I think we should realize that the Electoral Commission is also doing their best in the circumstances prevailing. For example, they argued that extra boxes are dispatched to the districts. In some polling stations like in Mbarara Municipality, we have Kisenyi polling station, which has over 9,000 voters where they normally use two boxes. If you took one box, at the end of the day you would have to empty it and then present another box. So, the boxes are normally extra for purposes of stations where one box will be filled. I can imagine a place where you can have 10 parliamentary candidates and the ballot papers will be so long and when the many votes are cast, the box might not be enough. So, they might have to change. 

Then the issue of the thumbprint; honestly saying that in the spirit of stopping rigging all of us should now put a thumbprint, is wrong. First of all, if we all use thumbprints and the ink is still fresh, we shall spoil other ballot papers and in the long run, you will find very many spoilt ballot papers. 

Secondly, how can you talk of a thumbprint when everybody will have agents who should know what to do? Let people tick; it is not necessary to talk of a thumbprint. 

Concerning recording names of people who have voted, the register is there and for honesty’s sake, these registers are displayed long before the elections. What are you talking about that every name should be written? Will all these documents fit if they are to go in the box? If you are five candidates and all the documents of the five candidates’ records of names go into the box, I think it will be confusion. 

About the tally sheets, today the Electoral Commission has improved. These tally sheets are numbered because I remember the last by-elections we held in Mbarara Municipality, there was an improvement. The tally sheets were numbered. So it is no longer possible for people to go and manufacture tally sheets, photocopy them and then come and use them. For each polling station at the beginning of polling, the agents will record, not tally sheets, but declaration forms They will record declaration forms and record the numbers. The danger of having the declaration forms photocopied at the end has also been minimized. 

They also said there could be under age voting. I think progressively, when we used to use names, there was a lot of under age voting but today with the photographic registration, the under age people have been stopped from registering. If there is one or two that have come in illegally, I think this can also be dealt with at the polling station. 

Hon. Loyce Bwambale said that in Mauritius where she has been, registers were displayed for the last eight months and she blamed the Electoral Commission for being inefficient. Honestly, this registration exercise and update of voters’ registers has been an ongoing exercise for a long time, but Ugandans are irresponsible. We refused to go and register in time. If all of us had registered, these registers would be displayed even for a year. But up to now, Members of Parliament were asking, “Please extend, people would not have registered by the 28th”, yet this registration has been an ongoing exercise on a daily basis not even in the last 30 days but even the last one year. People have not been going to register; they have not been going to transfer their stations. So, you cannot compare what you saw in Mauritius with -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I want to inform my friend that although registration is supposed to be ongoing, what is on the ground is that in most areas, especially my constituency, apart from the areas around the sub-county headquarters, nobody has gone there to register them and those who have attempted to go there have had faulty cameras. Legally we assume that registration is in the process but actually on the ground I do not think that the deadline for 28th will actually achieve the intended objective. Maybe for your constituency it is okay but in mine we need more time.

MR KIGYAGI: Yes, this is what I was saying. The Electoral Commission is doing their best but we as Ugandans are irresponsible because the registration has not started today; it has been going on. It was possible for everybody to have been registered by this time and the registers would be displayed but now, we shall conclude on 28th, we want more days; of course they will have little time for display of these registers! I know very well that during this period, not these 30 days but even before, the LC I leaders were encouraged to come and contact the registrars and say, “In my area, at my polling station, people are not registered” and people would move and go there. But everybody has waited for these last rush days to come up. I think the Electoral Commission is also overwhelmed and the whole blame should not be pushed to them. We as Ugandans should also share the blame because we are not responsible enough in as far as registration is concerned. With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.25
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to agree with my former colleague who contributed regarding the special interest groups, especially voting for the women Members of Parliament. One of the issues why we proposed that we should have elections for Members of Parliament and the President on the same day was election fatigue. If we make a mistake and say that women Members of Parliament would be elected thereafter, it would be a disaster. Taking an example of my constituency, Buvuma, these women spend money to go to the polling centres. Who will be meeting that cost? And the law is very clear that now, in case a candidate injects in some money, they are supposed to be disqualified. I would just appeal to the chairperson and members that we amend clause 11(4) such that election of the women Members of Parliament be held on the same day when we are electing the constituency MPs and the President such that there is vigilance.

I just want also to add that voting is a right of every eligible Ugandan. Although most Ugandans have been reluctant to register, in some areas it is not affordable. We all know that we have an active registrar in every district and registration has been going on since the time when those offices were opened. But you will take an example of Buvuma, for somebody to come from the islands to register in Mukono at the headquarters, it is very expensive. She has to spend over Shs 30,000 and these are the people who were failing to pay the graduated tax. You can actually compare the controversy. My appeal is that the Electoral Commission should extend the deadline and even improve in their working. Yesterday, when I was coming from the constituency the registrars were saying they had failed to recharge the batteries. People this time are willing to register, and given the fact that there is no graduated tax, the voters’ card is like an identity card. We should extend the time such that all eligible Ugandans can participate in the coming elections.

Mr Speaker, I want also to comment on clause 13 regarding independent candidates. We all agree that we made a law and this election is going to be conducted under the multi-party system. Under this system, each political party will have its own procedure for getting a candidate but I just want to urge my colleagues that since it is a right for every Ugandan to vie for a political office, we should not bury somebody who was defeated at the primaries. When you defeat somebody at the primaries, it means that even if he thinks that he wants to contest on adult suffrage, he will be weak enough. I think we can really agree with this law because the law is actually silent. Let independent candidates resurrect because at any point, if one was defeated, he can again be powerful. 

Secondly, each party would be wooing other members to join them. There is free mobility, which will depend upon the agenda and the programmes of a party. 

Although I was still young in the 1980 elections, I saw people handing over cards at rallies; it also happened this period. I would love to see at a platform for NRM, very many strong candidates or members of FDC giving in cards and vice-versa. But when we put an embargo we are actually killing our democracy. Let us strengthen our internal democracy within the party and that will check the intrigue. If there is no intrigue and somebody loses, he will be very happy and will just work for the progress of the party. But when we bar them from contesting, that will create intrigue.

I would also want to commend the committee regarding publicizing the polling stations. Since this law bars candidates from facilitating the voters, I want actually to declare that not all the islands are polling stations. It has been a normal practice for candidates to get fuel, hire boats and transport voters to polling stations. This is what everybody has been doing in the islands, including presidential candidates. If you do not transport these voters, you do not expect any vote because islands were clustered according to the Electoral Commission design. So, unless we declare that every island becomes a polling centre, candidates will be cancelled because when they see them coming to vote and they ask who facilitated them, definitely they will say, “It is the MP who will be cancelled”.  

We should work up with a mechanism, if it is the Electoral Commission to provide transport to those people who stay on the islands without polling stations rather than saying that members should not facilitate their voters yet we are denying them their right to vote.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, can you wind up.

11.32
THE CHAIRPEPRSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Thank you for the comments, which have been given in the spirit of improving the law for the better governance of this country.  

Let me thank members of the committee for the work they have done and let me thank hon. Rex Aachilla for stepping in, in the true spirit of what we have been exercising in the committee for the last one and a half years.

Let me start by saying that this Bill as we said is big and it is really big for no reason. The Parliamentary Elections Bill is the same as the Parliamentary Elections Act that was passed in 2001 except for 18 clauses, some of which are amending one word or a sentence. In other words, 83 provisions in this Bill are provisions in the Act that no proposals for amendment has been made for, either in the committee or by even the Government. So the Bill in spirit and in its letter and even effect is the same. All that this bulky Bill is trying to do is to introduce provisions that will regulate situations that arose out of the Constitution amendment.  

As a committee we were not very pleased that a mighty Bill of this nature was brought and we pointed this out to the minister and the committee discussed this in this spirit. All the clauses were examined and will be guiding the House at the Committee Stage where the committee of the Whole House should not spend time because the Sixth Parliament spent time on public hearings, second reading, Committee Stage and passed them and they are active provisions of the law even now as I speak. We should not spend a lot of time of this Parliament dealing with those. I will be pointing out these, Mr Speaker.

Review of Article 78, the issue did not come today, the issue came during the Constitutional Review Commission, it came in the Government White Paper but the committee said it has to wait for the lapse of ten years before a review can be done. That process should be started now and all those people affected under Article 78 will face this review. If we uphold the provision of Article 78 as it is so it be but if there are changes they should come. The ten years as, the Rt hon. Speaker said yesterday, have lapsed. 

Mr Speaker, election constables are not a new creature. They are in the Parliamentary Elections Act. They have been in our statute books for all these years. Why? It is to deal with a practical situation. The practical situation is this: you have 13,000 police officers and as of the last elections you had 17,000 polling stations. Even if you withdrew all the policemen from every place and deployed them, you would still have over 4,000 polling stations without police officers and that is the fact.

So, how did you deal with this?  So, practically it was proposed in the law that the presiding officer, for purposes of strictly law and order, not management of elections, for purposes of law and order, should appoint somebody from that village known there, a responsible person, a respectable person in the village to fill in that gap. Somebody who when he stands up even stubborn boys would respect him when he says no. That was a measure meant to cure that difficulty and it worked. There has not been a situation where there has been any complaint about election constables. Even the violence report - I was privileged to be a member of that committee – nobody complained about any election constable appointed by the presiding officer to maintain law and order.

So those are the circumstances under which we operate. But you heard that there was a proposal that the Government wanted to recruit 4,000 people, train them, to boost this capacity, this would be good. But this is strictly for purposes of law and order. The provisions in the Bill, in my opinion and in the opinion of the committee, are sufficient to handle this gap.

The hon. Salaamu Musumba said the Electoral Commission has no capacity. I disagree. I disagree and fairly strongly. The Electoral Commission has the capacity. It only has two difficulties, which I have sang on the Floor of this Parliament for a long time: the late enactment of laws and late release and insufficient release of funds, period. We are in the same House; we are repeating it now and I do not know whom to blame for this.

Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission should tell us as of now for the elections that are scheduled early next year how much money they have received to prepare for this. On voter updates you are hearing of cameras without batteries, generators without fuel, what is the implication, have they been given sufficient money to handle this emergency situation? Mr Speaker, we need to call upon the Government to take greater responsibility to support – not to support the Electoral Commission but to give them what they have asked for so that they can execute their mandate. It is not fair to expect people to perform out of nothing.  

This has been the problem and it continues to be the problem. The Electoral Commission has never sat down, they have always acted proactively, and they have even used exercise books in some cases to register so that an election can take place. The law that gives it power gives it a schedule of activities it must do within a certain period. It must put a cut off date for registration for the next elections, it must display the register after cut off to weed out the register and clean it up in order to prepare for elections.  

We are at the end of October; elections are in March, what do you expect the Electoral Commission to do? These are things that we should think about seriously. Instead of heaping blame on people we should be praising them for the miracles they are performing.  

The hon. Salaamu Musumba also raised the issue of under age voters. Mr Speaker, the hon. Salaamu Musumba did not read clause 80 of the Bill and it is nothing new anyway. It is also section 78(a) of the Act. Clause 80 provides: “Unauthorised voting or voting more than once: a person who knowingly - a) votes at an election at which that person is not entitled to vote ….” An underage voter is not entitled to vote so I do not know whether it is the beauty of the language of “under age voter”, which should be in the law, but I thought this would sufficiently cover the situation of people who are unauthorised to vote who show up to vote, and the penalties are sufficiently provided for in the law.

On violence, a look at this Bill shows that the violence is not because the law is inadequate; the violence is because all of us have bad manners. The law is sufficient and it has been sufficiently improved. The law prohibits violence in very strong terms of whatever nature, and it has put in place penalties and sanctions for those who will indulge in violence.  

All we need to do is have better manners as politicians then the law will work. In other countries all these things we are talking about are not in their law. Our law is quite detailed actually. You know you are going to vote and you know another person has a right to vote and he has a free will to choose who he wants to vote for. You just do not interfere with that and those are the good manners I am asking for. If this happened you cannot have elections being messed up, and I pray that all of us and all of you looking at me will do better this time so that the sticks are turned into hand waves and other things so that people exercise the true mandate granted by the Constitution.  

The National Council for Higher Education on this issue of the equivalent academic qualifications, this issue has troubled us in the committee and continues to be so. We heard the submissions from the House and the submissions from what was brought to the committee. The issue is that we passed in the Constitution that there should be an equivalent of A’ Level as the minimum academic qualification. Those who of course have it do not bother; those who do not have it but have qualifications that are similar or could be equivalent are the ones that we are dealing with. The question is: how do we deal with them? There were complaints with UNEB that if somebody comes with a diploma, then he is completely out of the ambits of UNEB, what can UNEB do about a diploma obtained from Nairobi?  

That mandate of qualifications that are above A’ Level is given under the law to the National Council for Higher Education. So there was this policy issue, is it right for the House now to move it to this or is it right for the House to leave it to UNEB? But the discussion is on.

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you chairman. Can you clarify to me, the job of issuing certificates of equivalent to higher education has been efficiently done by UNEB before, and they have issued certificates. Now you are changing the body to issue certificates of equivalent. Does it mean that this law nullifies the previous certificates issued by UNEB? Will they have to go back and apply again? This law also requires that the certificates to be issued two months before nomination and yet the commission has not started on this work. What does government intend in order to have this done in time? 

MR OULANYAH: To have this done in time, Parliament should pass this law immediately so that the institutions can begin to work; they cannot work without a law. But this mandate, if you look at the Universities and Tertiary Institutions Act of 2001, it gives the National Council for Higher Education the following mandate: “To determine the equivalence of all types of academic and professional qualifications of degrees, diplomas and certificates obtained elsewhere with those awarded by Ugandan institutions of higher education for recognition in Uganda.”  

This was not made for elections but the country knew that people were going to apply for jobs and they were going to come with certificates, which could be doubted. So they needed this provision to give this mandate to this institution to regularise their qualifications so that they can apply just like any other person who had qualified in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, we have had the discussions, we will be proposing amendments later to try and harmonise this situation. We are of the view that the two institutions could work together. We will be proposing a dual mandate that those, which fall at the level of A’ Level and below those qualifications that are equivalent, after senior four then you do some certificates, which are equivalent and would be directly managed and governed by UNEB. 

Those which are not, which are obtained from foreign countries and other places, which maybe UNEB may not have the capacity to handle, could be done under the mandate of this law so that they could do a dual consultation process and come out with some proper record. That is what we will be proposing.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you. I have interacted with people in the National Council for Higher Education since yesterday and they insist that their role is beyond senior six. You cannot cause them to begin discussing matters relating to the equivalent of senior six. They are supposed to handle matters of higher education, and senior six cannot be higher education.  

MR OULANYAH: That is precisely what I have said because I can get out with a senior four certificate, go outside and come back with a diploma from London. That diploma is already –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what the Chairman is trying to say is that by passing this amendment we shall by implication be amending the other one so that matters that are up to HSC be handled by UNEB and then the other one will handle higher education matters. I think it is perfectly okay. 

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the assistance. The hon. Mwandha, because he sits behind me sometimes, there is the issue of cut off. I have already spoken on this; it was raised by the hon. Loyce Bwambale. She says in Mauritius there is a clear cut off date. Even in our law there is a cut off date but you will find that our Parliament is angry with cut off dates –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe there is one which was raised by hon. Eng. Kiwagama. He was asking you what happens, because we have been having elections under the 1995 Constitution and certificates have been given that are equivalent by UNEB. Do they have to repeat the exercise say for the coming elections? I think that was the question.

MR OULANYAH: It is our Bill that proposes that those certificates would be validated, that is what is in the Bill. So, honourable member, be in peace as the matter is taken care of.

The hon. James Mwandha raised issues of the kind of exceptions we are trying to create and on that one, Mr Speaker, you made a response to. For as long as we are making any law, we must be able to create exceptions for any foreseeable circumstance and that is what the law should be. If the law cannot foresee exceptional circumstances and regulate it, then that law is inadequate to that extension.

The issue of display is another issue that the Electoral Commission has raised. Display of voters’ registers have been raised several times, they have even prepared the budget. They had proposed that they should get display boards that are made in strong wood and glass that sits at a special place, people come and look at it and they go away, they check and they makes notes and go. But there has been no money to do this. Money should be availed to the Electoral Commission to be able to display these registers properly. What happens now is: the display officer has to hold it for its security and has to be accessible to all the people at the same time and that is a bit difficult. When the hour closes, he has to fold it, put it in his bag and go to some safe place.  

But these are the difficulties that have been proposed. That money should be made available to the Electoral Commission so that they can make boards that are permanent and put in a sealed place so that people can view them day and night. The issue raised by the hon. Babu on the status of Kampala, now that it is a city and no longer a district. What happens to the representation of Kampala, the former Kampala District, which is now a city? I think on that matter the honourable minister needs to resolve on how we are going to proceed with Kampala - it certainly needs a woman representative.  

Rt hon. Speaker, those are the issues that have been raised. There are other issues that the committee has reconsidered. For example, qualifications obtained from the former University of East Africa, which is not taken care of in the Bill. We are proposing improvement on this at the Committee Stage. Thank you very much, honourable members, for the interest you have put in this bill because a perfect law will be the first gate to our true and proper elections. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee.  

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their comments and observations on the Bill. I think they were useful and quite instructive. I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee and his committee for a good job done and to say that I entirely share his observations on the comments made by members on this Bill.  

On the question of qualifications, I would like to repeat here, as you did guide yesterday, that qualifications are now a creature of the Constitution. They are a constitutional matter and to attempt to review them in this law would be unconstitutional. The Constitution is clear that the minimum requirement is A’ Level or its equivalent, and the Constitution goes further to enjoin this House to determine the manner and time on how these qualifications will be prescribed by this Parliament. At this stage we are doing exactly that to prescribe the organ and the time within which that organ must determine equivalent qualifications.  

I disagree with colleagues who proposed that this House must straight away determine what is equivalent to A’ Level. In my view the equivalent to A’ Level is a technical issue and it would suffice if this Parliament appoints a technical body, which will determine what is equivalent to advanced level.

Mr Speaker, you did guide further yesterday that foreign qualifications like local qualifications, which are alleged to be equivalent to A’ Level, must also be subjected to the test of equivalent like other qualifications. I agree with that guidance and I think it should guide this House in scrutinising equivalent qualifications. The idea being discussed here is not that equivalency of A’ Level should be presumed; the law cannot presume them. Equivalency must be specifically proved before the body that seeks to approve them.

I would like to make it clear that if you have an Advanced Level Certificate obtained in Uganda or a degree obtained in Uganda, or as the chairman proposes and I do agree, degrees which were awarded by the former East African University, you need not subject those qualifications to the scrutiny of the National Council for Higher Education. I would like to agree with the compromise the chairman has proposed that the mandate of what is equivalent to advanced level, and the mandate to scrutinise equivalency and degrees obtained from abroad be shared between the National Council for Higher Education and the Uganda National Examinations Board. I agree with that proposal and at an appropriate stage the chairman will be moving an amendment, which we shall look at and make the necessary changes in the Bill.  

The question of determining the equivalency should not be confused with the question of authenticity or looking at whether the documents are forged or not. That is a different stage. If any person is not satisfied with the authenticity of a document that has been presented by the candidates, it is up to him or her to petition the Electoral Commission to decline to accept that document upon proof that that document is forged or is not authentic. 

The question of funding to the National Council for Higher Education was raised on the Floor of this House yesterday. I would like to report that I did consult the Leader of Government Business who confirmed that indeed government would find funds that are commensurate with the task of the National Council for Higher Education to perform this additional function that is being conferred by this law.  

There are colleagues who wondered whether the role that this Bill seeks to confer to the National Council for Higher Education is consistent with the law that sets up this council. I would like to advise that even in the previous law when UNEB was required to ascertain the equivalency of A’ Level, the UNEB Act itself did not confer that function on UNEB. It is perfectly in order for a different law to confer a function on a body that was not envisaged by the law that set up that particular body. So although the statute that sets up the National Council for Higher Education did not provide for the verification of equivalent academic qualifications for electoral purposes, it is in order for this Bill in particular to provide for that function.

Members proposed that indeed the National Council for Higher Education, and in this case UNEB as well, should have a checklist of what it considers are equivalent qualifications to Advanced Level to enable persons who seek to contest for electoral positions to consider whether they should contest or not. I agree with that proposal and I think the bodies responsible will be advised to come up with that checklist.

Hon. Namusoke Kiyingi was concerned about the grounds for disqualification of a Member of Parliament and she was more particularly concerned about the ground of desertion. I would like to inform her that desertion is not just a ground, which is being introduced by this Bill, but desertion of the electorate is actually a ground for recall even in the Constitution itself. There is nothing much we can do about it at this stage. I think she missed the opportunity to have it repealed when we were reviewing the Constitution in this House.  

Mr Speaker, members also wondered whether the Electoral Commission was in position to determine the pay of polling agents appointed by candidates. The policy behind this provision is that if this Bill is passed into an Act, the Electoral Commission will be enjoined to provide for the payment of polling agents even for candidates. I think this is an improvement so that candidates are not burdened with having to pay polling agents. I think it will be enough for a candidate to appoint his agents, and the Electoral Commission will cater for them like it does for presiding officers. This practice was adopted and done during the referendum and it worked very well. I appeal to members to support this proposal.

On the question of percentages of women representation in Parliament, I would like to propose as you did guide yesterday, Sir that this is a matter for a resolution of review under Article 78 of the Constitution, which we undertake to bring to this House in not more than two weeks from now. So it is not possible for us to determine what percentage of women will be represented in this House unless and until Parliament has exercised its mandate under Article 78(2) of the Constitution.  

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much. I wonder what the minister means now in terms of procedure that when it comes to representation of special interest groups we shall not have any provision in the law, or are we are going to make provisions in case we decide differently and we shall have to come back to the law and amend the law?  

THE SPEAKER: I think the provision is in this law; it is provided for, it is there.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you for your guidance, Sir, and I agree. Hon. Bwambale wondered whether the constituency of Bugendera, which was created by this House in the Sixth Parliament, is now operational. I would like to inform her and to inform the House and the country that Bugendera constituency is now a recognised constituency with a code like other constituencies. Therefore, Bugendera will be represented in the Eighth Parliament and elections for that constituency will also be conducted alongside elections for other constituencies. So we now have 215 constituencies for directly elected Members of Parliament.  

Members also wondered whether district women representatives would represent districts, which were created by Parliament recently, which will only start operating with effect from 1 July 2006. My view is that these districts have been legally created by this House and therefore in accordance with Article 78, which requires that every district once created must be represented in Parliament, we have no hesitation in advising the Electoral Commission to conduct elections for these districts alongside other districts which have been in place. That is the view of the ministry and we think it is the correct position.

MR ISIKO MPONGO: I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of representation of women is a little bit questionable in the new district of Namutumba.  

One, there is a requirement for civil servants or public servants to resign 90 days before nomination. By this time we are not so much aware that there would be a requirement to elect a woman Member of Parliament for the new district, and we imagine that the 90 days have already passed. Mr Minister, I wish you could clarify on that.

THE SPEAKER: Must a person who is serving government represent the district? Are there no other people who can compete?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the way these districts were created, their effective date would be 1 July 2006. Is there any problem for deferring the election of the women Members of Parliament until a time when these districts actually are in existence, because I see there is a problem?

THE SPEAKER: I think I explained that yesterday, and there are measures taken to prevent that happening. Should we have elections in March without holding elections in these particular districts? Holding elections in those particular districts could presuppose that the Electoral Commission is conducting a by-election. That will complicate the position because they will say, “There is a person who was elected to represent this area, he is in Parliament, why are there by-election?” And it becomes unfair to the new districts because they will not regard that person outside the district as being their representative. I told you it created a problem in Bundibugyo, which is what he is repeating. So in order not to repeat that; this is what he is suggesting.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification in as far as Mengo Municipality is concerned. Are we also going to have a representative of Mengo Municipality contesting alongside in the general elections? Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. With regard to the districts that have been created this financial year, I understand that they have held elections and appointed members of the various councils. However, we have situations where counsellors representing persons with disabilities belong to one or another of the new districts created. They are faced with situations where for instance one can no longer sit in a particular new district because it is no longer part of their constituency.  

I will give an example of Kamuli District where we have two councillors belonging to the main Kamuli District. The newly formed Kaliro District, however, does not have a representative for disabled persons and the same applies to Butaleja. I wonder when the Electoral Commission will carry out elections so that disabled persons in the new districts are also represented.  

MR MWESIGE: The commission will handle the representation of persons with disabilities. I am not in position to answer that question until I have consulted the Electoral Commission. Perhaps they have arrangements to hold elections for them but I will check and get an appropriate answer for you.

On the question of Mengo Municipality, I would like to inform the honourable member that the Bill that seeks to create Mengo Municipality has not been passed into an Act of Parliament. As we speak that Bill is in the hands of the district councils for ratification. As soon that has been done Mengo Municipality like other municipalities will be represented by a Member of Parliament in this House. 

Mr Speaker, you have guided us very well concerning the new districts and I agree with you. I would also like to agree with hon. Baba Diri’s proposal that she made on this Floor yesterday to the effect that the electoral college for Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities should also be national. I agree with her and I will be moving an amendment to clause 11(e) to effect that proposal.  

I also agree with hon. James Mwandha on the proposal that persons with disabilities, elders and pregnant women must be allowed to vote before other people in the queue who do not have disabilities. I agree with you and I hope that an amendment will be moved in the Bill or in the regulations to this effect. 

In response to hon. Eresu I would like to state that the nomination fee is provided for in clause 14(3) of the Bill which states that the fee will be ten currency points. Hon. Eresu was of the view that this figure is too low and that it should be raised. My response to the proposal is that the fee must not be prohibitive and it must not discourage other Ugandans who wish to serve to be able to do so. Also, it must not strain the pockets of the incumbents because as I know they have serious financial probleMs It is therefore important that we maintain the figure of Shs 200,000. This is not only fair to the new entrants but to the incumbents as well. 

Unless there are other issues that members will raise at the Committee Stage, I beg to rest my case and to once again thank honourable members for their comments and observations on the Bill. I thank you, sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.  The motion is that Bill entitled the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after this stage we were supposed to proceed to the Committee Stage. However, from the explanation I gave earlier to the effect that these two Bills are almost the same I propose that we skip the Committee Stage at this juncture and deal with the second reading of the Presidential Elections Bill. Only after we have completed the general debate on this Bill as well will we proceed with the Committee Stage where we will deal with both Bills. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

12.14
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded, you may proceed.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 seeks to make provisions for regulating presidential elections in Uganda pursuant with chapters 5 and 7 of the Constitution, and to repeal and replace the Presidential Elections Act, chapter 142 of the laws of Uganda, 2000 edition. 

The Bill also proposes to make substantive provisions for presidential elections and seeks to comply with the amendments that this Parliament recently passed on the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

It will provide for qualifications for people wishing to be President of the Republic and it will provide for the manner of establishing the equivalent of A’ Level qualification, which is a constitutional requirement for anybody aspiring to be president of the Republic. 

The Bill will provide for how candidates for this high office will be nominated, how they will market themselves to the electorate through campaigning and how the voters will respond through the polling process.  

Votes will be counted, tallied and declared by the Electoral Commission and in case the candidates are dissatisfied with the results declared, the Bill provides for petitions for challenging the election results. 

Mr Speaker, there is fundamental behaviour that is expected during elections and when some people behave below these standards, the Bill provides for election offences and for other matters. This Bill has become necessary because we need to streamline the law in light of the experience gained in operationalising the 1995 Constitution. 

You realise that in the old law it was not clear whether a president could be elected unopposed. In a situation where there is only one candidate who is validly nominated, did the commission have the power to declare him elected unopposed? We have made it very clear in this Bill that if people do not offer themselves to serve as President and there is only one person willing to serve and he has been validly nominated, he should be declared elected unopposed. 

We have also provided for presidential elections in whatever political system Ugandans will have chosen whether it is the Movement political system or the newly adopted multi-party system. In brief, Sir, this is what the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 is about and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister and Attorney-General.

12.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable minister for the motion. 

This Bill was forwarded to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. We examined the Bill in detail and the conclusion the committee came to is exactly the same as the one I outlined to the House some moments ago. Our conclusion was that the size of this Bill was not necessary. 

Apart from its size we should point out that only 18 clauses were changed somewhat. The other clauses are exactly the same as the provisions outlined in the Presidential Elections Act, which is still an active law to date. 

Mr Speaker, we have given an introduction and background to the Bill, which has been efficiently covered by the honourable minister and Attorney-General. The objectives of the Bill have also been clearly explained by the honourable minister. 

We scrutinized the Bill and received both oral representations and written submissions from groups and individuals who totalled 26 in the period that we held public hearings. These included honourable members of this House as well as people from several institutions and organisations who felt duty bound to make a contribution to improving the laws governing this country. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee had the following observations on the Bill:

As is the case with the Parliamentary Elections Bill, active provisions of the Act should not have been included in this Bill. The Sixth Parliament dealt with these provisions adequately. Only the provisions requiring changes in view of the forthcoming multi-party political dispensation should have been dealt with. This would require an amendment to the Bill and not a totally new Bill.  

Concern was raised about the mode of display of voters’ register. It was noted that in many rural and urban areas, voters’ registers are not physically displayed. Officials of the Electoral Commission sit with booklets and only allow voters to check their own names. It was observed that this does not help in removing ghost voters from the registers.  

Academic requirements for the presidential candidates have been maintained, the verification for qualifications equivalent to A’ Level has however been made more stringent. The National Council for Higher Education, which accredits and approves programs for higher education, will now verify the equivalents.

UNEB will no longer handle this task since its role is basically to set and mark exams Mr Speaker arising from what I said earlier, this particular statement has been reviewed to take care of what will be proposed under this Bill at the Committee Stage.  

Public officers will be required to resign 90 days before nomination day as passed in the constitutional amendment. 

It was noted that the constitutional amendment did not cater for resignation of public officers who wish to participate in the presidential and local council elections. 

The campaign programmes and activities have been left to individual parties to arrange. The parties will, however, be required to submit their programs to the Electoral Commission or its officials at the respective levels.  

There is proposed restriction of convoys especially on nomination day. These convoys have not only been expensive but sometimes breed some degree of violence.  

The Government is to beef up the capacity of the Police to maintain law and order during electoral activities. Specific training for this purpose will or should be carried out.  

The Bill proposes more stringent rules on offences for example in case of conviction, one would not be eligible to stand for electoral office in the next seven years. 

Some witnesses who appeared before the committee were of the view that there was over criminalisation of civil cases. The committee, however, noted that these provisions were transplanted from the previous law and were meant to serve as a deterrent for violence and other malpractices. 

Many witnesses appearing before the committee were opposed to having provisions catering for the Movement political system in this law. The committee noted that this has been provided for under Article 73 of the Constitution. 

Some witnesses were opposed to the age limit of 75 years imposed on presidential candidates. The committee noted that this is a constitutional issue, which goes beyond the confines of this law. 

It was noted that the Electoral Commission decided on nomination dates before the relevant laws were debated and passed by Parliament. The committee is of the opinion that it was proper for the Electoral Commission to act proactively in providing a roadmap for elections.  

Recommendations:

The Electoral Commission should continue to be impartial in executing its duties. 

All presidential candidates should be accorded equal treatment and privileges in accordance with the law. 

All public officials involved in the elections should be properly trained to handle their respective mandates. 

The people should be thoroughly sensitised to clearly understand and appreciate laws and procedures governing the electoral process. This is what is called civic education.  

Restriction on the use of government facilities for presidential campaigns should be strictly adhered to as prescribed by the law. 

All provisions of the law should be strictly implemented to avoid electoral malpractices, which could result in violence. 

Procedures and electoral guidelines for voting in institutions and restricted areas should be followed.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee would like to thank the various groups and individuals who appeared before the committee or forwarded their ideas for consideration. 

The committee begs the House to adopt the report with the proposed amendments. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee for the report. Honourable members, the debate is open.

12.28
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a query concerning the new districts and women elections to be held there. Can the chairperson or minister clarify on what is to happen to somebody who innocently did not know that elections were going to take place in these new districts? This is because in case that person is a public servant he or she would not have resigned by now. What are we going to do about this? 

I am not saying that it is only public servants who are going to stand but in case there is somebody who falls in this category, what is going to happen in such a scenario?

THE SPEAKER: He or she will have to try next time. There is no need to seek for an answer because the requirement to resign before nomination is a constitutional matter. Therefore, the minister will not give you a different answer. 

12.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I have a problem with clause 5(c), which concerns people who have obtained academic degrees from outside Uganda. We have a lot of people in this country that obtained their degrees from Dar-es-Salaam, Nairobi, Oxford and Harvard. This clause states that all these people must go to the National Council of Higher Education to have these degrees vetted. 

My problem is why we are subjecting them to this. I would think that this would only come into effect in case somebody has expressed doubt concerning the authenticity of a particular degree. In other words this clause should not include everybody who comes with a degree from abroad. I have no problem with the first two clauses that is (a) and (b) but this third one should only be evoked when there is a complaint. I think it would be unfortunate if certain prominent universities heard Uganda does not recognize their degrees. Thank you very much.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that Uganda is a sovereign country and as such we have regulations and bodies in place. This is not the first time that this is happening. Much as we know that Dar-es-Salaam or Oxford Universities exist, before you can begin teaching at Makerere or in any other institution our bodies must first verify your papers. 

Even when recruitment is taking place in the Civil Service and someone comes with a degree from Dar-es-Salaam, it must first be verified. Therefore, this requirement is not new. Rather it is a normal requirement.

MR ERESU: I would like to give myself as an example. I am a graduate of Dar-es-Salaam University and when I got my degree I was appointed to work in Uganda. The Government of Uganda did not tell me to go and first verify my qualifications. Furthermore, when I was admitted to the University of Dar-es-Salaam, it was as a result out of an inter-university students exchange program. This means that the high school certificate I had from Uganda met the standards of Dar-es-Salaam. Therefore, to subject such a qualification that arose from an inter-university student exchange to vetting is ridiculous. In any case the governments of the three countries have agreed that when you attain a qualification from one of these countries you automatically qualify to enter a university in another country –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I wanted to seek is whether we are going to name those universities whose degrees are going to be excluded from verification in this law. This is because if we are saying that we should exclude degrees from Oxford we must be reminded that there are so many Oxfords out there. How are we going to know exactly which Oxford we mean?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, hon. Babu has pointed out a very clear case. He has said that a person’s qualifications should only be subject to verification if there is a complaint. In any case do we have the capacity for everybody to have his or her qualifications verified? Moreover how different is a qualification from Uganda from that of Nairobi and Dar-Es-Salaam? 

For example we have the best lawyers coming from Dar-Es-Salaam University and these include the hon. Speaker yet many other universities perform better than this particular one. I, therefore, agree that this law should only apply if there is a complaint. I thank you.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, this proposed clause is to deal with those who do not have A’ Level certificates. If you went to the University of Dar-Es-Salaam after A’ Level, you do not fall in this category. In fact to go for nomination you do not need to carry your degree certificate. All you need to carry is your A’ Level certificate. Where you went after that is immaterial as long as you have the A’ Level certificate. In the case of those who got awards from the former University of East Africa, we made a proposal in the previous Bill that the National Council for Higher Education should also exempt qualifications from this university from verification. We have made these adjustments and we propose the same in the Presidential Elections Bill –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are we making general contributions in form of clarifications?

DR MALLINGA: No, mine is relevant, Mr Speaker. This issue is getting confusing especially when we talk about A’ Level. I would like a clarification. Are you talking about A’ Level as far as Ugandan examinations are concerned? I took the Cambridge School Certificate and got an A’ Level certificate there. Do I qualify for A’ Level or do I also need verification?

THE SPEAKER: The Cambridge School Certificate you are talking about was the certificate of the day during the time that you got it and I believe that was the A’ Level equivalent then. I hope that is clear.  

MR ERESU: When you read Article 80 of the Constitution, which refers to presidential qualifications it reads in part 1(c), “…a person has completed a minimum of a formal education of advanced level standard or equivalent …”. The honourable chairman of the committee referred to this and said you can go with only an A’ Level certificate and I agree. However, that does not rule out the fact that you can choose not to go with the A’ Level certificate, which is the minimum and go with a degree as a qualification higher than A’ Level.  

What we are saying is that will someone who has gone with this higher certificate, which may not necessarily be the minimum qualification constantly be subject to verification if it has not been obtained within the confines of Uganda’s territory?  

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, an automatic equivalent is what the law, which established the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, No. 7 of 2001 sought to cure. That is why one of the functions of the National Council for Higher Education states that, “The council’s functions shall include the power to determine the equivalents of all types of academic and professional qualifications of degrees, diplomas and certificates obtained elsewhere with those awarded by Ugandan institutions of higher education for recognition in Uganda.”  

Therefore, recognition of foreign qualifications in Uganda is very important. It is not enough for you to come with a degree from abroad and say that because you have a document called a degree it should be recognised as such for purposes of our requirements in Uganda. The honourable chairman has been clear. If you obtained an A’ Level certificate in Uganda and then went abroad and obtained a diploma or a degree, you do not need to go for verification. 

However, if you turn up with a diploma after completing O’ Level, it is only proper that the diploma you obtained abroad is subjected to testing by the National Council for Higher Education or UNEB so as to determine whether the diploma you obtained is authentic. As the Speaker pointed out, some diplomas could be an accumulation of certificates of attendance obtained after attending ten seminars. These diplomas must be scrutinized by the bodies we have mandated in this law in order to satisfy ourselves that you either have A’ Level or the equivalent of A’ Level –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe for purposes of further clarification, how about those who have been presidential candidates or Members of Parliament since 1995? Does this qualify them automatically since they were never challenged before? Do they also have to go through verification? Is this reasonable?

MR MWESIGE: Sir, to answer that question let me say that we have had members who served in this House during the Sixth Parliament but when they turned up for nomination for the Seventh Parliament it had been discovered over time that the certificates they used to enter the Sixth Parliament were forged. Therefore, this law does not hinder complaints. Even if you have sat in this House over time, if the suspicion of forgery or that you do not have an equivalent arose a complaint can be lodged with the Electoral Commission and your nomination challenged in the courts of law.

MRS SSENTONGO: My issue concerns those whose qualifications were previously verified by UNEB. Now that we have given this role to the National Council of Higher Education, do these qualifications have to be taken to the National Council of Higher Education or will we exempt previous approvals by UNEB?

THE SPEAKER: I think we dealt with that issue a few minutes ago.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, can I just seek from the Attorney-General –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I suppose really we do not have a general debate and, therefore, I put the question on the motion for a second reading because I think the issues are the same in the other. I put the question that the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Do you want a break and we come back in the afternoon?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for expeditiously handling today’s business. Let us have a break and then we come back at exactly 2.00 p.m. for the Committee Stage.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.45 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.30 p.m._)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the reason we are starting with the Presidential Elections Bill is that it is numbered 23 and the Parliamentary Elections Bill is numbered 24, so why don’t we start with the first one and then go to the other?  

Unfortunately I do not know the details but we have our visitors, I do not know from which school. However, on your behalf I want to welcome them to Parliament. (Applause)

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1, agreed to.)

(Clause 2, agreed to.)

(Clause 3, agreed to.)

Clause 4

ME OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, our point was that we start with the Parliamentary Elections Bill but now we have to start with the presidential one. 

We had proposed an amendment on the issue of the “equivalent”. We propose an amendment to clause 4 (8). This is to take into account the issue of giving a combined mandate to the National Council for Higher Education and the Uganda National Examinations Board. So, delete sub-clause (8) page 11, and insert the following: “A person required to establish his or her qualification under subsection (7) shall do so by the production of a certificate issued to him or her by the National Council for Higher Education in consultation with the Uganda National Examinations Board.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You want the two bodies to work together?

MR OULANYAH: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: I see, honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendment. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, there is another amendment. We beg to propose in the spirit of what we presented on qualifications obtained from the former University of East Africa. We propose to insert after the word “Uganda” in the third line –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Where is that?

MR OULANYAH: Sub-clause (15), I am sorry. So now it would read: “For the avoidance of doubt, if a candidate has an Advanced Level Certificate or qualifications higher than the prescribed qualifications in each case obtained in Uganda or from the former University of East Africa, then there shall be no need for the verification of his or her qualifications by the National Council for Higher Education.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is it clear?  

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman that amendment would seem to take care of what I had argued for. But the mentioning of the words “from the former universities of East Africa”, would imply the qualification at the time when those universities within East Africa were under the name “University of East Africa”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is trying to take care of is that if you leave Uganda say Makerere University, the degree awards it was making were those of the University of East Africa. So now if you exempt those awards because there were at Makerere University it causes a problem because they were from the same university. I think that is what he is trying to take care of, but you can add other amendments if you have any. However, let us dispose of this one and then we can receive your amendment. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ERESU: I would propose we also insert that, “For the avoidance of doubt, if a candidate has an Advanced Level Certificate or qualifications higher than the prescribed qualifications in each case obtained in Uganda, or from the universities of the partner states of East Africa….”

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean national universities of East Africa?

MR ERESU: National universities of East Africa to take care of the current situation as well.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t you say Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda?

MR ERESU: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are trying to see – but I think you see the sense.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with hon. Eresu’s amendment because since the University of East Africa, which of course was recognised and is still recognised, a lot of new private universities have cropped up in the region of East Africa. Apart from the University of Dar-es-Salaam and the University of Nairobi, which are recognised here, I think there are other universities, which have come up in other countries of East Africa like Kenya and Tanzania whose qualifications should be scrutinised by our National Council for Higher Education. The case is different for private universities, which have come up in Uganda because those are credited by the National Council for Higher Education anyway. So I object to hon. Eresu’s amendment.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am actually not convinced because even the amendment we have just passed also calls for naming the universities because the minister was precise; he named Makerere University, the University of Dar-es-Salaam and the University of Nairobi. So instead of leaving it that “the East African universities,” why don’t we name them such that it is very clear?

THE CHAIRMAN: There was a university, which was known as the University of East Africa before, and for instance Makerere University was giving London University degrees. But when that ceased there was a university called the University of East Africa and constituent colleges were Makerere University, University of Dar-es-Salaam and Nairobi University. So it was significantly the University of East Africa; maybe it is no longer there.

MR ERESU: Can I, therefore, add specifically the names of those universities we are referring to, to cater for the current situation because the minister is here saying there are other universities, which have come and may not necessarily be recognised? So if we are taking recognition of those other universities, which were under the University of East Africa and now are universities of their own we could possibly put the amendment to read that: “For the avoidance of doubt, if a candidate has an advanced level certificate or qualification higher than that prescribed qualification in each case obtained in Uganda” - in this case Uganda caters for all those other universities other than Makerere University or the University of East Africa, or the University of Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe you can say “University of East Africa, or its former constituent colleges” without naming them because they are known.  

MR ERESU: I move according to the advice of the Chairman. I beg to move that the question be put on his amendment as improved by the Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I take his amendment, “awards of the University of East Africa or its former constituent colleges.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 4 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 5, agreed to.)

(Clause 6, agreed to.)

(Clause 7, agreed to.)

(Clause 8, agreed to.)

(Clause 9, agreed to.)

(Clause 10, agreed to.)

(Clause 11, agreed to.)

(Clause 12, agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Chairman, you will forgive me if I am a little bit lagging behind. I wanted to make some amendments to clause 13, if you would allow me to read it again. There are some presidential candidates whose academic papers might have been verified already. Do they still have to produce this certificate from the National Council for Higher Education?

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately you came late. This issue was handled during the general debate and it was agreed that it is necessary that they be verified because some letter could have been forged and, therefore, it will provide an opportunity to somebody to say so. I put the question that clause 13 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 13, agreed to.)

(Clause 14, agreed to.)

(Clause 15, agreed to.)

(Clause 17, agreed to.)

(Clause 18, agreed to.)

(Clause 19, agreed to.)

(Clause 20, agreed to.)

(Clause 21, agreed to.)

(Clause 22, agreed to.)

(Clause 23, agreed to.)

(Clause 24, agreed to.)

(Clause 25, agreed to.)

(Clause 26, agreed to.)

Clause 27

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend the proposed clause 27(2) by inserting the word “ordinarily” between the words “are” and “attached” in the fourth line of that sub-clause. This is to stop candidates from acquiring more facilities for campaigns than they ordinarily use.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, honourable minister?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I accept the committee’s amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, an amendment is clear. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 28, agreed to.)

(Clause 29, agreed to.)

(Clause 30, agreed to.)

(Clause 31, agreed to.)

(Clause 32, agreed to.)

Clause 33

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 33 in sub-clause (2) by substituting the word “one” appearing in the first line with the word “two”. The justification is to provide for continued presence of polling agents in case one is unable to be present at any particular time.  

These submissions were made by virtually all the political parties that appeared before the committee that it is necessary to have two instead of one. We propose this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 34, agreed to.)

(Clause 35, agreed to.)

(Clause 36, agreed to.)

(Clause 37, agreed to.)

(Clause 38, agreed to.)

(Clause 39, agreed to.)

(Clause 40, agreed to.)

(Clause 41, agreed to.)

(Clause 42, agreed to.)

(Clause 43, agreed to.)

(Clause 44, agreed to.)

(Clause 45, agreed to.)

(Clause 46, agreed to.)

(Clause 47, agreed to.)

(Clause 48, agreed to.)

(Clause 49, agreed to.)

(Clause 50, agreed to.)

(Clause 51, agreed to.)

(Clause 52, agreed to.)

(Clause 53, agreed to.)

(Clause 54, agreed to.)

(Clause 55, agreed to.)

(Clause 56, agreed to.)

(Clause 57, agreed to.)

(Clause 58, agreed to.)

(Clause 59, agreed to.)

(Clause 60, agreed to.)

(Clause 61, agreed to.)

(Clause 62, agreed to.)

(Clause 63, agreed to.)

(Clause 64, agreed to.)

(Clause 65, agreed to.)

(Clause 66, agreed to.)

(Clause 67, agreed to.)

(Clause 66, agreed to.)

(Clause 67, agreed to.)

(Clause 68, agreed to.)

(Clause 69, agreed to.)

(Clause 70, agreed to.)

(Clause 71, agreed to.)

(Clause 72, agreed to.)

(Clause 73, agreed to.)

(Clause 74, agreed to.)

(Clause 75, agreed to.)

(Clause 76, agreed to.)

(Clause 77, agreed to.)

(Clause 78, agreed to.)

(Clause 79, agreed to.)

(Clause 80, agreed to.)

(Clause 81, agreed to.)

(Clause 82, agreed to.)

(Clause 83, agreed to.)

(Clause 84, agreed to.)

(Clause 85, agreed to.)

(Clause 86, agreed to.)

(Clause 87, agreed to.)

(Clause 88, agreed to.)

(Clause 89, agreed to.)

(Clause 90, agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

The Fifth Schedule, agreed to.

The Sixth Schedule, agreed to.

The Seventh Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.05
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding_) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.06
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 and passed it with amendments to clause 4, clause 27, and clause 33. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House, which I have just read out, be adopted by this House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report, which the Minister has given us arising from the Committee of the whole House.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

3.09
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill has been passed. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

3.10
Clause 1

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a definition of “public officer” in the terms provided in the Constitution. We, therefore, propose to insert the following: “Public officer means a person holding or acting in any public office.” This is to provide an interpretation for this thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose in clause 4(2)(h) that it be amended by substituting the word “this” appearing in the last line, with the word “the”. In our opinion this is a typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Secondly, we propose an amendment to sub-clause (6) to answer the concerns earlier raised and we propose that we delete the existing sub-clause (6) and replace it with the following: “A person required to establish his or her qualifications under sub-section 5 shall do so by the production of a certificate issued to him or her by the National Council for Higher Education in consultation with the Uganda National Examinations Board.”

MR MWANDHA: In the morning hon. Kiwagama raised an issue of people who have been certified by UNEB. Would they also have to do the same?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, honourable member, as you remember we raised the issue of present members of Parliament who have to have equivalent or what not, the consensus was that it is necessary they resubmit what they have and this was agreed on. So I put the question to the proposed amendments, which are similar amendments as those we carried in the Presidential Elections Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause 13 we propose an amendment to the same effect to take care of the former University of East Africa. The new formulation would now read that: “For avoidance of doubt, if a candidate had an Advanced Level Certificate or qualifications higher than the prescribed qualifications in each case obtained in Uganda or from the former University of East Africa and its constituent colleges, then there shall be no need for the verification of his or her qualifications by the National Council of Higher Education.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 6(1)(i), to be amended by adding at the end of that clause the following expression: “And has accepted the appointment.”  The mischief the committee was trying to cover here is that somebody could just appoint you and when even nothing has been regularised, you are not even accepted and could use that appointment to mar your candidature or something else. Mere appointment without acceptance should not warrant a member to vacant his seat. We propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: But before we deal with this proposal, I personally looked at this Bill and I saw the arrangements in various parts of the Bill. This is talking about the tenure of a Member of Parliament, the next clause deals with right and procedure of recall, and this Bill is dealing with Parliamentary Elections. I would think that before we come to these clauses, which are okay, we should have dealt with nomination. You could not talk about tenure and recalling before somebody has entered the system. You enter the system when you are nominated then eventually when you are elected they talk about your tenure, and then they talk about your recall. I think clauses 12 to 20 should have proceeded this particular clause and others following later.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we take your guidance and we accept it. We will rearrange the next.

THE CHAIRMAN: okay, so honourable members you have heard the proposal by the chairperson on clause 6, it is an amendment. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR OULANYAH: Mr chairman, in clause 7 we propose an amendment to sub-clause (5) by inserting immediately after the word “commission” appearing in the second line, the following: “To verify whether the petition is initiated within the requirements of sub-section (4).”

The justification is that there is need to establish that the petition is signed by at least two-thirds of the registered voters of the relevant constituency. It would be useless to inquire into grounds if the signatures are less than the required number. We propose an amendment to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (9) we propose an amendment by inserting between the words “off” and “physical” appearing in the second line, the word “permanent”. 

Justification is that the incapacity must be of a permanent nature to warrant a recall of a Member of Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 8, sub-clause (5) to replace the existing sub-clause with the following: “Any party aggrieved by the decision of the High Court may appeal to the Court of Appeal against the decision and subsequently appeal to the Supreme Court.”

Mr Chairman, the committee had submissions and came to the conclusion that any aggrieved party has a right to exhaust all the stages of appeal in our judicial system. We propose.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposal by the committee chairperson but in view of the fact that election petitions must expeditiously be disposed of so that Parliament can settle and begin transacting business, is it not really going to bog down the process of Parliament by having proceedings, which go on up to the Supreme Court? I would like the chairman of the committee to clear my fears around that or if possible they could put an amendment so that it is possible for each court to put aside any other business and expeditiously handle these election petitions and it should be included in the law.  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the concern of the honourable member is correct and that is why at a later stage under clause 66(9) we will be proposing an amendment to reduce the period within which the High Court must determine a petition from 12 months to six months so that time is created for proceedings to end up in the highest court without extending the period within which these matters should be completed. But the right of a person to go the highest court in the land should not be compromised. That is our proposal. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to move an amendment to clause 11(2)(d) regarding the number of Members of Parliament with disabilities. Instead of five, I am inserting eight and instead of one I am inserting four so that we have eight Members of Parliament with disabilities, four of whom shall be women with disabilities. I explained yesterday the burden that we have and all of you understood, I think you will support me. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, while the minister prepares to respond on behalf of government, I would like to support the proposal by hon. Baba Diri Margaret very strongly. I think an extra three Members of Parliament will not be too much for this House.  

Secondly, each time we create new districts, we expand the constituencies of the disabled and mind you, people with disabilities considering that they have disabilities, it is important that affirmative action is extended so that they are able to perform their duties as Members of Parliament. Therefore, Sir, I think this is a reasonable proposal and I hope, first of all the minister will not object to it and certainly I hope that the entire House will support this proposal overwhelmingly. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But have we not dealt with this issue during the general debate? We have yet to consider our mandate under 78(2). Again I want to read this: “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter every five years Parliament shall review the representation and paragraph (b) and (c) of Clause 1 of this Article for purposes of retaining, increasing, abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to.”  Incidental to this we would presuppose the number and this and the other. So, whereas there are brilliant merits in the proposal, the proper time to deal with this would be when the minister promised that within two weeks he is going to bring the resolution.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, with your guidance I would advise my colleague hon. Baba Diri Margaret to bring that particular amendment at the time when the minister comes for review. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. Before I withdraw my amendment, it seems when we pass this, it will mean that it will stand. My suggestion is that we skip this section until the minister brings his resolution and we debate it because we are saying aye to it tomorrow. How shall we undo what we have already tied here? So, can we withdraw all that section and bring it when the minister brings the resolution?  

MR MWESIGE: The resolution for review is that the Government will be brought under the Constitution, so it is a constitutional mandate. Once this Parliament reviews the representation of special interest groups in accordance with Article 78, whatever law or regulation that is contrary to that resolution, which we will pass, will certainly have to be reviewed to conform to what this Parliament will have passed. 

There is no contradiction in proceeding with this Bill, Sir, and as I promised within two weeks government will have brought the proposal for review under Article 78. Once that review is done, all other laws will be subject to that review. There is no contradiction in preceding with this Bill and that resolution.

THE CHAIRMAN: So they will be adjusted accordingly.

MR MWESIGE: Absolutely, Mr Chairman.

MRS BABA DIRI: Okay, thank you. I shall bring it when you bring your resolution. I now withdraw.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Clause 11; any other amendment to it?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 11, sub-clause (4), we propose to amend by inserting paragraph (b) as follows: “The representatives of the workers shall be elected in the manner prescribed by regulations made by the minister under section 100 of this Act. The Constitution provides for workers’ representation among the interest group and their mode of election must also be provided for because all the others are provided for.” I propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, when we were debating the Political Parties and Organisations Act, the matter was raised concerning the sponsorship of candidates under the multi-party political arrangement, and it was noted that after the primaries, it would be necessary for those who opt to go for primaries in particular political parties and have lost not to again stand as independent candidates. This is necessary to provide some order in the carrying out of affairs of political parties and organisations. I, therefore, propose that clause 13 be deleted and we insert the following: 

“Sponsorship of candidate by political organisations or parties and restriction on standing as independent candidates:  

1.	Under the multi-party political system, nomination of candidates may be made by political organisations or political parties sponsoring a candidate, or by a candidate standing for election as an independent candidate without being sponsored by a political organisation or political party.
2.	Notwithstanding sub-section (1) - which I have just read - a person who has participated in the primaries of a political party or a political organisation for the purpose of being considered as a person to represent a political party or political organisation at any election shall not stand for election as an independent candidate in respect of that election.”

Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much. I am surprised that my very good friend and colleague who is always conscious and a very good listener when we were debating in this House, has resurrected this matter. Mr Chairman, you guided this House and I was fully convinced that the proposal being made by hon. Kiwalabye would be totally unconstitutional. It would be telling people that, “You must stay with party X or else you have no chance of standing and offering yourself as a candidate”, which I think is totally against the principle of association and the right of association is a fundamental right. There is no way you can come up with a law to make me associate with any particular person or not to associate with any particular person. Therefore, I oppose the proposal. It is unconstitutional and I think the best hon. Kiwalabye can do is to withdraw the proposal. Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, adding to what hon. James Mwandha has just said, the freedom to associate also means the freedom to disassociate, and that freedom is continuous. It cannot have a cut off point. You cannot say that you will have it for this week and not have it next week. If you have had it in the primaries, you can continue to have it even after the primaries. Therefore, we will be definitely going counter that freedom and we cannot derogate from that freedom at this stage.  

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, multi-party politics requires some discipline among its members, despite the fact that people have got their freedoMs We know that we have a freedom to associate but once you have opted to associate then your freedoms are to a certain extent limited to the fact that you have associated and under that association there must be some discipline. Definitely what would be the essence of associating in a political party and the political party is going to sponsor candidates and in selecting candidates, you are not selected? You with your supporters now opt to go independent. That will definitely weakens the party for which you opted and, therefore –(Interjections)- I am not yet convinced that I should withdraw.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, I beg that the question be put.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, I want to inform members that even though political parties exist, not all Ugandans are going to belong to political parties. In fact the vast majority will not be members of political organisations. They are going to be independent and they should reserve the right to independently elect anybody who does not belong to an organisation and in fact if a member feels that he has not been fairly treated in the primaries, he should be entitled to disassociate with the party and seek the vote of the independents out there. For those reasons, I would beg my colleague to withdraw this amendment.

MR ERESU: Motion. Mr Chairman, I beg that the question be put –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let me put the question to the proposed amendment and you vote on it. Hon. Kiwalabye moved an amendment, which you have debated, now I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, in view of the responses –(Laughter)- and in view of the constitutional complications this motion of mine may cause, I beg to withdraw.

THE CHAIRMAN: But let us put the record straight. Once a ruling has been made - because I put the question and it was lost - therefore, there is nothing for you to withdraw. But it is okay; there is nothing wrong.  

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, drawing back to that particular Article to strengthen those freedoms you have expressed, can we even be clearer through this amendment by putting it that a candidate even after losing in the primaries is free to stand independently?

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 13 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 23(7) we propose to substitute the word “or” – in the report it is written “off”, it is supposed to be “or” – appearing in the last line, with the word “and”.  The drafting seems to suggest that there are options that you can have the elections either freely or in accordance with the law. We think both are a requirement and we propose that it should be: “freely and in accordance with the law.” We propose that amendment so that it should now read: “Subject to the provision of this section, every candidate for election to Parliament has a right to conduct his or her campaign freely and in accordance with the law.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 35(2) to substitute the word “one” appearing in the first line, with the word “two”. This we have passed in the other law and it should also be passed in this law on agents. We propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: You heard the amendment; I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, under sub-clause (5): “The presiding officer or polling assistant shall write the name of the polling station in the space provided for on the top of the ballot.” I propose that this sub-clause be deleted because as we had discussed, if we allow these presiding officers to write they can even tick and it will cause confusion and it has been done in the past. So since the serial numbers are there, it is not necessary for the presiding officer to write on the ballot papers. So I propose that we delete this sub-clause (5).

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the argument. I think he made a contribution during the general debate.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I do not understand the essence of the deletion of this sub-clause. “The presiding officer or polling assistant shall write the name of the polling station in the space provided on top of the ballot paper before handing the ballot paper to the person claiming to vote;” what is wrong with this?

THE CHAIRMAN: Supposing the polling assistant knows that you are going to vote for a candidate he is against, he may decide to write Naguru on your ballot paper, when I actual sense you are in Nsambya. Eventually this will make this particular ballot paper invalid. The Electoral Commission should know the ballot papers it has sent to individual polling stations, because they even have serial numbers. Why does the polling assistant have to write when he might invalidate a ballot?  

MR KIGYAGI: That is not the only problem. We have had experiences in the past where presiding officers or polling agents are instructed not to have any pens or pencils. The moment you allow them to have pens and allow them to write, they will simply tick. They know which fellows do not know how to read. This kind of thing will make many ballot papers invalid. Therefore, I propose that we delete this sub-clause.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, since ballot papers will have serial numbers, I accept his amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 66(9). The “12 months” should be replaced with “six months”. The justification is to create time for these processes to end up in the Supreme Court.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 and made amendments to clauses 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 23, 35, 37 and 66 of the Bill. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I should draw your attention to this observation for guiding the House. During the general debate a matter was raised by hon. Banyenzaki. This was about clause 4 and the disqualification dealing with a person as judged by the commission for various reasons. It is in this Bill. I went back to my office and scrutinised the Constitution provisions under Article 80. I scrutinised the disqualifications, which we inserted to amend Article 80 in the recent Bill, which we passed. It was Bill No.3 of the Constitution (Amendment) Bills. What I found out was that this Bill creates more disqualifications than those disqualifications that were created by the Constitution and this is not permissible. The Bill should not be bigger than the constitution itself. Whereas there might be merits in inserting that particular provision, it contradicts the Constitution. You may need to think about it before we proceed to pass this Bill. I do not know whether they are merits.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I am raising on a completely different matter. The committee discussed the matter you have just talked about, which took us a long time. It is upon the House to take a decision because the committee discussed it and we could not move beyond what we had done. I propose that the House takes a decision.  

I would, however, like to seek for a recommittal of clause 11, arising from the issues that hon. Babu raised and the discussions that took place in relation to what changes we have made regarding Kampala City and its representation in Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER:  Did you say clause 11?

MR OULANYAH: Yes, clause 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Bill. We propose a small amendment to take care of the representation of the cities that will be created. We propose that we recommit and amend sub-clause (1) by inserting the phrase “or city” immediately after the word “district”. Therefore, it would now read: “As required by Article 78(1)(b) of the Constitution, there shall be one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city.”  We propose. 

THE SPEAKER: Will you not have to look at Article 101? What will happen to the many municipalities you have created? 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the elections of the woman representatives are not catered for under this Article.

THE SPEAKER: I am not talking about women representatives. All municipalities in Uganda are now constituencies. What will happen to these constituencies, which we created because of the regional tier?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, we had thought of only Kampala city, which has been a district until recently. We had not extended our views to municipalities because we thought they were sufficiently covered under the Parliamentary Interim Provisions Act.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you. However, you created both cities and municipalities, which were not represented by Members of Parliament in the past. What do you intend to do with this kind of situation? I have understood your concern but what about the municipalities?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, the issue of municipalities would require an amendment to the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Act. I do not think this law would have a solution because the Schedule to that law is what lists the constituencies, where Members of Parliament are supposed to be represented. That is where we get the number of 200 and now 15. Therefore, if there is a proposal of increasing the number to take care of the municipalities that have been created, whose representation must be reflected in Parliament, an amendment is necessary in the Schedule of that particular law.

THE SPEAKER: No. By incorporation, you have adopted what is in that interim provision to be part of this one. After passing this one we shall forget about the interim law. Everything that is in there will be there for history; we have transplanted some of the provisions there and made them part of this. 

MR MWESIGE: The first Schedule to the Parliament Elections Interim Provisions Statute, 1996 is flexible. It is amendable by the minister and Parliament. When constituencies are created the minister goes back to this schedule to amend it to accommodate the new constituencies.

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion by the chairman that we recommit clause 11 of this Bill to take care of the city. However, the point I am raising is constitutional. We will be challenged that Parliament has given itself powers to expand the list of constituencies when the Constitution limited them. What do we do?

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I propose, therefore, that we recommit clause 4 as well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion that we recommit clause 11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

Clause 4

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I take into account the guidance given to us. Clause 4(2)(h) may be against the Constitution. I have considered the matter and propose that sub-clause 2(h) of clause 4 be deleted from the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 11

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Chairman, when I raised the issue on clause 11(2)(d) the minister explained very clearly that we are not sure of the affirmative action and we should not talk about it until he brings the resolution. By amending this particular one are you trying to dodge my concern?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Baba Diri for keeping institutional memory, which is very important. I congratulate her upon being a fighter.  However, in not picking up the issue of increasing the number of representatives of persons with disabilities, we are within the constitutional review programme. When you review, you could increase, decrease or abolish completely. We cannot take this kind of decision administratively or even summarily. We have committed ourselves to bringing a resolution here for the matter to be reviewed in the shortest time possible.  

As for keeping to the requirement of the rule of law and complying with the Constitution, we cannot add anything, as you rightly guided, Sir, in the other Chair as Speaker. You cannot add to the list of disqualification, which is not provided for in the Constitution. This was an additional disqualification. We are here to proceed according to the Constitution and that is why we said that the other one has to wait for the proper constitutional review programme. We shall move a resolution here in the days that we indicated.  We are actually being honourable to ourselves by sticking to the programme of the Constitution. I thank you.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, considering the mandate of the Constitution, any person holding Ugandan citizenship  –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Alintuma, we are dealing with matters that were recommitted.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, this was a preamble. I am going to Article 4. I still have a problem with Article No. 4 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You should have made a motion.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Recommitting means amendment. I am making these amendments, Mr Chairman. I thought we are making amendments so –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there is a special task we are dealing with, brought by the minister when he made a motion to recommit for a specific purpose.  We are not in the general committee stage.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Can you then clarify to me what the Attorney-General has just previously done with 4(h)?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Yesterday I raised the issue of the respective effects and you said some laws could be retrospective. Now that we have deleted this particular sub-clause, is it going to affect people who have committed these offences within the last seven years or is it going to apply to people who will commit offences after we have passed this law?

THE CHAIRMAN: What we deleted will not affect anybody. It is deleted.  

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, I do not think we have two chairpersons in this House. Why is the Attorney-General pointing fingers at members who are making suggestions? Is it proper for the Attorney-General to behave in a manner that harasses others?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, let us move as we have been moving since we started. We had the Committee Stage, which we finished. The report was given and the minister was about to move a motion for the third reading. The procedure is that before the question is put, if there is any member who for one reason or another thinks that a clause, which we passed should be recommitted, should make his or her case to justify recommittal. We only recommit that provision for which a plea has been made. In this case, the matter for which the minister sought recommittal has been dealt with. There was no other clause in respect of this provision. Therefore, we cannot consider any other matter now. We had two recommittals and the other was the chairman’s. Let us deal with that of the chairman before we resume.  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 11 is proceeded by part 4, which reads: “District Women Representatives and special interest groups.” The proposed amendment would also affect this. I now propose to amend part 4 to read, “District, city women representatives and special interest groups” and under 11(1), “As required by Article 78(1)(b) of the Constitution, there shall be one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city.” I propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House reconsidered clauses 4 and 11 upon recommittal and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations upon the Bill we have just passed. Thank you for your patience, which has enabled us to accomplish this exercise today. However, before we proceed with another matter, I want to welcome the children in the gallery. They are from Exodus Primary School in Kagoma County, Jinja District. Their teachers have accompanied them. You are welcome to your Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND 
IMMIGRATION CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

4.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2004 be read for the first time. I note that under section 10 of the Budget Act 2001, this Bill must be accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications. By the Grace of God, I have a Certificate of Financial Implications, signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 11 October 2005. I beg to lay it on the Table. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for consideration. Honourable members, I would like to know the position on the Local Government and the Police (Amendment) Bills. They are also relevant in expediting the transition process. Are there any members from those two committees? Are the reports ready?

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, we have been working hard and I am sure the reports should be ready.  

THE SPEAKER: Have you finalised them?

CAPT. BASALIZA: We have almost finalised them. Some members who have been away have not signed. However, hon. Kabakumba is now here and I am sure she will sign. Therefore, many members will have signed by tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: How about Local Government?

DR RICHARD NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson and his vice-chairperson are not here. However, I learnt from the committee clerk that the report is ready. He is only trying to get in touch with the chairperson. Therefore, if the chairperson is here tomorrow, we will proceed. 

MS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have consulted with the chairperson and the vice-chairperson. They will be here tomorrow.  

THE SPEAKER: We adjourn to tomorrow morning so that we handle these reports. With that we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 October 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


