PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10549Thursday, 12 October 2023If this vice continues, we shall write to you with a proposal requesting you, as the appointing authorities, to withdraw these people because it will be difficult for us, as presiding officers, to work with chairpersons who cannot attend plenary.Otherwise, I wonder: when they present their Bills, who will be handling them if they do not attend the House sittings? They should be leading by example. Honourable colleagues, also, under Rule 26(4) of the Rules of Procedure, every Thursday, the first two hours should start with Member’s issues. However, because we also, at the same time, have Prime Minister’s Time at 4.00 p.m. and some of the issues are covered under Prime Minister’s Time, I have used my prerogative, under Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure, to put it immediately after the Prime Minister’s Time. So, we shall be handling those issues after Prime Minister’s Time.Yesterday, I also guided that the Government would present a statement with regard to the complaints raised by the Leader of the Opposition on the arrests of some of the leaders of the Opposition. I apologise that we did not include it on the Order paper, but I will amend the Order Paper to accommodate that statement, immediately after my communication.Then, matters of national importance will come together with the Prime Minister’s issues. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 6TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am happy to see some faces that I have not seen of late. I had asked my team to compile for me my report. Maybe I can use my digital copy. We had assigned Hon. Prof. Mushemeza to check for us the attendance of committee chairpersons – but my office has also been taking note – so that the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition can know the performance of their leaders as far as attending plenary is concerned.When I checked what we have covered with Professor and my team – from the records – I found out that on the 3rd of October, only 21 (37.5 per cent) attended – that is, committee chairpersons and vice-chairpersons; on the 4th of October, only 19 (33.9 per cent) attended; on the 5th of October, 15 (26.7 per cent) attended; on the 10th of October, only 16 (28.5 per cent) attended; and on the 11th of October, 14 (25 per cent) attended. These are the leaders! 10550COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRHonourable colleagues, also, Article 163(5) of the Constitution requires us to debate, consider and take appropriate action on reports of the Auditor-General within six months. The deadline that was given to accountability committees to comply with this requirement of the law was 10 October 2023, which has passed, and they have not yet complied. Therefore, on Tuesday, all accountability committees’ reports that have not been considered will be adopted by this House.The accountability committees will go and handle treasury memoranda – that is, action taken on those reports, as provided for under the law. This is done so that we know that deadlines are deadlines. (Mr Aogon rose_)Hon. Silas, you are standing up. What is the – here, when you stand up, before you get the microphone, you give reason why you are standing up. Reaction to my communication? Please.2.17MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Mr Speaker, I am a member of one of the accountability committees –(Mr Ssemujju rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Would you mind if your colleague finishes his point and then I allow you? Procedure?MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You ruled that immediately after your communication – and on your ruling, in our rules, a procedure exists on how to challenge it. Your ruling was that immediately after your communication, we would receive a statement from the Government. I do not know whether Hon. Silas has just been appointed a minister and that, that is the reason he stood up to speak on behalf of the Government, in total disregard of the ruling that you had made; that immediately after your communication, we would go to the statement.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I am still communicating – because reactions are part of my communication. (Laughter)  Reactions to my communication are part of my communication. Once we go beyond that, we would have gone to another item.So, since I have not yet called for another item, I think he is still – it is just reaction to my communication. MR AOGON:  That is why, Mr Speaker, we always elect Members with wisdom to be in that seat. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, my concern was to find out from you whether the committees will be given an opportunity to explain why they were not able to catch up with the deadline of the 10th of October. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, Hon. Tebandeke? MR TEBANDEKE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to say we elect only Members with wisdom in that seat, implying that those you competed against are not wise?   (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, every Member of Parliament has the wisdom and qualifies to be the Speaker or Deputy Speaker. Even I, can be a backbencher tomorrow.  –I can also be on the frontbench or anywhere. So, all of us here are men and women of great wisdom. Thank you.2.20DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of nonattendance by chairpersons and their deputies is a big one. I am happy you have been able to analyse our attendance. It was long overdue.One time, I raised an issue of how chairpersons and deputies of committees are identified and selected. I also raised the issue of attendance of Members. Mr Speaker, if a Member has not been attending committee meetings, how can [The Deputy Speaker]10551THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023that person be appointed as a chairperson or a deputy. We need to have these statistics clear. Otherwise, for you to be in leadership, you must be a role model. For you to be given any responsibility, your attendance in committees and plenary should be emphasised. Chairpersons lead Members to oversight roles either abroad or inland. We had a retreat of chairpersons and deputies, but it was noted with concern that many reports, be it travel abroad or inland, are never presented in the House yet money is spent on these field visits. I am of the view that we get out all those reports and present them here. Otherwise, they all have very important policy issues that have to be looked at. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Florence. That is very right. We have started and we are going to follow up all these and ensure reports are presented.2.23MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Mr Speaker, my reaction is in regard to attendance by chairpersons and vice chairpersons. These individuals serve as our leaders - and we have a Business Committee in place. Mr Speaker, in that line, I request that you convene a special meeting of the Business Committee for chairpersons and vice chairpersons so that you discuss - and by the time we come back here - there are statements we do not want to make - but as Prof. Mushemeza records attendance here - we see others attend and others do not.I know very well there are people who will not attend. However, through your office, Mr Speaker, for the benefit of the committees, the benefit of the business we process here and for the benefit of this country, hold a special meeting of the Business Committee where all these leaders are, so you can take them through the implications and why they were appointed in such positions, so that we all benefit in that regard. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, that is in the offing; we have already started on that, but it is beyond the chairpersons because there are also individuals. Like I said last time, there are individuals who never attend this House, but they go to the press and say “I do not catch the Speaker’s eye”. Do you want my eye to “come” to your bedroom? (Laughter) Hon. Kinyamatama, do you have a procedural matter?MS KINYAMATAMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. On 9th October, one of our Members, Hon. Zaake came to my constituency and used defamatory words against me that I cannot mention here. I ask that the Information Communication and Technology (ICT) Department - [Ms Namugga rose_]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Wait. What is your point of order? Honourable colleagues, do not mind. MS NAMUGGA:  Mr Speaker, we are reacting to your communication, but I did not hear you mention anything concerning Hon. Zaake as part of your communication. I am wondering whether the Member is in order to raise issues concerning Hon. Zaake. This was not part of your communication, Mr Speaker. I am inquiring whether Hon. Kinyamatama is in order to raise a matter concerning a Member when it was not part of your communication.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, a point of procedure is raised any time –(Applause) - and the Member has raised a point of procedure. Allow the Member to present what she has and then I will rule whether she is procedurally right or not. (Applause)MS KINYAMATAMA:  Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that the words used against me are so demeaning that I cannot mention them. I request the ICT department of this Parliament to play the video of Hon. Zaake so that you know what happened. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker?10552COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I equally listened to an audio and I was totally shocked on how an honourable colleague - The problem is that you are all talking.Honourable colleagues, I listened to an audio and I do not know whether that is the one Hon. Kinyamatama is referring to. I also watched a video where our brother, Hon. Zaake, was calling a certain “ Nalumansi” MP . Yes, that is what was in the video. It referred to a colleague as the “most dense” – It really surprised me.Honourable colleagues, I know that in Parliament, when you go to a colleague’s constituency whom you do not agree with, there is a way we usually deal with it for the sake of respect in the House.  [Member rose_] - Hon. Tebandeke?I am going to use my authority to direct that if that video is available with the ICT team, it is played. (Applause) Sometimes when you say things, people think you are harassing them. So ICT, if you have it, play it. If you do not have it, do not play it.MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, firstly, as a person, let me make it clear as I raise this point of procedure that I have a problem with matters that happened outside Parliament – (Interjections)  - I said, “I have”, I did not say, “You have.” – (Interjections)  - coming here and they become part of parliamentary business. Having said that, Mr Speaker, the colleague complaining has said that what was said cannot even be uttered. How on earth can Parliament listen to what a Member has said she cannot utter? (Interruption)  You are boiling for no reason because if you want to shout, we can.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, listen to the colleague who is submitting. You will be given a chance to respond.MR SSEMUJJU:  Yes, if you want to shout, we have a mouth and we can begin shouting. Yes, we can, if that is what you want. I would like to plead with you, Mr Speaker, that if something cannot be uttered – I am speaking out of experience. You see, some of you have just come. When I had issues here with the Presiding Officer, you remember what Hon. Chris Baryomunsi and Hon. Dombo did to have this matter sorted outside Parliament. Otherwise, I fear that to turn this Parliament – I go and quarrel with Hon. Ssekikubo, he comes here and it becomes Parliamentary business. The procedural issue I am raising here is whether our rules that require decorum in this Parliament can allow screening of words a Member has said cannot be uttered. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  First of all, thank you for the wisdom of a senior Member of this House. However, with regard to issues that happen outside Parliament being brought here, you have brought issues which do not even concern Members of Parliament. Wherever a Member of Parliament is – and I have been tasked as a Presiding Officer – whether inside or outside, we must protect them.What I picked from Hon. Ssemujju is that some of the statements are so despicable to the extent that we should not give them a national platform. Listen to me; that is what I heard. On quarrels outside, in the recent case of Hon. Zaake versus the Parliamentary Commission, the court ruled clearly that the code of conduct of Parliament can apply to you on issues in and outside Parliament. If I may quote what the judge said: “It is clear that the comments attributed to the Petitioner were not, strictly speaking, made in Parliament. However, they were published online and, therefore, accessible to all who had access and cared to read them.”The court went to note that, “As can be perceived from its long title of the ‘Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act’, this Act protects Members from being sanctioned for statements made in Parliament. However, Parliament, in its great wisdom, deemed it fit to regulate the 10553THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023conduct of Members both within and outside Parliament. It made specific rules describing the behaviour of Members in its Code of Conduct under the rules including aspects of specific conduct of personal conduct in paragraph 3 thereof. The Code of Conduct is attached to the Rules of Procedure. The Code of Conduct then becomes part of the rules and falls under the jurisdiction of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.”Honourable colleagues, if you think that you are going to go out and do whatever you want that affects the image of Parliament and say, “I did it from outside, you cannot touch me”, we shall apply our Rules. With that, as I conclude on this matter, I have taken the guidance of Hon. Ssemujju that indeed, the way the Member has put it, we should not play it on a national television.Honourable colleagues, I refer this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline as per Rule 175 of our Rules of Procedure, to report back within 45 days and the video will be played as evidence in the committee. I think it would be a middle ground because there are people who have not watched it and I would not want to give it prime time. It was really bad. I have ruled on the matter. Hon. Kinyamatama, I am so sorry for that.MS KINYAMATAMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. An attack on a woman is an attack on all women. The reason I am asking for that video to be played is because I cannot say those words, but let the world hear what he said. Why are we covering up evil? An attack on a woman is an attack on all of us as Women Members of Parliament. We cannot let this stay. I want the Members of Parliament to see what exactly happened. I have been keeping my cool, but I want this House to see what exactly happened. We cannot cover up evil. We cannot cover men that do not respect women. I cannot be called what he called me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Okupa.MR OKUPA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker - (Interruptions)-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to one another. Order!MR OKUPA:  Honourable members, shouting will not help us to solve this problem. Can we listen to one another? Mr Speaker, when you made a ruling, I was getting up on a point of procedure. Rule 87(2) of our Rules of Procedure talks about the decision of the Speaker and says, “The decision of the Speaker or the Chairperson on any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantial motion made after notice.” Mr Speaker, you had made a decision that the video be played, but we did not proceed correctly in order to rescind your decision. Can we follow the rules since you had already made your decision?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I can feel the sentiments. In the end, I am going to put this matter to a vote. If you say that we play it, we will play it. If you say we should not, then we will not. I do not want to appear to be covering up for anyone because I am a man. Hon. Niwagaba? MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruptions) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us listen to the LOP. THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruptions) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would like to put the question that the video be played.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Play the video; it is the decision of the House.10554COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR(A video recording was played.)[“MW. ZAAKE:  Kyonna kyonna kiri ku muntu atya?AUDIENCE:  Omu.MW. ZAAKE:  Ne bw’anaakozesa ddogo, tajja kusobola kubeerawo, ffe tuli bavubuka. President waffe muvubuka. Naffe tuli bavubuka. Ky’ogamba nti agenda kubeerawo ppaka ppaka ffenna tumulekewo?AUDIENCE:  Agenda kufa.MW. ZAAKE:  Kati mumanye nti … tubeere ku mulamwa; mubeere ku bavubuka bannammwe, muve mu kuwagira abakadde, muwagire abaki?AUDIENCE:  Abavubuka.MW. ZAAKE:  Era bino bye mpulira simanya mulinayo …, eno t emulina mubaka wa Paalamenti n’omu, okuleka abagenda eri … n’okubeerayo tebakola ki?AUDIENCE:  Tebabeerayo.MW. ZAAKE:  Mpulira simanya eno mulinayo Gyaviira, y’akyasinze okubeera omusiru ennyo mu Paalamenti eno.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Talina ky’ayogera mu Paalamenti. Aliyo bubeezi, kubeera awo kuba ng’atuuyanya butuuyanya ntebe za mu Paalamenti.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Era bwe tubeera eyo, bwe tuwulira ekivundu mu paalamenti tukebera ku Gyaviira ateekwa okuba y’abeera akitaddewo.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Kati ate … ate tulinayo ka Nalumansi bakayita Kinyamatama, ate ako kafu nnyo nnyo nnyo.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Kabeera wali eri kumpi kaba ng’akeetunda obwetunzi mu Paalamenti … temuddamu kutuleetera bannange kisiraani mu Paalamenti. Era ako temukakola ki?AUDIENCE:  Tetukaleeta.MW. ZAAKE:  Kubanga abo be bakyasinze okutusibira mu busibe mu Paalamenti eyo, ne Paalamenti n’efuuka useless. Era Paalamenti yafuuka talk show nga bwe tujja wano ne twogera ne tubireka wano. Terina ky’esalawo. Naye twagala musindikeyo abantu nga njasabiggu, ate mubalina wano, ng’ate bali mu maaso gammwe, tugende tuzoganye Paalamenti eyo ppaka bwe tulaba nga tufunye eki? Enkyukakyuka. Ate ebyo byonna byonna 2026 w’anaatuukira, ng’ebyo byonna byonna byaggwa dda kuba bagenda kuba tebakola ki …? Naye ebyo tusobola kutuukawo nga tutaddemu amaanyi, nga tuvuddemu eby’okugamba nti tusanyusaamu busanyusa, bino ebigambo ne tubifuula ebikolwa.”]Translation of transcribed Video[MR ZAAKE:  It is all about one what …?AUDIENCE:  One person.MR ZAAKE:  Even if he uses witchcraft, he will not be there, we are youths. Our President is a youth. We too are youths. Do you want to say he is going to be around, and we shall all leave him behind?10555THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023AUDIENCE:  He is going to die.MR ZAAKE:  Now, you should know that … we should be focused; support your fellow youths; stop supporting old people, support the what …?AUDIENCE:  The youths.MR ZAAKE:  And what I am hearing that you have …, you don’t have any member of Parliament here, save for those ones who go there and … and they don’t even go there.I hear that here, you have Gyaviira; he is the most stupid person in this Parliament.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  He does not say anything in Parliament. He is just there; he is there to just make Parliament chairs sweat.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  And when we are there and smell a stench in Parliament, we check on Gyaviira, because we know it must be coming from him.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  And now … we have this Nalumansi called Kinyamatama; that is very fake!AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  She is always there, as if she is selling her body in Parliament … please don’t bring us disasters again in Parliament. And that one, please don’t do what …?AUDIENCE:  Bring her.MR ZAAKE:  Because those ones are doing a lot to keep us in captivity in Parliament, and making the Parliament useless. And the Parliament has become a talk show, in the same way we come here and talk and leave everything here. It does not decide anything. But we want you to send strong people, and you have them, in front of you here; so that we go and shake that Parliament, until we get what …? A change. And by 2026, all that will already be finished because they don’t … But we can only achieve that if we put in effort; by not doing things just for entertainment, and by turning these words into actions.](The video recording was transcribed and translated by Centre for Language and Communication Services, Makerere University.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the House is suspended for 10 minutes.(The House was suspended at 2.44 p.m.)(On resumption at 3.33 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Welcome back, honourable colleagues. I hope tempers have cooled. Can I have order in the House? Honourable colleagues, tempers went high, but we still remain family. That is what - (Members rose_)  - Please, just listen to me. We still remain a family. When we are being judged outside, we are still Members of Parliament. We have met, as leaders, and had a longer meeting      than the 10 minutes I had anticipated. We have had two days whereby our colleagues on the Opposition side have not been in the House over a very important item, which they felt was extremely key and they needed a Government response. Indeed, Government 10556COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRresponse has been prepared and the minister is ready. I was caught in the crossfire between two aggrieved parties in circumstances that are totally different. So, we have agreed that we will watch the video for two minutes and then immediately after, we will go to a very critical issue that we have been waiting for – that is the item from the Minister of Internal Affairs, which made the Opposition Members of Parliament walk out. Once we lose focus, we go into many other issues. With that, please, let us play the video for two minutes and finish. MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with your ruling, but I kindly advise that the fact - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us listen to the honourable member. MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker,  the fact that our colleague was very aggrieved with the video and even said the words that were said cannot be announced on the Floor, I suggest that for purposes of holding the dignity and the decorum of this House, we stay the playing of the video. This is because several of our colleagues have abused others in the field. Can we bring the same videos to be played here?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Namugga, if you have a video of that nature affecting a Member, please bring it to me, and I will give it space; we will play it. MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, I was part of your meeting. The issue for which we left Parliament – and Hon. Kibalya was a Guild President in Makerere – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kibalya is not on record; so, let us continue. MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, the issue for which we left this Parliament, in our judgment, is graver than the issue at hand. For harmony in this Parliament, let us deal with the first issue. Deal with the issue for which we left this Parliament, and then we will be ready to deal with this issue as well. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the good thing is that I am ready to deal with both issues. One issue is going to take two minutes; the video we have is just two minutes. The other issue is taking more than an hour. I do not know why we become difficult. Let us provide leadership. Honourable colleagues, this House does not belong to me, as the Speaker, but it belongs to all of us. So, the moment we have a meeting of minds and we do not radicalise each other, that is how we shall run business in this House. Otherwise, we are going to set a precedent whereby if one side does not agree with what is being proposed by the other side, then you stop the other side from speaking. It will not be good. 3.38THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I know it is not decorum for me to divulge the extent of the debate in our small retreat. What was not resolved is how you are going to deal with the matter of language of the video that is not provided for under the rules. Are we just going to play it for the sake without necessarily –? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I used my power under Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure to allow the video to be played. On the language, those who understand will pick it and those who do not can be helped. However, when it goes to the committee, of course, it will be sent to Makerere University for translation, and it will also be played. Honourable colleagues, for the sake of harmony, let us just do this. Clerk, play the video.(A video recording was played.)[The Deputy Speaker]10557THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023[“MW. ZAAKE:  Kyonna kyonna kiri ku muntu atya?AUDIENCE:  Omu.MW. ZAAKE:  Ne bw’anaakozesa ddogo, tajja kusobola kubeerawo, ffe tuli bavubuka. President waffe muvubuka. Naffe tuli bavubuka. Ky’ogamba nti agenda kubeerawo ppaka ppaka ffenna tumulekewo?AUDIENCE:  Agenda kufa.MW. ZAAKE:  Kati mumanye nti … tubeere ku mulamwa; mubeere ku bavubuka bannammwe, muve mu kuwagira abakadde, muwagire abaki?AUDIENCE:  Abavubuka.MW. ZAAKE:  Era bino bye mpulira simanya mulinayo …, eno temulina mubaka wa Paalamenti n’omu, okuleka abagenda eri … n’okubeerayo tebakola ki?AUDIENCE:  Tebabeerayo.MW. ZAAKE:  Mpulira simanya eno mulinayo Gyaviira, y’akyasinze okubeera omusiru ennyo mu Paalamenti eno.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Talina ky’ayogera mu Paalamenti. Aliyo bubeezi, kubeera awo kuba ng’atuuyanya butuuyanya ntebe za mu Paalamenti.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Era bwe tubeera eyo, bwe tuwulira ekivundu mu paalamenti tukebera ku Gyaviira ateekwa okuba y’abeera akitaddewo.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Kati ate … ate tulinayo ka Nalumansi bakayita Kinyamatama, ate ako kafu nnyo nnyo nnyo.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MW. ZAAKE:  Kabeera wali eri kumpi kaba ng’akeetunda obwetunzi mu Paalamenti … temuddamu kutuleetera bannange kisiraani mu Paalamenti. Era ako temukakola ki?AUDIENCE:  Tetukaleeta.MW. ZAAKE:  Kubanga abo be bakyasinze okutusibira mu busibe mu Paalamenti eyo, ne Paalamenti n’efuuka useless. Era Paalamenti yafuuka talk show nga bwe tujja wano ne twogera ne tubireka wano. Terina ky’esalawo. Naye twagala musindikeyo abantu nga njasabiggu, ate mubalina wano, ng’ate bali mu maaso gammwe, tugende tuzoganye Paalamenti eyo ppaka bwe tulaba nga tufunye eki? Enkyukakyuka. Ate ebyo byonna byonna 2026 w’anaatuukira, ng’ebyo byonna byonna byaggwa dda kuba bagenda kuba tebakola ki …? Naye ebyo tusobola kutuukawo nga tutaddemu amaanyi, nga tuvuddemu eby’okugamba nti tusanyusaamu busanyusa, bino ebigambo ne tubifuula ebikolwa.”]Translation of transcribed Video[MR ZAAKE:  It is all about   one what …?AUDIENCE:  One person.MR ZAAKE:  Even if he uses witchcraft, he will not be there, we are youths. Our President is a youth. We too are youths. Do you want to say he is going to be around, and we shall all leave him behind?10558COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRAUDIENCE:  He is going to die.MR ZAAKE:  Now, you should know that … we should be focused; support your fellow youths; stop supporting old people, support the what …?AUDIENCE:  The youths.MR ZAAKE:  And what I am hearing that you have …, you don’t have any member of Parliament here, save for those ones who go there and … and they don’t even go there.I hear that here you have Gyaviira; he is the most stupid person in this Parliament.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  He does not say anything in Parliament. He is just there; he is there to just make Parliament chairs sweat.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  And when we are there and smell a stench in Parliament, we check on Gyaviira, because we know it must be coming from him.AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  And now … we have this Nalumansi called Kinyamatama; that is very fake!AUDIENCE:  [Ululation]MR ZAAKE:  She is always there, as if she is selling her body in Parliament … please don’t bring us disasters again in Parliament. And that one, please don’t do what …?AUDIENCE:  Bring her.MR ZAAKE:  Because those ones are doing a lot to keep us in captivity in Parliament, and making the Parliament useless. And the Parliament has become a talk show, in the same way we come here and talk and leave everything here. It does not decide anything. But we want you to send strong people, and you have them, in front of you here; so that we go and shake that Parliament, until we get what …? A change. And by 2026, all that will already be finished because they don’t … But we can only achieve that if we put in effort; by not doing things just for entertainment, and by turning these words into actions.](The video recording was transcribed and translated by Centre for Language and Communication Services, Makerere University.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. So, honourable colleagues, that is the video. I refer the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, as per Rule 175 of our Rules of Procedure. Hon. Achayo and your team, you have up to 45 days to respond to this matter. I need the item now for the Minister of Internal Affairs. STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS     (I) MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ABOUT INCIDENTS INVOLVING SECURITY OFFICIALS, THE NATIONAL UNITY PLATFORM PRESIDENT AND SOME NUP MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN KAMPALA METROPOLITAN AND KAYUNGA ON 5 AND 9 OCTOBER 2023     THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Internal Affairs?MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10559THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 20233.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a statement on incidents involving security and – (Interruption)MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This honourable Parliament, two months back, directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring a comprehensive statement without any contradiction about the attacks on the UPDF in Kasese. Up to now, the same has never been brought. Is the minister proceeding well to give priority to the recent issue of human rights, leaving aside the statement, which was earlier asked by Parliament? Is he proceeding right? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, since the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs does not want the statement and wants the other statement to come first because it is high priority, honourable minister, go bring that statement first, then we shall later handle this one of human rights. Next item.Honourable colleagues, let us listen to the Leader of the Opposition. 3.45THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to state from the onset that for a minister bringing a statement on the Floor that we have demanded is not a favour and nobody should construe it as such. When Members demand a statement of any nature and it takes that long, it delays inordinately and a Member reminds the House of that inordinate delay and instead it impeaches another matter that speaks to ill will on the part of the Government. As the Opposition, we abhor ill will. We are patient over so many matters, but when we demand particular situations to be clarified, and they are construed as favours – two weeks ago, Mr Speaker, you promised that you would compel the Government to respond to so many unanswered questions on the Floor. This is week three, but there is no response. Of course, I understand the fact that the Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka could have misconstrued the length and the breadth of this. However, that should never in any way impeach the urgency of the subject matter at hand, to the extent that the Order Paper would be compelled to move to the next item. Mr Speaker, these are very grave matters of this country. We are listening to the minister and the minister had better act seriously on this matter. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable Leader of the Opposition, I also sympathise with you. Because now, you told me you sat as a Shadow Cabinet, wrote a letter demanding a statement; I passed it onto the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister directed the minister and the minister has prepared a statement. However, your shadow minister says he should not be listened to. I can give in to your wish. I thought I was ruling as per what you wanted. Therefore, next time, I request that you coordinate better; it is better to always consult with your Leader of the Opposition. Otherwise, I will make a ruling of that nature - but, with due respect to my brother, honourable Minister for Internal Affairs, please present the statement. Motion?3.48MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having referred the matter of the Hon. Zaake to the rules committee – and I am not pre-empting the statement which brought us here – I move that the Hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala who boxed the Hon. Zaake in the last Parliament, be referred to the same committee. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I think honourable colleagues, Hon. Ssemujju wanted a light moment because I do not know under which rule he moved the motion. After 10560COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRall, you only move a motion under rules; under which rule, honourable member? MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, I am moving this motion under the category of motions without notice; Rule 52 – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rule 59, honourable member. MR SSEMUJJU:  And Mr Speaker, the requirement is that this motion is entertained because if you are dealing with matters of injuring each other, we have a General here who nearly killed the Hon. Zaake in this Parliament. Therefore, as we refer Hon. Zaake for whatever he may have said, we also need to refer the one who was killing him and he is still seated with us here. That is my motion, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, let us go onto serious business. He has referred to 59(1)(k); it is the one in which the Speaker has a discretion whether the matter is urgent. I do not consider this one a serious matter; therefore, I do not grant it. Honourable minister, continue. GEN. MUHOOZI:  Mr Speaker and honourable members – (Interruption)MR KIBALYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am constrained, as member of UWOPA, and this is because of these ladies you see here, boiling. We do not want to say anything about your ruling. Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, to water down and treat the issue concerning a woman lightly, the way it is being perceived- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  How have I treated it lightly? MR KIBALYA:  I am proceeding, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, Hon. Kivumbi, please take your seat. Hon. Kibalya - honourable colleagues, I do not want us to blackmail each other here. The aggrieved Member of Parliament came on the Floor, I gave her space and she raised her issue. She requested that she wants her video played, but it caused commotion. We went and met as leaders, we agreed and the video was played. There is no other video I have not played; that is the video, which was given to me and we have played it. As per the rules, it is still an allegation; so, you must refer it to the other committee so that the accused Member can be heard. I have referred it to the other committee. So, which other way would one say that we are “watering it down”? Please, colleagues, let us not really- I respect women, I was raised by a woman, and I do not want anyone to insinuate that we are not handling well the issues of women. Gen. Muhoozi?GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, this is a statement about incidents involving security on the National Unity Platform President and some NUP Members of Parliament, in the Kampala Metropolitan Police area and Kayunga on 5 and 9 October 2023.IntroductionMr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you requested for a statement and it is being presented. I request you to talk to your Members to listen to the statement and then we debate. Thank you.GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, you ordered that a statement be made by the Government in response to the incidents that happened on Thursday, 5 October 2023 in Entebbe and on Independence Day, 9 October 2023 in Kampala Metropolitan area and Kayunga District, involving the National Unity Platform party leaders and some party supporters, respectively.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT [The Deputy Speaker]10561THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 12 OCTOBER 2023BackgroundIn the months of August and September 2023, we witnessed nationwide mobilisation tours and the opening of party offices by the NUP party President in various parts of the country. These tours were punctuated with some incidents of public disorder, damage to property through malicious damage, fatal and serious traffic accidents, as was the case in Hoima on 11 September 2023, as well as inciting violence and uttering defamatory statements against the person of the President of the Republic of Uganda –(Interruptions) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 3.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 October 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)