

Tuesday, 20 October, 2020

Parliament met at 11.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like to begin by amending the Order Paper to bring item 9 ahead of item 3; the Revenue Bills.

Secondly, I welcome and congratulate you for having participated in the nominations for the 2020/2021 parliamentary elections. I know it is a hectic period for us as leaders, but I still urge you to carry out your responsibilities with the dignity and honour expected of you.

Also, both here and in your constituencies, we advise that you continue to observe the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

I have been obliged to interfere with your recess, but as you recall when we last adjourned, I said that it may be necessary to call you from time to time. In particular, I have invited you, among others, to deal with the Revenue and Expenditure Bills. 

You may also recall that we passed the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020. However, His Excellency the President returned them to Parliament for reconsideration. It is therefore necessary that we dispose of this business in order to enable the Uganda Revenue Authority to execute its mandate.

You will also recall that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid on the Table the Supplementary Schedule 1 and 2 for Financial Year 2020. A number of entities, including the new cities, require funding. It is therefore necessary that Parliament should accordingly appropriate funds so that services can be carried out.

In the meantime, I received a petition by 714 residents of Lira-Kamdini Road. The petition was sent by Mr Patrick Obura who is complaining on their behalf about the 65 kilometres of crucial road, which is a major trade route connecting eastern Uganda to West Nile, Acholi, Bunyoro, Sudan, Congo and Egypt.

The complainants say that they have brought the matter to the attention of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), which has been making temporary fillings but that these get washed away by heavy rain and heavy traffic. We urge that the matter be addressed urgently. The petitioners feel that unless this is done, trade is going to be affected.

Therefore, I urge the Minister of Works and Transport to address this issue and report to Parliament at the end of November about what will have taken place.

I also would like to congratulate Team Uganda for their outstanding performance at the World Athletics Half-Marathon Championship held in Poland on 17 October 2020. In a special way, I will single out Jacob Kiplimo who emerged the marathon winner in a record time of 58 minutes and 49 seconds. Together with Joshua Cheptegei, Benjamin Kiplagat, Moses Chebet and Stephen Kissa, Team Uganda was fourth overall and this was only 10 days after Joshua Cheptegei broke the 10,000 metre record in Valencia, Spain.

In a special way, I would like to salute the Sabiny Community for producing and nurturing young men and women who have represented Uganda in various athletics championships and excelled. We are extremely proud of these young people.

Indeed this year, the Ethiopian and Kenyan athletics champions who had dominated the athletics scene in the whole world were finally outmatched by the young people from the highlands of Elgon. Congratulations again.

Honourable members, on a sad note, I would like to inform you about the death of Mr Okello Gautama Obabaru, the former Deputy Clerk (Corporate Affairs). He passed away on 9 October 2020, in Mulago Hospital. 

Mr Okello retired in 2019, having served in the Uganda service since 1980. He worked first as an Assistant Secretary, in various ministries as an administrator, rising through the ranks. He served Parliament from 1991 until retirement.

Our thoughts and prayers go to his children and family and pray that the Almighty God gives them comfort during this trying moment. Mr Okello will be laid to rest at his ancestral home in Lira Palwo, Agago District on Thursday, 22 October 2020. I invite members to stand up for a moment of silence in his honour.

(The members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, the final matter relates to the issue of the election and election dates. Before we went for recess, we had required of the Electoral Commission to inform the country about the election dates. I would like to complain, on behalf of the citizens, about lack of clarity on this issue. Candidates have been asked to prepare programmes but there is neither a starting nor concluding date. It is difficult for members to submit the programmes.

In addition, the absence of clarity on this issue is affecting the Judiciary. As you know, election petitions take priority and it is important for the Judiciary to take this into account while making their programmes and setting dates for their other work.

Failure to inform the country about this matter means that the Judiciary will be obliged to fix dates for hearing of other matters. In the end, this will cause frustration to the litigants because their hearing dates will be overtaken by the electoral petitions. This is a barrier to access to justice. 

We urge the Electoral Commission to live up to the expectations and inform us about the date so that the country, together with all those who are interested, can know.

There are just two matters of national concern.
 
11.46
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the Communication from the Chair, you have raised a very important point on the issue of lack of clarity.

As the sitting Members of Parliament, we have some activities, which we have to continue doing within our respective areas. However, because of lack of clarity, now that we are nominated, until we get clearance, if some of us who have been involved in sponsoring orphans – I know you are one of those involved in this exercise – these orphans are going back to school for the purpose of examinations. They may think that we are bribing voters so we do not know how to execute our current activities when we are already nominated. Our opponents may think by so doing we are compromising the voters in our favour. Madam Speaker, that is a very serious matter which I would like the Electoral Commission to clarify for us. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should brief us before the close of business today about this issue. 

11.48
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. After nomination, I was issued with a booklet of guidelines, which are dated July.

Starting with the point that you have raised, Madam Speaker, I was also asked to submit a campaign programme. I do not want to think that we are helpless. The Electoral Commission is behaving like this election is theirs and yet they are just presiding over an election for the country, where we are participants. 
My suggestion is to summon the minister responsible for the Electoral Commission this afternoon because there is no way we are going to a campaign period not knowing when it will start and end. 

In the area I am campaigning, police told me that I cannot start because they need clearance from Electoral Commission. We have been surrendered to nobody. The police told us one thing and the Electoral commission is quite but we have been nominated. I do not know whether they want us to be idling. 

The Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs – we have progressively relaxed COVID restrictions. How can the Electoral Commission issue July COVID guidelines in October? Things have changed. Guidelines for schools and people working have changed but the guidelines they have issued include no meetings or conference. It is the one they issued in July. 

Can we be helped, Madam Speaker, by those responsible; the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General? They should tell us why the guidelines have not been changed three months later; the one I have is of 2 July 2020. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, as I indicated, this is a very serious matter and we need clear answers. We would like the Minister of Justice and the Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney-General to come here. We are here until 5.00 p.m. so they must come and tell the country what we are going to do. It is even unfair for instance to expect a district councillor to campaign from now until whenever the elections are. It is a serious issue. 

I do not know who is standing in as the Leader of Government Business today but we really want the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney-General here. We cannot continue as if no one knew that elections would take place. 

11.51
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter regarding funding of political parties that are represented in Parliament. 

You did give me an opportunity to raise this matter about two weeks ago and when the minister was asked to explain why political parties had not been funded, they acted by releasing Shs 15 billion to the Electoral Commission. 

When the Electoral Commission received that money, it was sent to the political parties with representation in Parliament on the basis of numerical strength. Out of Shs 15 billion, the NRM received Shs 12 billion, FDC received Shs 1.5 billion, DP received about Shs 650 million, UPC received about Shs 350 million and the mighty Jeema received only Shs 41 million. 

This distribution is against the law. Section 14(a) of the Political parties and Organisations Act is to the effect that once money is for electoral activities, it is distributed equally. That is the law. 

When I engaged the Electoral Commission, I was told that the finance ministry did direct them that the money should be distributed on the basis of numerical strength. 

My prayer is to seek your indulgence to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on what basis this instruction was given. Why was that instruction against the Munyonyo spirit of the IPOD summit? There was a meeting with the chairman of the NRM, myself, hon. Norbert Mao and hon. Jimmy Akena where this matter was discussed and agreed. The Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were there as well. Why did they deviate from that spirit and the law? Madam Speaker, the minister should clarify on that aspect. 

The second issue relates to students who were admitted to pursue a Bachelor of Clinical Medicine and Community Health in 2014. These students accessed the loan facility and studied. They completed the course but they cannot get jobs for the simple reason that the Ministry of Health has not issued a mandatory internship programme according to their course. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Health comes and clarifies why up to now, students who offered this course and accessed tax payers’ money cannot do internship, and yet there is even a scarcity of those professionals. 

In the country, currently, there are only 150 professionals in that aspect and there is a group ready to work. However, they cannot work because they have not done internship since the Ministry of Health has not issued internship policies. We request that the Ministry of Health explains that matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on the issue of the clinical medicine - this is a programme that was accredited and approved by the Government of Uganda. Therefore, the Minister of Health should come and explain why the discipline of clinical medicine has not been given an opportunity for internship. 

Secondly, on the issue of the money, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. He can tell us why he first withheld the money and then when they gave it, they did it the way they did.

11.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for raising that important issue. We do apologise that we delayed to release the resources for the funding of political parties in the last two quarters but we have sorted that issue.

As the law requires us - the funding for political parties – the parties receive the resources according to the numerical strength in the House. If Jeema is not satisfied on the amount of money they have received, they certainly know what to do. They must increase the numbers of Members of Parliament in the House. I wish them well on that. We cannot change that law. 

The spirit of Munyonyo is a different matter because it involves funding for other activities, not the money that we are talking about of the funding for political parties. Therefore, the two things are separate and we are working on them. The Shs 15 billion we released is specifically according to the funding of Political Parties Organisations Act, which requires the parties to receive money according to the numerical strengths of the parties in the House. We hope that the NRM will receive more than that in the coming Parliament. 

We are working on the Munyonyo one and we hope that we will report to this House in the next sitting when we meet. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for the explanation. However, with due respect, the explanation is flawed in two respects:

First, I have referred to what the law says. The Political Parties and Organisation Act, section 14(a) paragraph (b) is very clear. When it comes to electoral related activities, the framers of that law envisaged that a situation would arise, parties would be going for elections and they would need money.

Secondly, if the minister is deviating from the law, let him say so. It is as simple as that. The Munyonyo spirit was precisely intended to buttress that provision. When we were in Munyonyo, the discussion was very clear. That provision of equal share has never been invoked by the ministry and by the Electoral Commission.

Therefore, the Minister should not come on the floor and claim that the Munyonyo spirit was about something else. It was actually about the concept of facilitating political parties during election time. That is why it was even discussed to increase it. Previously, it was Shs 10 billion. In Munyonyo, we agreed that the budget be increased to Shs 35 billion. You have released Shs 15 billion. That was the spirit that was in Munyonyo and I just hope that those who were in that meeting will update you on what exactly was discussed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will require the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and explain to us the implementation of section 14 (i) (b) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we need to get this clearly. The Shs 15 billion which we released was according to the funding of Political Organisation Act, which is different from the law that he is quoting. The Munyonyo spirit required an additional Shs 35 billion which we have not been able to raise. However, the Shs 15 billion is a regular- we have been funding this for the last five years. Therefore, that is different from the Munyonyo spirit. I know exactly what I am talking about honourable colleague. Therefore, we are looking for money for the Munyonyo spirit- the Shs 35 billion, which we have not been able to raise.

However, the Shs 15 billion is for you to continue funding the activities of the parties like we have done in the past four years.

THE SPEAKER: Nevertheless, honourable members, I think I still want the Minister of Justice to come and explain the import of section 14, outside the Munyonyo spirit when we resume.
Just a minute, hon. Zaake

12.01
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to raise a matter of national concern about Uganda Police in Mityana District led by Mwine Mukono Alex, the DPC. It is about harassing and tear gassing religious leaders on a cultural event in Mugulu, Mityana South Constituency. This has raised alarm from Buganda Kingdom and from the Inter-Religious Council. They condemned the act saying it was unnecessary.

The Police Spokesperson, Mr Fred Enanga, accepted the fact that they did wrong but also condemned the elders and the religious leaders for not observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). These people are in their 60s, 70s and 80s. They had observed social distancing and put on masks. Secondly, this was their home, as Mbogo clan, so it was unnecessary.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is: I request the Minister of Internal Affairs to apologise on behalf of Government for what they did. He should also suspend Mwine Mukono Alex for what he did. He has done it several times. He tear-gassed my home some time back over nothing and threated my life. He was unable to kill me the other time but I think he is ready to finish me off this time. I cannot take that lightly because he did that though the matter is still in court. 

It was unnecessary and uncalled for. I condemn the act and on behalf of Parliament, we should condemn the act. The Inter- Religious Council has come up together with Buganda Kingdom to condemn the act. I think the Government should also come out, to condemn it, and do something about it because the DPC accepted that he was wrong. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain to the House and the country the incident at Mugulu where the famous Mbogo Clan were holding their meeting and they were set upon by the state agencies. He should report to us when we resume in November. Thank you. Honourable minister, laying of papers.

LAYING OF PAPERS

12.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Supplementary Schedule 3, for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee of Budget for scrutiny and report.

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Secondly, I beg to lay the proposal to borrow up to Shs 4,307.3 billion through domestic borrowing and $600 million from the International Monetary Fund to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Minister of State for Finance, is very experienced with the loan procedures and all procedures, which are associated with finance. I am surprised that he would come to Parliament to lay Supplementary Schedule 3 and a request for the loan without making a formal request for that loan. He puts it as if it is a by the way- “I lay on Table a Supplementary Schedule 3 and making a request for a loan”. I think that he is taking us for a ride. I know we are all stressed and tired but please make a formal request for that loan. We want to know what loan, how much and for what. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you move a proper motion for that loan? Meanwhile the other proposal is sent to the committee as I said. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the item on the floor was for laying and this is what we have done before. We never read a full motion to the House at this stage until it is referred to the committee.  However, with your guidance I can now read the full motion.

THE SPEAKER: Because it was not on the Order Paper, was it? Therefore, we want to know for the Hansard.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this is to seek for parliamentary approval to borrow up to Shs 4,307.3 billion from the domestic market and US$ 600 million from the International Monetary Fund to finance the Budget deficit for Financial Year 2020/2021.

As you are aware, the outbreak of COVID-19, which started in China spread globally and has now affected 35.5 million confirmed cases and over one million deaths worldwide as of end of September, 2020. In particular, Uganda has so far recorded 10,000 confirmed cases and close to 100 deaths as of 6 October, 2020. The COVID-19 has greatly affected the economy of Uganda and economic growth projections for the Financial Year 2019/2020 were revised downwards from six per cent to 3.9 per cent, and 4.5 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021 due to the impact of this outbreak.

In the financial sector, the past Financial Year 2020 registered a shortfall revenue collection of Shs 1.2 trillion and in the current financial year, we are registering a shortfall of Shs 2.5 trillion due to the impact of COVID-19. As you are aware, the total approved Budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 was Shs 45.4 trillion, out of which, Shs 21.8 trillion will be financed through revenue collection. A total of Shs 15 trillion will be financed through borrowing, of which Shs 12 trillion is from external sources and Shs 3 trillion is from the domestic market. So far, Shs 1.5 trillion has been raised in the domestic financing, leaving Shs 1.4 trillion to be raised from the market in this financial year to finance the Budget.

We have also had some other external pressures, which have been captured in this supplementary request, which is about to be considered shortly. Due to the downfall in our revenue and economic activity, we have been compelled to go back to the market and borrow an additional Shs 4 trillion and USD 600 million from external markets to finance the Budget for the remaining quarters. It is for that reason that we are laying this request for Parliament to consider. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The proposal and request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to talk about that loan request. For the record –

THE SPEAKER: You want to debate about it? No, please go and speak about it in the committee. We are not going to alter the rules. Please go to the committee. Next item.

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 1 AND 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

12.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for this House to approve a Supplementary Schedule 1 and 2 and the Addendum to Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Can we have the report then?

12.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No. 1 and 2, and Addendum to Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

On 1 October 2020, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament Supplementary Expenditure requests for the Financial Year 2020/2021 under the following schedules:

    1. Schedule 1: Is within the three per cent legal limit of the Public Finance Management Act, containing Shs 1.363 trillion. 

    2. Schedule 2: Requires prior approval of Parliament, containing Shs 2.063 trillion. Addendum to Schedule No. 2, which was laid on 6 October, 2020 also requiring prior approval of Parliament containing Shs 389.367 billion.
The supplementary schedules were all referred by the Speaker to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny and reporting thereto. The committee has considered the report and wishes to report as follows:

The structure of the report is as follows:

    1. Part A: Presents the methodology, legal framework, status of compliance and preliminary observations. 
    2. Part B: Presents the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No.1 with the corresponding observations and recommendations.
    3. Part C: Presents the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No. 2 (with Addendum No.1) for the same Financial Year 2020/2021; observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, in terms of the methodology followed, we met the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Health and the NAADS Secretariat. We also obtained additional information from some of the affected agencies by this request.

The legal framework is the usual one and I will skip it in the interest of time. However, we made some preliminary committee observations as follows:

    1. The committee observed that the Supplementary Expenditure schedules were laid in accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution and Section 25 of the PFMA Act, 2015.

    2. The committee noted that the total Budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 was Shs 45.49 trillion. 

    3. The committee observed that the Supplementary Expenditure under Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2020/2021 is a result of the Financial Year 2019/2020 Supplementary Expenditure approved by Parliament on the 26 June, 2020. Time would not allow these funds to be released during the Financial Year 20l9/2020 and have, therefore, been released within the three per cent legal limit of Financial Year 2020/2021 indicated in Schedule 1.

    4. The source of funding for the supplementary has been indicated as additional borrowing; a matter that requires a separate resolution of Parliament. I want to believe that it is the motion that has been laid on the Table a few minutes ago.

Madam Speaker, I want Parliament to caution the ministry not to alter the original appropriation approved by Parliament as a source of funding this supplementary.

Part B of the report, as I mentioned earlier, deals with the supplementary requests under schedule number one for the financial year 2020/2021 and we have provided a list of the resources involved in this request.

In part 5.1, we provide the justification for the proposed funding. Parliament may need to note that we are dealing, under schedule one, with resources that have probably been released by the ministry to the spending agencies. 

Let me start with Vote 002 – State House

Under this vote Shs 201 billion has been provided, out of which Shs 200 billion is for classified expenditure and Shs 1 billion for the scientists developing the anti-tick vaccine. The committee has recommended approval of the required Shs 201 billion under classified expenditure and the anti-tick vaccine development programme. 

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Under this vote an additional Shs 2.670 billion has been provided to cater for recent deployment of ambassadors and to facilitate their person-to-holder entitlements. This expenditure had not been budgeted for under the vote. The committee recommends approval of Shs 2.670 billion as requested.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

Under this vote, a request of Shs 455.18 billion has been made. This funding is earmarked for the recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank for the implementation of the Import Substitution and Export Promotion Strategy, through the manufacturing sector, as one of the measures for addressing the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The committee found this as a necessary intervention and recommends approval of this money. 

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance Support Centre)
The committee was informed that COVID-l9 has had a very devastating effect on the capacity of SACCOs and other associations operating at the grassroots of our population. In order to resuscitate the operations of these small organisations, Shs 50 billion has been availed through the Micro Finance Support Centre to be accessed by borrowers in form of affordable credit. The committee recommends approval of this Shs 50 billion for the Microfinance Support Centre to offer affordable credit to SACCOs and the VSLAs. 

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Emyooga)

Under this vote, Shs 110 billion has been requested for. This programme is known to you, dear members. This money is earmarked for that Emyooga programme. The committee recommends approval of that additional Shs 110 billion for the Emyooga initiative via the Microfinance Support Centre under ministry of finance. 

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

The agriculture ministry requested for an additional Shs l0 billion to enhance households' capacity for food security, provision of inputs and to support the e-voucher system. The committee was informed that the agricultural sector is one of the critical sectors of the economy that must be sustained as the country grapples with the effects of COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed interventions will be in the following areas:

    1.  The e-Voucher Agro-input Subsidy Scheme;
    2.  Rehabilitation of Road Chokes; and
    3. Desilting valley dams, valley tanks and fishponds. 

The committee has recommended the approval of Shs 10 billion for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the above interventions.

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health 

The Ministry of Health requested for an additional Shs 89.34 billion towards funding additional requirements for dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. The committee was informed that the funds are for the items outlined in Table 1 and these include: procurement of face masks - Shs 33 billion; transport and allowance for distribution of face masks - Shs 2.3 billion; procurement of test kits and laboratory consumables - Shs 37 billion; remodelling of intensive care units - Shs 7.04 billion; support to local governments for district based surveillance activities in the 48 border districts and other districts with COVID-19 cases - Shs 4 billion; and tents - Shs 6 billion.

The committee has recommended the approval of the Shs 89.34 billion to be allocated to the Ministry of Health for the war against COVID-19.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

The committee was informed that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives requested for an additional Shs l00 billion for the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) to partner with businesses that invest in priority import substitution and export oriented projects. 

Investments that qualify to be executed by UDC go through a thorough investment appraisal process to determine whether they demonstrate a strategic business case. The eligibility criteria to obtain such support is listed down there. The total investment required to support the identified initiatives is estimated at Shs 128 billion and is broken down as indicated in Table II on page 9. I will not go into the details. 

The committee notes that Shs 28 billion was appropriated in financial year 2020/202l leaving a balance of Shs 100 billion, which is now being requested for. In this regard, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 100 billion be approved for UDC to undertake the identified equity investments. 

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

The Ministry of Works and Transport has requested for additional Shs 1.82 billion to cater for Government of Uganda's contribution towards the development of the Church of Uganda Museum at Namugongo. 

The committee was informed that this is in line with Government policy on supporting faith-based tourism as part of the broader strategy to promote tourism and development. The committee has recommended the approval of Shs 1.82 billion for that purpose.

Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

 Under this vote, Shs 31.032 billion has been requested for. The funds have been provided as support to scientists and innovators engaged in COVID-I9 scientific research including the procurement of specialised machinery and equipment, development of vaccines, drug diagnostics and other operational costs. In Table III, we provide a summary of the project budget allocations. We indicate the scientists benefitting from this programme in column III and the projects or concept titles in column I. I will not go through the details but they run through page 10, 11, 12 and 13.

The committee recommends that the request of Shs 31.032 billion be approved to support scientists and innovators engaged in COVID-19 scientific research activities.

Vote 122 – Kampala Capital City Authority

Under this vote, Shs 5 billion has been requested for. This amount is to cater for the payment of the court awards to remove orders arising out of a suit filed by St Balikudembe Market Stalls and Lockup Owners. We have recommended for the approval of this amount.

Vote 125 - NAGRIC 

This requested for Shs 2.43 billion to cater for compensation for 25 hectares acquired by Civil Aviation Authority for the expansion of Entebbe Airport.

This funding will facilitate acquisition of alternative land by NAGRIC and we recommend its approval. 

Vote 133 - Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions 

This office requested for Shs 3.648 billion broken down as follows:

    a) Shs 1.2 billion for outstanding obligations on prosecution case management information system. 
    b) Shs 1.4 billion for purchase of vehicles for the newly appointed DPP 
    c) Shs 1 billion to reduce the case backlog, given the increased workload and new criminal cases arising out of the lockdown. 

The committee recommends the approval of Shs 3.64 billion to the Office of the Director, Public Prosecutions.

Uganda Revenue Authority requested for Shs 60.855 billion. This has been a contentious issue for some time but here we present all the details concerning it. They run from pages 14, 15, 16 and 17. 

On page 17 we make certain observations; that the prices quoted for the digital stamps are generally comparable except for wines and spirits where Uganda’s prices are relatively higher.

This was an attempt to compare prices in other East African countries. We noted that Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda are already implementing this programme. Kenya and Tanzania are implementing it under SICPA. Uganda has equally proposed SICPA to provide this service.

Observation No.2; the price differences are generally driven by volumes. Kenya and Tanzania have a larger market than Uganda and thus higher volumes hence the lower cost of digital stamps.

No.3, the total cost of digital tax stamps initiative is Shs 106.25 billion of which Shs 45.67 billion was appropriated in FY 2018/2019.

When we appropriate the balance, that will be it. There will be no more requests for funding digital tax stamps. From there on, the manufactures will be sponsoring the costs associated with digital stamps.

The committee recommends that the supplementary request to URA of Shs 60.855 billion to cater for outstanding payment to SICPA Uganda Limited to facilitate the implementation of digital tax stamps for the Financial Year 2019/2020, be approved as requested and that Government should not accept any further requests for funds to implement the digital tax stamps initiative.

We noted an upward spiral in terms of increase in revenue as a result of the implementation of the digital tax stamps. It is on the strength of that background that we are recommending the approval this time.

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
This requested for Shs 10.775 billion. We are all aware of how our prisons were attacked by the pandemic and we have since had a cumulative total of 819 COVID-19 cases diagnosed but successfully treated at the established prisons treatment centres. These included 770 prisoners, 39 staff and 10 relatives.

The prisons treatment centres have registered no deaths and currently, 544 recoveries have been discharged and 255 patients are still undergoing treatment as reflected in the table on page 18; table no.5.

There was sufficient justification for this request and the committee recommends, on page 20, that Shs 10.7 billion be approved to Uganda Prisons for the purposes outlined in the tables.

Various central Government Votes requesting for Shs 223 billion. The funds were provided to cater for clearance of domestic arrears; the details relating to these arrears are in annex no.4 to this report.

The measure was intended to bolster businesses, which are owed money by Government institutions and also to facilitate the Votes meet their obligations to avoid litigation by the suppliers of goods and services as shown.

    a) Shs 93.9 billion is provided toward recurrent domestic arrears, which are for land, cooperatives, rent and other recurrent and development arrears by service providers to Government.

    b) Shs 73 billion for payment of arrears to suppliers of coffee seedlings. 

    c) Shs 6.1 billion for payment of arrears to suppliers of tea seedlings.

    d) Shs 50 billion under various Votes to clear the verified utility arrears in line with the Government programme on COVID-19.

The accumulation of domestic arrears with various ministries, departments and agencies has crippled the business enterprises of many service providers to Government. Many businesses have collapsed while others have lost property to banks because of their failure to pay back loans.

The committee recommends that only Shs 216.9 billion under various Votes be approved for settling of domestic arrears. Shs 6.1 billion for payment of arrears of tea suppliers under NAADS be deferred pending further information regarding verification of suppliers.

Item 9 Votes 500 onwards relating to Local Government’s request of Shs 6.829 billion as follows:

    a) Shs 2.857 billion was provided to local governments from the supplementary for COVID-19 that was returned by the honourable members of Parliament. This money is being sent back to your districts.

    b) Shs 3.807 billion was provided for the education capitation grant as well as funding for primary healthcare under the local governments.

    c) Shs 0.165 billion provided for the newly created local governments as well as meeting ex-gratia shortfalls. We have recommended the approval of Shs 6.829 billion under various Votes as detailed in the schedule.

Madam Speaker, we turn to part (c) on page No. 21; proposed supplementary requests that require prior parliamentary approval under Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The proposed supplementary expenditure budget under Schedule No.2 requires prior approval of Parliament as provided for under Section 25(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The requests amount to a total of Shs 2.063 trillion and the details are outlined in (a) up to (m). 

Identifying the benefiting institutions

The justification for the proposed funding in 6.1

Vote 002 - State House

This is requesting for Shs 250 billion to cater for classified expenditures and we have recommended for the approval of this request.

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defense and Veteran Affairs: Shs 1,124.5 billion to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to cater for mainly classified development expenditure. The funds are to ensure that our forces keep in tandem with technological advancements, professionalization of the army and dealing with new challenges in the defence sector. We have recommended for approval of this request.

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs requesting for Shs 2.439 billion. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested for this money for the movement and deployment of foreign service officers to Dar-es-Salaam, Abu Dhabi, Ottawa and Washington DC. We do not have any objection in recommending the approval of this request.

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs: Shs 30 billion intended for the compensation of verified war claimants in Acholi, Lango and Teso regions who lost property notably the cattle farmers during the wars in Northern and Eastern Uganda. The matter required more time for verification of the victims. Moreover, the payment could be misconstrued as an election bribe especially by those who would not benefit from this initiative. The committee concludes that this perhaps is not the right timing for the pay out. The committee recommends that the matter be deferred pending verification of the victims and conclusion of the Presidential and Parliamentary elections.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:  Shs 95.6 billion. 

The ministry requested for this money broken down as follows:

Shs 50 billion is to provide additional support to the Emyooga initiative specifically for Kampala and Wakiso area, Shs 45.6 billion is to pay the outstanding loan obligation by UTL to Trade and Development Bank. We have provided details on the justification for this request of Shs 45.6 billion. It is all outlined on page 22 to 23. 

Having gone through that elaborate justification, the committee recommends the approval of payment of Shs 45.6 billion for the Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) loan obligation to TDB by the Government of Uganda. Further Shs 50 billion be provided as an additional support to the Emyooga initiative specially for Kampala and Wakiso area.

Ministry of Health: Shs 50 billion and the amount is an additional requirement under COVID-19 interventions as highlighted in table 6 below:

    1.  Procurement of face masks Shs 24 billion.
    2.  Allowance for health workers Shs 3 billion.
    3.  Meals for treatment centres Shs 2 billion etc. making a total of Shs 50 billion.

We have recommended the approval of this request.

Ministry of Works and Transport: A total of Shs 220 billion.  The Ministry of Works and Transport requested for Shs 200 billion following negotiations between Uganda and DRC to implement strategic infrastructure projects. Under the negotiations, GOU has proposed to provide 20 per cent of the project cost to construct and maintain 223KMs of road network connecting the two countries in order to boost trade between the two countries, ease business, and improve people to people connectivity and security.
 
The committee was informed that the project has agreed on an arrangement where the two countries will each provide 20 per cent of the project cost, and the private contractor will provide 60 per cent guaranteed by the Democratic Republic of Congo. The preliminary estimated cost of the project is $334.5 million; therefore Government of Uganda will contribute approximately $66.9 million which is approximately Shs 254 billion.

We have examined the compliance of this request with relevant legal framework. Article 123(1) of the Constitution provides, “The President or a person authorized by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter”.

Article 119(5) requires that all such agreements must be concluded with legal advice from the Attorney-General. The committee notes on 18 September 2020, the Attorney-General cleared the following agreements for signature:

1. 	The Inter-Governmental Agreement between the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Republic of Uganda concerning the joint implementation of a road infrastructure project in the territory of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
2. 	The project development agreement between the DRC represented by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Works and the Republic of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Works & Transport and M/s Dott Services Limited, concerning the construction and upgrading of the National Road Number 4 from Kasindi section at the Border to Beni which is 80 km. And the Integration of the Beni-Butembo Axis (54 km) to National Road Number 2 and the Bunagana border- Rutshuru-Goma Road (89 km).

The committee further notes that the Ratification of Treaties Act cap 204 requires that such an agreement is ratified by Cabinet and must be laid before Parliament as soon as possible. The committee was informed that the additional Shs 20 billion is for counterpart funding for rehabilitation of rail line from Tororo to Gulu under the EU project.

The committee recommends that:

    1. The signed agreements be laid in Parliament before implementation of the project commences.

    2. The committee recommends that Shs 200 billion be approved to the Ministry of Works and Transport to implement strategic infrastructure projects in DRC and Shs 20 billion as counterpart funding to the EU project for the rehabilitation of the railway line from Tororo to Gulu.

Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development: a request of Shs 50 billion. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development requested for this money to meet costs of deemed energy shortfalls in the Financial Year 2019/2020 and 2020/2021. The committee recommends that consideration of payment of Shs 50 billion be deferred to allow the committee more time to study the matter in greater details. For the benefit of members, this is power that is generated but is not being consumed largely for lack of transmission lines.

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission: Shs 50 billion

The committee was informed that this request is to reduce the shortfall on the electoral roadmap and will mainly go towards meeting the requirements on the Biometric Voter Verification System, as well as operational costs arising out of increase in the number of constituencies as well as special interest groups. The committee recommends approval of this request.

Vote 116: National Medical Stores 

Shs 50 billion is proposed to meet Government commitment with health partners of increasing funding obligations for Malaria, Tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AIDs by Shs 150 billion over three financial years.

The committee noted that this funding is because of the decline in development partner support and therefore the need for Government of Uganda to bridge the funding gap.

The committee was further informed that this funding is required for procurement of drugs and other items under National Medical Stores (NMS); with ARVS taking Shs 10 billion, Shs 15 billion for TB drugs and reagents and test kits for Viral Load Testing of Shs 25 billion.

We recommend that Shs 50 billion be approved to the National Medical Stores for the purpose indicated.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force - Shs 30 billion

The Uganda Police requested for this money towards meeting the persistent shortfalls in fuel, food, maintenance, classified expenditure and insurance. 

The committee noted that the supplementary issued in the Financial Year 2019/2020 was not provided given that the financial year was coming to a close.

Below is the schedule showing a breakdown of the items involved:

S/N
Description (Arrears)
Amount (UGX)
    1. 
Fuel - to pay fuel suppliers
15,000,000,000
    2. 
Feeding in operation and CCTV Command
4,640,000,000
    3. 
Insurance: Aircraft and Boats
2,500,000,000
    4. 
Maintenance of Aircraft
1,310,000,000
    5. 
Consultancy: Aircraft pilots
550,000,000
    6. 
Classified Expenditure
6,000,000,000
    7. 
Total
30,000,000,000

We recommend that the Shs 30 billion be approved to Uganda Police Force for the items as outlined above.

Vote 152 - NAADS: Shs 100 billion
 
NAADS requested for this money to meet the proposed interventions for the Presidential Initiative on Agro-Industrialisation for Local Economic Development (AGRI-LED). The initiative is a transformative strategic national intervention, aimed at the improvement of household incomes. 

The programme is being piloted in Rwenzori sub-region and seeks to facilitate projects towards Public Investment Management for Agro Industrialisation. 

Government of Uganda, through NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) is establishing agro industrial and business parks in Kasese and Kabarole districts. The completion of these industrial parks will attract investors and add value to locally available raw materials thus boosting agro-industrialisation.
Furthermore, additional AGRI-LED strategic interventions are planned for the short to medium term across all the nine districts in the Rwenzori Sub-region, that is: Kabarole, Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Ntoroko, Bundibugyo, Kitagwenda, Bunyangabu, Kasese and Kamwenge. 

These interventions seek to support entire commodity value chains from production to value addition and processing based on the agro ecological conditions, and priority investments for the respective district local governments. 

The Shs 100 billion will mainly be used to fund the following strategic interventions:

    a) Production

    b) Post-harvest handling

We are recommending that this Shs 100 billion be approved for NAADS to meet the proposed interventions for the AGRI-LED Programme.

Votes 500 onwards - Local Governments request for Shs 10.294 billion, additional co-funding of Shs 10.294 billion for Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer (UGIFT) for the completion of construction of seed secondary schools and completion of upgrade of health centres II to III under UGIFT.

In Table 8, we give the details of Local Government unspent balances, which we are now re-voting for those districts as outlined. Also, there are unspent balances on the upgrade of health centres. The affected districts are indicated in that table.

The committee recommends the approval of Shs 10.294 billion for expenditure under the votes as outlined in the two tables above.

Madam Speaker, I now turn to Addendum no. 1 to Supplementary Schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Following the request by the Budget Committee, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has presented the above addendum relating to additional resource neutral supplementary funding to local governments, involving among others, returned COVID-19 funds by Members of Parliament. It includes the districts that had been excluded.

Details are as follows:

    a) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Shs 0.483 billion. This amount relates to a transfer of NTR to URBRA to facilitate a study on optimal features for micro pensions and also implement the automated Risk Based Supervision Framework.
    b) Jinja Regional referral Hospital – Shs 1.63 billion from USAID to cater for payment of salaries for contract health workers and support staff.
    c)  Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital - Shs 2.966 billion from USAID to cater for payment of salaries for contract health workers and support staff.
    d)  Local Governments - Shs 2.091 billion to cater for Local Government responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
    e) Terego District - Shs 23.81 billion transfer from Arua District to the newly created Terego District as per details in the annex.
    f)  Local Governments - Shs 357.72 billion transfer of funds from former municipalities to the newly created cities as per the attached schedules.
    g)  Ministry of Trade - Shs 0.650 billion to procure a vehicle for the senior presidential advisor on AGOA.

Madam Speaker, I beg to conclude. I request the House to consider the committee’s recommendations and approve the supplementary expenditures outlined in the table below and detailed in the annexes 1-3 of Supply Schedules for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The summary is presented in table 9 as follows:

Schedule
Recurrent (UGX in billion)
Development (UGX in billion)
Total
Schedule 1
1,302.37
55.11
1,357.48
Schedule 2
552.55
1,430.29
1,982.84
Addendum No.l to Sch.2
187.58
201.79
389.37
Total 
2,042.5
1,687.19
3,729.69

Madam Speaker, on page 30, we present Annex 1 on supplementary expenditure estimates recommended for supply under Schedule 1 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. This will exclude whatever we have not recommended for approval. It stretches from page 30 to page 34.

On page 34, we have indicated the total recurrent expenditure, which I have already mentioned, as well as the development expenditure. 

Annex 2 on page 35 is supplementary expenditure estimate recommended for supply under Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. The total recurrent is reflected there. I have already mentioned that figure and the total development is on page 36, also reflected, which I have already mentioned.

On page 37, we present annex 3, supplementary expenditure estimates recommended for supply under Addendum Number 1 to Schedule 2 for Financial Year 2020/2021. All the respective agencies involved are mentioned up to page 38. 

Annex 4 is not intended for supply because these figures are already included on the schedules above but it is intended to give you the details of the domestic arrears being proposed to be paid under Schedule No. 1. Therefore, the details are there and the benefiting agencies and institutions have been mentioned up to page 41. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our chairperson and the members of the Committee on Budget. I just have two comments: The first one is to do with the face masks. We appropriated Shs 89 billion for masks for everybody in the country except the young children.

However, in the few days I spent in my constituency, I realised that the bulk of people do not actually have these masks. We would like to know what happened to those masks.

For the second one, I see that the Minister of Works and Transport proposes to support the Uganda Martyrs Museum at Namugongo but you are conspicuously silent about the first Ugandan Martyr, Bishop James Hannington. There has been a proposal for a very long time with no response from the Government, not even the one at St Matia Mulumba in Mayuge and St Gonzaga in Kaliro. We would like to hear about those. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, may I request that you allow me lay on Table the report of the Committee on Budget? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Budget on the supplementary expenditure Schedule No. 1, 2 and the addendum to Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter. I recall that when the matter came before the Committee on Budget, we did interrogate them; we had a thorough discussion with the ministers mentioned in the report and some heads of agencies.

We raised some fundamental issues; one of which you have already stated. Up to now, we have not got detailed accountability of the COVID-19 funds that this Parliament approved.

Secondly, we were also told that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would come to give us a reviewed status of the budget. We had approved Shs 45 trillion but they said they would come back to us with details of what they actually need out of the Shs 45 trillion. Up to now, we have not received that. The Committee on Budget raised that. 

We raised the issue of the presidential initiative on value addition. This House has discussed over and over again the over-supply of sugarcane. We had wanted to set up some rural processes of sugarcane so that we can mop out some excesses that we always end up with. 

I also raised the issue of cotton - revival of the Lira Spinning Mill - and the cassava factory as part of the presidential initiative but it has not been mentioned anywhere. 

Madam Speaker, since there was no time – we all went for nominations that ended on Friday. On Monday, I got a message from the Clerk indicating that members would come and sign the report. I replied, “Which report? We have not yet interrogated, discussed and come out with a final position.” Today is Tuesday and the final position has already been written and signed. 

In the spirit of the pandemic and by-elections, I am not going to table any minority report or challenge what has been done. However, I am urging the House to thoroughly interrogate this report; thoroughly interrogate this supplementary budget, particularly Schedule 2 and the addendum that has been tabled. I think we need to thoroughly interrogate them to ensure that this money will be used and taken to the targeted group.  

The Emyooga money, which we are going to distribute as cash during elections – even if you take that money to Kamuli, it is going to cause unnecessary commotion –(Interruption.) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a very senior legislator. She has raised very fundamental issues about the report. In fact, she only fell short of saying that this report is a forgery. 

Under our Rules of Procedure, the authenticity of a report comes in doubt, the demand is that, that report must be investigated. 

The reason I am raising a point of order is, if hon. Cecilia Ogwal, with all the experience and knowledge, is she in order to suggest that this Parliament must interrogate what she has described as forgery? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Rules of Procedure are well known. Where you object, you file a minority report but I do not see any. Therefore, let us proceed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind members of Parliament that, two days to the end of the financial year, we passed a supplementary budget, which consisted of the following: 

UDC – Shs 100 billion

However, today, I am again seeing Shs 100 billion in addition to the Shs 100 billion, which makes it Shs 200 billion. This is taking Parliament for a ride. 

Secondly, State House has classified expenditure of Shs 200 billion in addition to Shs 250 billion. The Shs 200 billion, is State House buying guns? What is it going to use the Shs 200 billion for? What is that classified information which cannot be found in the ministries of Internal Affairs and Defence or the Uganda Police Force? What is this Shs 200 billion plus the other Shs 250 billion, which makes it Shs 450 billion? Is it a matter of just appropriating money just for the sake of it? This is disastrous for this country.

Madam Speaker, I see here another Shs 110 billion for Emyooga. In the last supplementary appropriation, we approved Shs 120 billion; so, this totals to Shs 230 billion. In addition, management staff of the Microfinance Centre are in prison. You are also aware that Shs 22 billion for the teachers is already missing. Who is going to manage this money? Are we just giving money for the sake of it? Is it because we are in an election period? Why do you want to put the country at stake? Madam Speaker, we must be realistic as the Parliament of Uganda; we should not allow public money to be mismanaged during this period. 

For the COVID-19 pandemic, we appropriated Shs 89 billion; when you divide that by 2,000 per mask, it gives us 44.5 million masks. It means that all those above six years old should have got three or two masks. However, even I do not have one. Who took this money? Is that the reason the Minister of Health decided to go for campaigns? Is it because she has now seen this free money? 

Now you want to appropriate another Shs 33 billion before we receive accountability for the Shs 89 billion. I do not think it is rational for Parliament to approve this Shs 33 billion, yet the Shs 89 billion has not yet been accounted for. It would be wrong for Members of Parliament to pass this budget in this context.

Madam Speaker, you have mentioned the tourist sites; I do not see any rationale for only these sites they have here. They should bring a list of all the tourist sites here. It is not only the Uganda Martyrs Shrine that needs investment; even the Protestant and the Muslim shrines need it. There are so many sites and many tourist attractions. 

It is important to halt this approval for now until we have all the tourist attractions and invest in them. Why should we always come here to lament yet we have the capacity to make decisions. I think for now we should divide the little we have among all the sites so that we deal with this matter once and for all.

Madam Speaker, you mentioned the works sector, that they have been given Shs 1.82 billion as supplementary. The roads in the countryside are bad. I do not think this is right for us to do. What is the criterion of approving the Shs 1.82 billion, given the fact that many roads and bridges have been washed away, and we are taking money to non-productive sectors? Nobody can use a road, which is slippery, or cross a broken bridge. 

The committee should have come out clearly by telling us the number of bridges and roads, which need to be repaired, to help us deal with this request. Otherwise, asking for Shs 1.8 billion yet you are appropriating Shs 33 billion for masks, which you are not buying; is that fairness in this country? We must be realistic when we are doing this expenditure.

Madam Speaker, I want to make comments on two more fundamental issues, which I have seen here. We are raising expenditure for the sake of it. The National Medical Stores (NMS) needs Shs 50 billion. You are now shifting to National Medical Stores and you also have Ministry of Health. What does NMS do? It buys drugs for health centres and referral hospitals. So, what is the role of the Ministry of Health as far as this Shs 52 billion is concerned? Madam Speaker, we must do a total investigation in this sector before we release this money.

Finally, I do not know if Members have gone through this budget in totality. We need time to review this budget. If we pass it in this state, Ugandans should crucify us because the deserving areas have been left out and we are putting money in non-deserving areas, where it is easy to misappropriate public money. This is very dangerous for us as Members of Parliament.

I would like to say that this business of us talking about corruption and theft - it will be us condoning it if we pass this budget. This is entirely for stealing public money. If we allow it to pass in this formant, public money is going to be stolen. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Concerning Uganda Martyrs, I want to remind you that when His Holiness the Pope was coming, the Government spent Shs 88 billion on the Catholic Shrine. Therefore, I support the proposal for the Anglican side to also get funding, but I want them to get out of Kampala and support other shrines in the countryside.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the figures mentioned by hon. Nandala-Mafabi - Shs 100 billion to UDC, Shs 110 billion to Emyooga, and so on - are figures that we passed in the supplementary budget for 2019/2020, towards the end of that financial year. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came back to this House and said that they were not able to pay out that money because it was time barred. 

Therefore, they used that money to come under the three per cent legal limit. That is why they came back to this House with the same request. They did not spend the money last financial year; they are only going to spend it during this financial year - they have actually already spent it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the Shs 100 billion to UDC has already been paid out. If you have paid it, it means that you used the authority we gave you, so you cannot say that you want another Shs 100 billion.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you recall, last financial year we passed most of these items that are under schedule No.1 of the supplementary budget, which were brought to the House –(Interjection)- I have known hon. Ogwal to be orderly. Her standing is making us very uncomfortable; I do not know if she is coming for me. 

When this supplementary budget was passed, we told the House that we would try as much as possible to make sure this money was disbursed. It was not disbursed in the last two days, so we decided that we would use the existing legal framework to ensure we implement what Parliament had appropriated. Therefore, we used the three per cent approval, which is given by the minister, for the supplementary, to implement what Parliament had approved and the money was disbursed. 

Therefore, this money is already spent but it requires that after spending, we report to the House within four months, and that is what we have done. Therefore, schedule No. 1 is already implemented. It is not double appropriation; we can never do that. It was a technical way of handling it and it was done according to the law.

THE SPEAKER: I do recall that we really had a serious argument over that issue.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to give Members here is that the money under Ministry of Works and Transport, the Shs 1.8 billion, is for the development of the Church of Uganda Martyrs Shrine and not the Catholic Church. I want this to be very clear because it may mislead us.

I also want to put it on record that the money, which was used for the development of the Catholic shrine, was actually for a payment for the Catholic Church land, which had been taken by the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority in Entebbe. In effect, the clarification I am making is that Government of Uganda has not given the Catholic Church any free money.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do not take us into those semantics. The Catholic Church got Shs 88 billion and we know that; please, do not confuse us. The President said it himself when he was in Busoga. 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need clarification from the committee chair on vote 102, Electoral Commission. They are requesting for Shs 50 billion. According to the report, the Shs 50 billion is to facilitate the biometric voter system. 

Madam Speaker, prior to the 2016 elections, the Electoral Commission procured a biometric voter verification system. I would like to find out whether this Shs 50 billion is for procuring a new biometric voter verification system or for upgrading or maintaining that other system? 

I ask this because when we were in the Supreme Court arguing during the petition, we asked the Electoral Commission to provide data from those machines and the Electoral Commission told us that the machines they had procured could not capture data. Therefore, we were not able to know the number of people who had actually voted using those machines. Now, the Electoral Commission is asking for Shs 50 billion. What exactly is it going to do?

Secondly, on the agreement between Uganda and the DRC for infrastructure development, I would like to find out whether the committee had an opportunity to look at this agreement. What we are being told is about the funds but the other details of the agreement are not known by anybody. I do not know whether the committee looked at that agreement. Many times, Uganda has had agreements with other governments and international organisations and it has turned out that Uganda has had a bad deal when negotiating those agreements –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: The information I would like to give you is that when the committee was interrogating the minister, we guided the minister that the House would want to receive the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and that it had to be laid on the Table in Parliament. 

Therefore, you are quite right to say that we cannot decide on spending before we understand the issues that are raised in the MoU. Can we have the MoU laid on the Table and Parliament looks at it before we can think of –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is something that the committee chair said. What did you say about that? You talked about laying - There is something you said in your report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, we asked for those agreements and they were laid before the committee. We asked our legal staff to examine them and they did so. Later, we also received confirmation from the Attorney-General that they had scrutinised these agreements. So, we were satisfied by the submissions of the technical team and we went ahead to recommend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on page 25, it says, “The committee therefore recommends that the signed agreements should be laid in Parliament before implementation of the project…” This is what it says; I am reading from the report.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, my concern relates to whether the committee had an opportunity to interrogate this memorandum of understanding. We have had instances before where this Parliament has information on agreements reached between this country and other organisations and we got a raw deal for the simple reason that either we do not have strong negotiators or our negotiators, in one way or the other, are compromised. So, it creates a very big problem.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when can you lay this agreement before the House?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the example I would like to give is what is happening right now. Trade agreements were signed between Uganda and Kenya and they changed within a minute and stopped our raw cane from being exported to Kenya – moreover raw cane is one of the export products in the trade agreements. 

I would like to inform the House that we have to look at the trade agreements so that this loan benefits our people. The MoU should be followed step by step, so that Uganda is not that country in the East African region where every neighbour who wants to benefit comes here and takes what he or she wants. Sudan took loans and they are playing with us. Kenya signed agreements and they have played with us. Tanzania made agreements from which they are benefiting 80 per cent and we are benefiting 20 per cent. Now, Congo has also come; they want us to construct roads for them. 

We are not more Catholic than the Pope. We are not in the region to become donors. Moreover, our economy is not doing well. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, this Parliament is the only gatekeeper as far as international treaties and agreements are concerned. This matter of the road between Uganda and Congo is a very emotive issue; it has evoked a lot of discussion in the public. If we are not very careful, we are likely to have a very big problem in as far as this issue is concerned. We can only rely on the report of the committee in as far as this matter is concerned. If the committee did not have an opportunity to scrutinise this MoU, with due respect, we are going to land into a very big problem.

We have had many problems before concerning negotiation of these agreements; I do not think we should be in a hurry to pass this supplementary budget. If even basics like MoUs are not before this Parliament - In most cases, when that time comes, the minister lays before this Parliament an MoU without giving Parliament an opportunity to have an input –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that Uganda has a history with the Democratic Republic of Congo. In the previous years, this Government purportedly told the country that they had an agreement to go into Congo to protect them, only for Congo to turn around and take us to court that we went into their country and stole from them. Court awarded US$ 10 billion against this country. 

Therefore, this time we need to look at this agreement to be sure that the DRC will not turn around and claim that we have entered into their country illegally. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. In addition, hon. Jonathan Odur should have asked: would this money be deducted or offset from the US$ 10 billion that the court found that Uganda should pay them because of the plundering of the resources? That needs to be cleared because we owe them some money. If we go ahead and build the roads, will it be deducted when the time comes for us to pay?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us separate the issue of the debt from the issue of the strategic need to create more access to different parts of Africa. We already have a problem with Tanzania blocking our goods; Kenya, Rwanda and Sudan have locked us out. We need to go into the other areas of COMESA. Therefore, let us separate the issue of access from the issue of compensation, which I think the Attorney-General should come and explain. Let us separate strategic interest from other things.

MR BASALIRWA: Finally, I do not think anybody wants to oppose development either at regional or continental level. We only want to protect the interests of the country. It is not enough to tell Parliament that we are engaged in infrastructural development; it is also important for us to know how we have been cushioned in that agreement. As people’s representatives, we have a responsibility to cushion them either from compromises or bad negotiators. 

I think the committee and the Minister of Transport and Works have an obligation to come clear on this matter. Except for the monies, none of us knows the other terms of that MoU. I think that should be clarified. 

Finally, from the report of the committee, the chairperson proposes that they need Shs 50 billion to facilitate the Emyooga initiative, basically for Kampala and Wakiso. The report specifically mentions Kampala and Wakiso. We really have a problem with classifying this country. You remember, when it came to the distribution of food during the COVID-19 lockdown, it was Kampala and Wakiso. A budget is now being brought for Emyooga and they are talking about Kampala and Wakiso. When will Emyooga come to Bugiri, Kamuli or Ruhinda? 

I think there is a big problem. If you are planning for the country, why don’t we have a comprehensive budget that looks at Emyooga in a cosmopolitan manner, rather than reducing it – Is it because Government is worried about Kampala and Wakiso? What is the problem?

MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. What has been said is indeed true, when it comes to Kampala and Wakiso. Look at the skills development programme where about 50,000 youths have benefited only in Kampala and Wakiso, as if the other areas are not part of this country. 

Let them include all of us. When you talk of Emyooga and you concentrate on Kampala and Wakiso and our people are watching, they will think that we are just here to support some areas, not the entire country. Thank you. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, some of us are getting hated in our constituencies because it is said that we no longer fight for our areas. 

Like you said, Madam Speaker, the masks were distributed in Naguru. Government officials and people of Kampala who can afford were given masks. I see many Government officials changing masks every day. You find a minister putting on yellow today, red tomorrow, the next day blue and all of them have “Government of Uganda”. This is a minister who can afford to buy a mask, but you find a poor person down in Mitooma has never received a mask. 

What ends up happening is that we, the Members of Parliament, end up replacing Government in providing these services, yet we provided money for them. Now, you are adding Emyooga; you want to give only Kampala and Wakiso. I propose that if we cannot get money for Emyooga for the whole country, then we stop it so that we do not give only Kampala and Wakiso. I beg to submit.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, all Ugandans are equal. This country must be developed at the same level. We do not know whether it is the fathers and mothers of Kampala who give birth to special citizens in this country. Moreover, Kampala has moved above the poverty level compared to the places that we come from. 

I do not know whether targeting Kampala in everything is to soften the hearts of the people of Kampala so that they vote us back into power. We have talked about this so many times. Why do you target Kampala and leave out Busia, which is on the border and our people there are ready for business? 

Secondly, I would like the honourable minister to tell Uganda why people pay money to get Emyooga funds. There is information on the ground that people must pay some money before they are given money for Emyooga. Today, I would like to tell the minister and Government that all Ugandan citizens belong to Uganda and they all support the NRM regime. We should stop taking Kampala as a special case. 

Thirdly, the people of Kampala are changing masks as if they are in a fashion show, yet families in our communities are sharing one mask amongst eight people. This must stop, and the minister must also clarify why our people are paying money to get Emyooga funds. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I must provide information to correct this misconception that the money for Emyooga is meant for Kampala and Wakiso only.  

On page 5 of the report, we have indicated that Shs 110 billion is for Emyooga. It is not necessarily for Kampala and Wakiso but for other parts of the country. Secondly, in the national budget that we passed recently, we provided over Shs 100 billion for Emyooga for the rest of the country. Therefore, we have over Shs 200 billion for the rest of the country, other than Wakiso and Kampala. 

THE SPEAKER: Were Wakiso and Kampala specified here? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Wakiso is specified under schedule No.2 –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the chairman has mentioned that when we passed the budget, it was for the whole country. So, why do you have Kampala and Wakiso now? They were also included in the other one. Is this an addition? Why are they getting double? 

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson has given me an opportunity to inform him. 

What was provided for in the budget for the whole country was Shs 100 billion. Now for Wakiso and Kampala, they have provided Shs 50 billion. Why can’t we put this money together and divide it so that every part of the country receives a share of these resources? If we leave Shs 50 billion for Wakiso and Kampala and the rest of the country shares Shs 100 billion, the inequality will continue to rise. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this is the clarification Government would like to make on the issue of the Emyooga initiative to this House: You have so far appropriated Shs 220 billion for Emyooga and Government is proposing another Shs 50 billion specifically for Wakiso and Kampala - (Interjections) – Please, hold on. 

This is the plan, and we want all leaders to get involved: We have approved 19 categories of emyooga and they are going to operate at the constituency level. Each emyooga will get Shs 30 million at the constituency level. This means that each constituency will be able to get at least Shs 500 million with 19 emyooga at each constituency. The operational unit of these emyooga is at the constituency level. So, the entire country is entitled to this money. 

Actually, this money is available and the minister of state for microfinance has been moving across the country mobilising people to get involved in Emyooga. Why did we – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: He is confusing us – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us listen to him first. 

MR BAHATI: Hon. Ogwal, where you get confused, I will be able to clarify further. 

We used some logic for choosing Wakiso and Kampala and we can have your input on this in a civil manner; if you think we are wrong, you will advise us. The whole country is covered. It was agreed that this should be in every constituency in Uganda. As for Wakiso and Kampala, the logic we used was based on the population of young people in the two districts. That was our target. 

As we speak now, during the day, we have over two million people in Wakiso and Kampala. Therefore, we thought we would reach them, as a special arrangement. That is why we are proposing this. If you agree with us, we will appropriate. However, if you do not agree us, we shall take your recommendations. Otherwise, the whole country is going to be covered. There will be 19 emyooga per constituency and each will get at least Shs 500 million.  Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We have already discussed this matter. It is on record in Parliament that we questioned the minister responsible for microfinance why we have just these mysterious 19 Emyooga groups when we can have hundreds of them in one constituency. We asked that question but they have not up yet with any reply.

We all represent constituencies. When you say you are giving Shs 30 million per group for 19, what about the other hundreds who equally qualify for this money? I believe this will cause confusion during the election.

Madam Speaker, we said that if the ministry will be giving us Shs 500 million, they should allow us to identify all those who qualify and give them money, whether it is Shs 1 million or Shs 2 million per group. Why do we have these mysterious 19 Emyooga groups in a constituency? 

We even asked the minister why Members of Parliament were not involved in this initiative yet they are saying it is going to happen in every constituency. We were told that only Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) - not even Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) – would be involved.  

Madam Speaker, we have our Clerk here, who normally coordinates our expenditure. Why are we being subjected to the authority of RDCs? We would like to know whether the Shs 500 million is going to our constituencies and who the beneficiaries are. We must know if they actually qualify or not. What about the others who have qualified but have not been given money, how are you going to deal with it? The minister should be clear. Otherwise, we are all going to face the electorate and they will ask why others and not them, and this will divide our people. It is wrong. 

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Budget. We provided Shs 85 billion for food distribution across the country but up to date, Dokolo District has never benefited, not even a single shilling, from that money, which I participated in appropriating. However, we are again coming up with additional money for Kampala and Wakiso. Should I bring the people of Dokolo to come and start living here so that they can also get money? Is the minister in order?

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, for us who come from upcountry constituencies, about 80 per cent of our people who were in Kampala and Wakiso moved back to the villages. The youth you are talking about have moved back to the villages but you are still counting them as residents of Kampala and Wakiso. 

May I, therefore, propose that the Shs 50 billion be added to what had been proposed earlier, so that if a constituency was to get only Shs 500 million, they can now get about Shs 600 million. This money should be equally distributed in the country to cater for the other people who went back to the village after we had already sorted out the issue of the Emyooga.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, I do not know why you want to cause unnecessary stress to Members of Parliament and the country. First, we had to force the Minister of State for Microfinance to come and make a statement here. It was not on his own volition. We told him that if this is a Government programme, then Members of Parliament should be informed when he is going out. I have not received any notice. I just see him being mentioned in the press as he goes to different constituencies. Why do you do this?

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has just stated here that their plan will see every constituency benefit from Shs 500 million. However, the mobilisation that we have been seeing is being done at the district level. If they get boda bodas, they pick on one group across the district, not the constituency.

We would like to seek clarification on this matter because this is different information from what we are seeing on the ground. Thank you.

1.41
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House that Uganda has been divided into three categories - Kampala and Wakiso, urban centres, and the rural areas. We represent the biggest number of people. You remember recently, when there was a food crisis during the lockdown, Kampala and Wakiso benefitted but outside there, people are still complaining. 

When it comes to this Emyooga, I think the way forward is for the minister and those concerned to come up with a plan and the list before we approve anything here. In that way, we can scrutinise it and see whether the initiative can work. In a similar manner, looking at the roads for the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has not been aware of this.  Therefore, if the directive is to just use the money in that manner, how are we going to develop the rural communities? 

Madam Speaker, I actually thought they were going to talk about the road from Kamdini to Lira. I drove there last night but it took me four hours. The road is now impassable. For your information, next week there is going to be the biggest demonstration by bus and lorry owners in Lira. We can no longer tolerate this.

A bridge in my constituency, which was broken by a military tanker, has not been repaired for 15 years now. The Ministry of Works and Transport said they had taken up the matter but I do not see anything going on. You cannot drive on the roads upcountry; you can only walk. Even when you are walking, the road is still terrible. 

Honourable minister, the money, which you have requested us to come and approve, is nothing but shopping for campaign money for those who are above the community level. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I raised the issue of the Kamdini Road in my communication and gave the minister instructions to report to us, because the citizens also petitioned me. 

1.43
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I remember the last time we handled a supplementary budget here, we were meant to concentrate on a few things and we left the entire supplementary budget uninterrogated. It is my humble request that we look at item by item and interrogate this supplementary in accordance with the law. 

The Public Finance Management Act provides rules on how we are supposed to handle supplementary appropriation. Section 25(6) and (7) clearly show that some of the things we are seeing here are matters that can be budgeted for. On page 21, for example, this country is not at war but look at the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs seeking for Shs 1,125 billion -(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Supplementary requests are always brought to the House and sent to the Committee on Budget for expeditious handling and report back to the House. In the committee, the supplementary request is scrutinised line by line and the committee comes back to the House with proper and appropriate recommendations. Therefore, is it in order for a Member to come to the House and suggest that we process the supplementary requests line by line, when the committee has already done the job? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are just making general comments for now, then we shall go to committee stage.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is trying to divert me from the fact that - I would not be demanding for this if the committee took time to do it. However, it is because the committee ignored even simple things. Here in the supplementary budget, there is AGOA; it tells you that this committee never took time - garbage in, garbage out.

That is why I am demanding that since the committee never took responsibility for this, this House must look at these items. This is because some can be put in the financial year budget and then we deal with only those items that deserve to go under the supplementary budget.

Look at page 21; Shs 1,125 billion - that is Shs 1.1 trillion – is going to Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and it is under classified expenditure. At such a stage, what are we doing? This is bleeding the country at a time when the minister has indicated himself that the economy cannot raise money to fund our budget. We are going to borrow under circumstances where we would be –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Budget. We did subject this request to all the necessary tests, including all the legal ones. That is why you will recall that we deferred the approval of some of the requests.

Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to insinuate that the committee did not subject this request to rigorous tests as required when we did that? –(Interjection)- You may disagree with our recommendations; that is why you are allowed to come and give your comments. That is why you are allowed to debate.

Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the committee did not do this when actually we did subject this - I am a member of the committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee has satisfied me that they considered the items; they have made different proposals for different areas. Therefore, you are out of order.

1.49
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is also a general comment on this report. The issue of face masks has been a big challenge. We, Members of Parliament, have taken on the role of complementing Government on this. We have been buying face masks like mad people and making them for the voters yet we appropriated enough money here -

THE SPEAKER: Weren’t you arrested for being a purchasing officer? (Laughter)

MS AMERO: Yes, but you cannot do much if you want people to go for voting and they are restricted from voting; you will have to dig into your pockets. Therefore, we would like to know from the Government where the money for face masks went, before we give this money that they are requesting for.

On the issue of Kampala and Wakiso, I would like to say that we are trying to fight rural-urban migration but we are encouraging it ourselves right here. We cannot put a lot of money in Kampala instead of diversifying and investing in other cities. What was the use of creating these other cities? Can’t we have these youth go to other cities other than putting everything in Kampala? What basically attracts many people to Kampala is the easy access to money here. Why don’t we give this money to all places? 

With the Emyooga, you are talking about 19 groups in a county; what about the parishes? We, the women, are more disadvantaged in this because we are not even involved in the selection of groups. This whole idea came in when Members complained that they had become donors to the voters. Now, if we are giving this money, why shouldn’t we give to every district to benefit –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government should be sensitive to the sentiments of the country. First of all, the jua kali shelters, skilling centres, the food supply and now even Emyooga are in Kampala and Wakiso; you are taking us for granted.

1.51
MR JONATHAN ODUR (FDC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 22, vote 007, money was proposed to compensate the people of Lango, Acholi and Teso for the loss of their cattle between 1986 and 1987. Here, however, the committee proposed that this must be deferred and their reason is that it could be mistaken for a bribe during an election. However, when it comes to Emyooga and the funding to other groups, it is okay. 

What is it that this committee has against the people of Lango, Acholi and Teso? I would like the chairperson to answer that here because we need this Shs 30 billion, and it was awarded by court. The verification was done. Even when we appropriate this money, it does not mean that you are just going to pay people; we are passing it here subject to verification. Therefore, I invite this House to allow the proposal of Shs 30 billion for the compensation of cattle in Lango, Teso and Acholi to pass.

Madam Speaker, on page 24, Shs 254 billion is proposed for the Ministry of Works and Transport for construction. I have no problem with that, but the minister appeared before us and in his ministerial policy statement, in the Budget Framework Paper, he never indicated that they have the intention of constructing roads in DR Congo. When we pass a supplementary budget, it must be in line with what we had processed through the Budget Framework Paper.  Therefore, I invite the House to reject that proposal until the minister and Government come before the sector committee and we iron out that.

For State House, the proposal is Shs 250 billion. Today, I would like to be educated; what exactly takes place in State House? I thought the money is for food. We have already constructed a state building there. This is Shs 450 billion for State House, yet prisoners are getting just Shs 10.7 billion. Prisoners are many –(Interruption).

Madam Speaker, I would like to just conclude. If you look at page 17, under Uganda Prisons Service, each temperature gun is being charged at Shs 350,000 and batteries at Shs 10,000. These are a pair of batteries, which we buy at Shs 1,000, but now they are charging Shs 10,000. Blankets for prisoners - I have ever been in prison and I know that the blankets they use cost Shs 4,000 but here they are saying Shs 80,000. The committee never did their work in scrutinising.

Lastly, on page 10, they mention the COVID-19 projects. These are the same professors renaming their projects. The same professor goes to Makerere University, Uganda Virus Research Institute and Busitema University and they rename projects and we are funding all of them. They just alter the names. Why don’t we restrict these scientists to one project? After all, they are experimenting and testing; why give them three or four projects yet the experiments could actually fail? I would like this House to scrutinise these scientists’ proposals properly. Thank you.

1.54
MR IBRAHIM SEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start from page 3 - preliminary committee observations – point No. 4, where funding for this supplementary is indicated as “additional borrowing”. We are borrowing to give State House Shs 450 billion.

Madam Speaker, in the budget that we have just passed, the biggest consumer of our resources, item No. 1, is now interest payment on the money we borrow from commercial banks. We are now paying more than Shs 3 trillion every year. Where is the hurry, that even before we finish implementing the budget, we again want to borrow from the same market where we are paying Shs 3 trillion as interest?

Also, the President in his address, after the reading of the budget, pointed out that there were problems with the budget that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had presented to Parliament. He said that the “Saleh team”, meaning his brother, Gen. Salim Saleh, had identified areas from which to cut and that there was about Shs 7 trillion that was going to be re-allocated.

I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell this Parliament, if the money for internal and external travels and seminars, amounting to about Shs 7 trillion, is not going to be used in the budget, why must we borrow to finance these other items? Why should we do that when we have money already budgeted for items that have not been executed in this budget because of COVID-19?

Hon. Odur talked about State House. My understanding is that State House is the residence of the President. The President’s children have grown and got married; so, they are no longer there. This State House has become the biggest consumer of our budget - Shs 450 billion for State House on top of the Shs 600 billion that we passed here! Maybe, we need a committee of Parliament to go to State House and find out what else is there, apart from the President and his wife, that is consuming all these resources?

The President is not supposed to be buying guns. They are bought by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence, which is also asking for Shs 1.1 trillion for classified expenditure. 

The committee - I do not want to fault them - has put qualifications saying, “approve this money with caution.” However, they go ahead and say, “approve”. You are talking about Congo whose agreements you have not seen and you are recommending that they should be brought to Parliament yet you are saying that money must be passed.

About the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), this Parliament has had problems with this agency. We now do not know who runs it; is it the National Agricultural Advisory Services in the law or President Museveni’s young brother, Gen. Salim Saleh? We must be told who is in charge of this money. Also, NAADS is under investigation; the same committee has made recommendations to this House about it but they are now saying we should give it another Shs 100 billion.

Madam Speaker, my proposal is that Parliament must not approve the Shs 3.7 trillion, including monies for all the items that this Parliament has questioned. We must stay approval of this money until further investigations are done. This is the worst time to be dealing with a complicated matter like this. All of us, naturally, are scattered but we are now here being stampeded by Government to approve Shs 3.7 trillion. 

Tell us about the revision that you said you would make. You said the revision would take care of Shs 7 trillion that was meant to finance travel abroad, internal travel and seminars. Where has that money gone to so that you now ask Parliament to allow you borrow to finance these additional items?

1.59
Mr SAMUEL odonga Otto (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, this is my 19th year in this House, and when I came, I found some Members already here. 

Madam Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament, I remember the late honourable Dr Okulo Epak advised the whole House that there is a way of looking through classified expenditure. I do not know whether your chair can advise the House on that. At that time, it was said that there is a way Parliament could look through classified expenditure without jeopardising national security interests.

The Speaker: There is a Committee on Classified Expenditure.

Mr odonga otto: My understanding, therefore, is that this committee should have scrutinised this Shs 1.1 trillion, which is being given for classified expenditure.

Secondly, hon. Bahati, my good friend, just tabled a loan request to borrow money to finance the budget deficit; the papers have just been tendered in here. When you go into the budget, we are appropriating money to tarmac 223 kilometres of road in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) using our taxpayers’ money; really! Should we go and tarmac roads in DRC at this time?

The other day, I led a delegation of the Parliamentary Football Club to Kamuli. We crossed Kamuli using the Kayunga Ferry and we got stuck. These roads have been washed away. Moroto Road, from Gulu to Karamoja, has not been tarmacked, including the Lira–Kamdini Road. The roads in the country have been washed away.

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that even if we have to pass loan requests for roads in DRC, this is not the right time. It is a rainy season. The other day, the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba, said he was overwhelmed by phone calls from all over the country because the roads have been washed away.

In law, we say that you do not use an exception to establish a general rule. Even if we love to do business with DRC, this is the time we should repair the roads that are being washed away because we are having these kinds of rains for the first time since 1964. Therefore, I would like to move, at an appropriate time, that we oppose –(Interruption)

Mr bahati: Thank you, my good friend, hon. Odonga Otto. The information I would like to give you is that as the Speaker has informed the House, and the President also informed the country on Independence Day, these strategic roads in DRC need to be supported because the business between Uganda and DRC alone contributes $500 million to the economy. 

We need money to do the roads inside Uganda. We need markets to help our farmers across the country to sell the goods that they produce. Therefore, this is the logic, which must be understood. It is an investment that needs to be supported. Thank you. 

Mr odonga otto: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. I am not saying the roads in DRC should not be done. All I am saying is that we are in a crisis because of the floods in our own home. You are going to sweep the courtyard before cleaning the house; there are faeces in the house.

Gen. Katumba Wamala cannot pick his phone calls because he is overwhelmed; bridges have been washed away, but you want to go and repair roads in the neighbour’s home. I think in the next Parliament, we need to pass a law against lobbyists. This Parliament is being over lobbied by external factors. I even know of a company that is constructing roads in DRC; I saw their contract. They are actually waiting for the money, so they are pressing this institution so hard. There is already a contractor waiting for the money and the committee is being forced to do things in a hurry. That is where the whole problem is. 

2.04
Ms mary kabanda (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am surprised to see that after just three and a half months, we are now pushing for a supplementary budget. I am wondering what will happen by the time we read the next budget. The national budget that we passed has only been implemented for three and a half but they are now bringing in a supplementary budget. The reason they are forwarding is COVID-19, but I think COVID-19 should teach us to spend wisely. How can we take money to do roads in DRC when our own schools have failed to open because there is no money in the country?

I also wonder why we need to implement Emyooga at this time. I appreciate the idea of Emyooga because it will help our people to raise their standards of living and increase their per capita income; that is okay. However, my concern is, why do it at this time? It is going to become a political issue. Members of Parliament are not involved but they are involving RDCs. You saw how the food issue became political. Even Emyooga is going to become political. 

We are advocating for rural-urban migration and the Emyooga initiative is going to encourage urban-rural migration. My suggestion is that we should stay the implementation of Emyooga and first go through this political situation. It is only going to take us three months and then after that, we shall implement that policy. 

2.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the budget was read here, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did state that because of the unforeseen circumstances of COVID-19, they were going to recast the budget. I do not know where he has walked off to. I would have really loved to hear from him what has happened to the recasting of the budget to fit the prevailing situation. Before we even get into this supplementary budget, we should have done that. What happened to it? Hon. Bahati should explain to this country when the recasting of the national budget is going to be done. 

The second issue is on the compensation and verification of the people of Lango, Teso and Acholi. This is the very argument that the Committee on Budget keeps bringing up when we talk about verification of the claimants. They always claim that the time is never right. However, when it comes to Emyooga, the right time is now for it to be implemented.

On behalf of the people of Teso, I took Government to court. After 18 or 19 years, we won the case in the year 2018 when the judgement was given. The Attorney-General was given six months to verify because they doubted our figures and numbers. Today, it is two years since that time, but they have still not done the verification. Nonetheless, we see the Budget Committee coming here to say that we should defer this. We need this to be verified. This is one of the areas with the highest poverty levels and this is the money, which should have helped these people. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon Members to let this money be passed and let the claimants be verified so that we go to the next stage of payment. Have a human heart on this matter, honourable chairperson.  

THE SPEAKER: Let the chairperson of the Budget Committee first clarify. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, personally, I have no objection to availing this money to the people of Teso and Lango. However, it is the Members of Parliament from that region – actually members of the committee - who rose up and objected to the idea of sending this money. If they now say that they have changed their minds, I do not have a problem at all. It is them that misguided us. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you cannot rely on the personal opinions of Members because this is a court judgement. Give the people their “thing”. Let them mismanage it but give it to them. They have been waiting for 20 years. It is not right. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: We have no objection reversing this recommendation. We can then proceed to supply the money.

THE SPEAKER: You will therefore make some adjustments.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, we shall make some adjustments and the same will be done on Emyooga. I think there is consensus that the Shs 50 billion be added to the total, so that it can be redistributed across the country, equally across the constituencies –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Chairperson, not to the 19. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that we had problems with verification and we agreed that if the Shs 30 billion, which is too little, is to be allowed, let the records of the people who are going to be compensated be laid before Parliament so that we know who they are. Many people claimed to have been left out. Therefore, we said that we should know who the claimants are. Let the list of the people to be compensated be laid on the Table so that we know them. There was no contradiction – 

THE SPEAKER: You are the ones who told the chairperson of the Budget Committee that you are not ready.

MS OGWAL: We agree on the approval of the Shs 30 billion and even more if possible.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are the one saying that you are not ready because you do not know the claimants. What do you want this House to do? You are not being fair to us and the chairman.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was party to the suit. The Attorney-General’s representative in court did say, “We want to be sure that the list that you have provided has captured everybody and that they are the true beneficiaries.” That is why they asked for joint verification. 

When we go for the joint verification – that is why we are asking for the money – our legal team, together with the Attorney-General, will move around. If there are any people left out, like hon. Cecilia Ogwal has alluded, that is what is will be harmonised. 

For now, it may be too early for you to ask for the list to be laid here. Let us go and verify the people so that we lay the list here and compensate them. I am happy that the chairperson is conceding to it.

Also, in their recommendation here – 

THE SPEAKER: We now have a position from Teso, Lango and Acholi. What do we do? 

MR OKUPA: We agree to release the money for verification because that is the most important thing. This is not for payment as it is very little. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the work of Parliament is to appropriate; we shall not implement. Allow us to discharge our obligation. Let us give you the money and then you sort out yourselves. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we need a directive from you, and it would help if it can be followed to the letter. You will release this Shs 30 billion and the money will be shared by less than seven people. That is the challenge. 

The chairperson of the committee has a case, and Madam Speaker, you are guiding. As hon. Okupa said, this money should be released, but subject to the list being presented to the relevant committee. You can guide accordingly, because I know that 10 people in Gulu will share the money and the claimants in Pader will never receive even Shs 1,000. 

I am actually almost inclined to say that the money should not be given. However, Madam Speaker, you can direct that the list be tendered to the relevant committee or published in the newspapers before payment and that the money goes directly to the beneficiaries’ account. There are so many conmen along the line of this money and they will share it. The committee had a vision when they talked about it. The national Parliament should correct it. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you see how you have put the chairman in a very difficult position? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, maybe this is where the committee and the Attorney-General needed to have clarify. Let me make it clear here. If I got them right, it looks like the verification for Lango and Acholi was done. However, the verification has not yet been done for Teso. That is why they are saying that this money is for compensation and verification, if you read the statement. 

Therefore, Teso needs verification. Acholi and Lango need to start off the compensation. I think that is why they said that the list must be laid here because theirs is concluded. That must be clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, how will Parliament establish the rightful claimants? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Cecilia Ogwal are asking for is the list to be laid here, but not to go ahead and verify it.

THE SPEAKER: If you lay a list of 10 people and there are 300 people, what will Parliament do? 

MR AMORU: Madam Speaker, the additional information I would like to provide, especially regarding Lango, is that we have had about three different segments of verification. As we speak, whereas there may be disputes about the list, at least we have verified claimants. The point of contention is that we want money paid directly into the accounts of beneficiaries. This is because, previously, it would go through some hands, so the claimants would not get it. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, let me speak for Teso. We need money for verification and that is the money we are asking for. The court had given Government six months but it is now two years. We again wrote to court and they said they are giving the Government another six months, which will expire next month. Failure by Government to provide money for verification, they will go with the figures and the number of people that we gave. That is why I am appealing, in the case of Teso, that we need this money for verification by the two joint teams so that in the next financial year, we push for the money for compensation.

Finally, regarding the matter of DRC, I think it is very good reasoning in terms of regional integration. However, I think Members are asking that we be transparent. That is why the committee has said that before the implementation, the agreement or the memorandum of understanding should be laid before the House. I think the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala, will lay that before the House and then we can proceed. 

However, do not forget Ugandans. The three main roads in Kasilo have all been cut off and people have even died. We need money to open up the roads and even work on diversions during this rainy season. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, who is going to implement the actual distribution of the compensation money?

THE DEPUTY ATTORNRY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, since the matter went to court, the advocates represented the claimants and the procedure is that the Attorney-General or Government releases money to their advocates who are accountable to their clients. That is the procedure.

THE SPEAKER: That is with respect to Teso; what about Acholi and Lango because they are apparently together?

MR KAFUUZI: If they all went to court, the procedure is the same.

MR OKUPA: Attorney-General, let me make it clear to you. As I stated, there are two issues here. There are those due for compensation, but the ones of Teso are for verification. In your Chambers, the team that we met wants to come and meet with our team to go for a joint verification, so you need money. That is the order that was given by court. This money is needed for joint verification for the Teso case. However, for Lango and Acholi, that is where the compensation will be. 

The Speaker is asking, which is the responsible ministry? You are the ones to finance the teams from your ministry to come to us to verify. We have not reached the level of compensation. However, for Lango and Acholi, the firms that represented them are there.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have just consulted with Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Works and Transport. They have informed me that a decision was made that the money be paid directly to the claimants and not through the lawyers. Therefore, that means that the concerned people will have to present the verified lists to the Attorney-General’s office, then we shall go on with the payment exercise.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, there was a Principal State Attorney who was appointed to oversee this; unfortunately, he died - the late Oluka. He had completed verification in Lango and partially in Acholi, but I speak for Lango; the list is with the office of the Attorney-General. Your office appointed the late Principal State Attorney who went all round doing verification. You have the list in your office; we are now left with payment.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General has not made it clear to the people of Teso; are you providing money for verification or you are only talking about compensation? We are the ones who were with you in court and that is what was ordered. Is this part of the money you are going to provide for your team? It is your team asking for money for verification because you do not agree with the figures that we have.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I am being put in a very tricky situation. That is not a matter that has come to my desk before and it would not be fair for me to commit myself on whether we are going to provide money for verification or not. However, if there was a procedure agreed upon for verification, my understanding is that only verified claimants will be paid. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in the report here on page 22, under vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, it says, “Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs requested for an additional Shs 30 billion to cater for compensation of verified war claimants in Acholi, Lango and Teso regions who lost property, notably the cattle farmers, during the wars in northern and eastern Uganda. The matter required more time for verification of the victims.” 

That is why I am asking this question. It is stated here that you will retain part of this money for verification and part of it for compensation. What is so difficult for the Attorney-General to state or re-affirm that it will be provided for the verification? What is so difficult? If you need time with our legal team or me, you could as well say so. It has delayed for two years because verification is not taking place.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I understand my colleague’s assertions. However, as I said, that particular information has not been brought to my attention. He can avail it to me, then I will do the needful.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am very knowledgeable in these compensation issues; I can help the Attorney-General. Even if we appropriate the money, we have to be very careful, and the chairperson of the committee should be of help. The verification is jointly done. It is guided by your ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Therefore, it is a joint verification team. It would be dangerous to say that the money for verification should be part of this Shs 30 billion. That means the money for verification would go to the respective votes and be itemised.

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with you because you are going to touch the lives of millions of people. We are going to release this Shs 30 billion. In Lango, previously, the money was divided in one week and the people who benefitted were just majorly urban dwellers and dealers. There are people who are just demanding for Shs 700,000 from Government but they never got it and they do not appear on any list. In Acholi, it is even worse. 

This is where I need your directive, Madam Speaker. The money will be released to the lawyers - Kampala Associated Advocates. They have an agreement to take 20 per cent at the face of it. Therefore, if you release Shs 20 billion for Acholi, the lawyers in Kampala will take Shs 4 billion. Now, for the money, which goes down there, there is a group that have formed themselves into an association called Acholi War Debt Claimants Association; the executive members will divide the money amongst themselves. I also brought this to the attention of the President, that we need a mechanism where the last man in Nwoya, in Aruu, can even get Shs 1 million.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how you will do it but you need to direct that much as this money is going to be released, the list of those who are benefiting should be published in the newspapers or the Gazette, so that we know that this person is getting money from Pader and the other one from Gulu. Otherwise, if we pass this in a hurry, people who are putting on suits like me will share the money here in Kampala and the people down there will get nothing. I beg for your indulgence, with your seniority.

THE SPEAKER: What is coming to my mind is that we are not ready for this money. I think the chairperson was right. On one hand, Teso needs verification but the Acholi and Langi say the list is incomplete. So, we are not ready.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry that I have to raise this matter here. As you are aware, due to COVID-19, we have no platform, apart from this. 

My people are listening and they have for long been requesting –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, this Parliament approved hon. Opendi as a Cabinet minister. The Member has never resigned but she now comes to Parliament to say that this is the only platform she has. Is she in order, without tabling her resignation, to disown Cabinet?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Opendi is a Member of Parliament. Before becoming a minister, she was a Member of Parliament. Therefore, she has a right to speak here. 

Honourable members, I want to agree with the chair that we defer this issue. However, can we organise for a committee to sit on the Teso, Lango and Acholi issues so that we complete them? It is now fluid. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have different categories. In the case of Lango, verification was done. However, as I speak, no one knows the names on the lists. As hon. Otto said, it may include fake names. Therefore, we want the list to be published so that the –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Ogwal, that is why I am saying that we are not yet ready for this money. Let the logistics be done, the people identified, the lists made and then we pass the money. Otherwise, I do not know where it is going - It cannot be subject -

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling. I want to apologise for raising this this here. 

Tororo, as you know, is one of the districts where Alice Lakwena camped when she moved from northern Uganda during her war. For a very long time, the people that were affected by that Lakwena war have been requesting for their compensation. The very last statement His Excellency the President made on this was in 2015; he asked the people of Tororo to be patient so that he completes the compensations in Lango, Acholi and Teso regions before he comes to Tororo. 

This matter is now being discussed and my people are listening. Whenever we go for campaigns, they raise it. Even during the primaries, they were asking me about this compensation. 

I would like to request my colleagues that we consider those who were affected because the list for Tororo was submitted long ago. I recall in 2011, His Excellency the President tasked me, together with a team, to go and verify the list that we were given. I moved through the subcounties where Lakwena camped, namely Paya, Kirewa, Nabuyoga, Mulanda, Iyolwa and parts of Magola and I submitted that list to His Excellency the President. I want to request that this matter be brought to an end like it is being done for the other areas.

Secondly, I am happy that the funds for the COVID-19 response have been sent back to the district. I was shocked two days ago when I received phone calls from some people who said that they had supplied the district with food in April and they had not been paid yet this was part of the Shs 20 million that we had given to the district. In fact, I had no idea. When I called the Chief Administrative Officer, he told me that they were asked to send that money to the Consolidated Fund, which is what they did. I am glad that this money is being sent back. 

I also know that Tororo has six Members of Parliament and we sent back all the Shs 120 million. Some Members deposited the money at the district while others paid back to the Parliamentary Commission. I can see Tororo has Shs 80 million. I hope that the balance of the money will be sent to the district. 

Madam Speaker, I would also want to know why in certain districts the money was Shs 20 million but when you look at Nakaseke District, it is Shs 1.5 million. I was trying to ask my colleague how this arises - from the Shs 20 million it is now Shs 1.5 million. I would like to get clarification on what could have happened in such situations where the money was not returned wholesome as given. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I know that you are going to be busy, but this issue of the compensation must be brought to a close. I do not know whether we can give you one month. Your technical officers will not be having campaigns; they will be in office. Can they conclude the issue of the verifications and gather all the information from Lira, Lango, Acholi and Teso so that when we come, we can deal with it? 

Attorney-General, can we have your people work quickly on this issue so that the verification and whatever is outstanding is done and we can approve the money later? Honourable minister, please assure us that this is going to be done. They have been waiting. They are almost there but they need just small assistance to get on board.

Secondly, concerning Tororo, Sebei and Busoga, honourable members, the Lakwena war ended in Busoga but we have never been compensated. Attorney-General, the people of Sebei, Bukedi, and Busoga should also be considered for compensation because they suffered and there was a lot of destruction. 

2.32
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We seem to have agreed that the Emyooga issue is going countrywide and we need to appreciate that. 

While I support the Congo road project, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to seriously think about what we have already committed ourselves to in regards to our roads in Uganda. The Minister of Transport and Works presented to this Parliament the requirements he had in order to sort out the roads that have been badly affected by the long rains. 

I am privy to information that this money has never been provided and we are still struggling with those roads, which are supposed to give the producers access to markets, some of which will even be in Congo. As Parliament, we are looking very ugly supporting an external project while side-lining our own roads. 

Madam Speaker, we need to task the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide the finances that were approved by this Parliament to deal with these roads. Even some of those roads, which were in the emergency category, have never been handled to date. Since the two ministers are present, we need them to reconcile and confirm that these roads have been dealt with, so that as we deal with the roads in Congo, we also work on roads that will produce for the Congo market. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.34
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the people of Ik for bringing me back to Parliament unopposed. Therefore, I am already in the Eleventh Parliament –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you. I would like to also thank the committee for the report. However, there is no affirmative action in the report. Looking at Karamoja, for instance, it covers an area of 350 kilometres along her international borders, from Amudat up to Karenga, bordering Kitgum. However, there is no road which crosses into Kenya or South Sudan.

Secondly, the President directed that all the tourism roads should be open. I border Kidepo National Park and there were 30 international tourists pushing their bicycles last week going to Ik. They were passing through panya routes because there were no roads. I have been asking for murram roads, not even tarmac. Now, the Tenth Parliament is ending and I have not seen anything.

Sometimes, we need affirmative action for some of these communities. We need affirmative action; not just in theory, but practical affirmative action for the marginalised, the disadvantaged and the minorities. The Batwa are suffering in western Uganda. The Benet and Tepeth in eastern Uganda are suffering. In north-eastern Uganda, the Ik are suffering. Where is the affirmative action for the minority groups?

The reason there is persistent insecurity in Karamoja is because people are idle and they cannot do any business. They cannot transact because there are no roads across the borders. If there were roads, they would have been able to access opportunities along the border. We are not asking for tarmac roads for now; we are asking for murram roads to open up the region. Imagine it is only 50 kilometres from Ik to Kenya; that cannot even cost Shs 500 million.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the Emyooga programme. We had the Youth Livelihood Programme in the past and the money was wasted. I am a member of the local government accounts committee. I know that the money was misused because there were no trainings done. 

We had the Women’s Fund and the women utilised their money very well. It would, therefore, be wise to give the women a lot of money. When we went through the report, many women across the country utilised their money very well. The money was being dispatched every financial year and they were getting Shs 2 million per group. Why not prioritise money to the right people?

Madam Speaker, we had the Entandikwa Scheme. That scheme came but also collapsed. Now, this one has come but trust me when I say that it too will collapse because we are hurrying to do things without doing thorough assessments. People are warming up for this money, but you will see what will happen with it. So, it will be wise to ascertain how exactly this money will be used.

Finally, on the issue of compensation, my colleague talked about the former Solicitor-General who died. Karamoja had submitted a list but when he died, the list disappeared. This is because these animals were taken away from protected kraals, which were being watched over by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), not from the villages. So, most of these people were not compensated at all. 

As we speak now, the raids are happening every day. Animals are being raided and there is a black market for them. There are people who are encouraging the raids not only within Karamoja, but also outside Karamoja. These are businesspeople dealing in animals. 

We have a quarantine in place in Karamoja but now there are deals taking place in Karamoja for animals. It is a hot cake. So, people are using the animals in the protected kraals every day. I do not know how we are going to deal with this. We are only focusing on the powerful people in this country; what about the communities at the grassroots? Who is going to stand for them? I am here to stand for Karamoja. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think that the Minister of State for Micro-finance should actually write to individual Members of Parliament and inform them how much money is available in their constituencies and also inform us how the money can be accessed. We cannot continue in this way. It is important. 

Then, honourable Hillary Lokwang, I think we have agreed that the Emyooga money will go to the whole Uganda, not just Wakiso and Kampala.

2.40
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

I also want to make comments on three areas. One is on the issue of compensation. I felt that when Government came up with a programme to compensate people who suffered during the war, it should have been a comprehensive consideration. Whereas there was the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in Acholi, Teso and Karamoja sub-regions, we also had the West Nile Bank Front and also the Uganda National Rescue Front II (UNRF II) which also caused a lot of problems in West Nile. I also believe that the Allied Democratic Front (ADF) might have had an effect on Rwenzori Region. 

We also suffered with the LRA as the people of West Nile. There were lots of people ambushed on the way; people lost vehicles and goods. Therefore, I feel that as Government comes up with a programme to compensate our brothers in Acholi, Teso and Karamoja, there must also be consideration for the West Nile people. 

For the LRA case, those who suffered ambushes and arrests – the list of those who lost vehicles including buses was also submitted to Government. However, we have not heard any response from Government. Now that Government has come out clearly to compensate this category of people, it should be comprehensively done. Those who suffered the effects of war, lost property during the West Nile Bank Front and in UNRF II wars, must be considered.

Madam Speaker, on COVID-19, when I looked at the list of the areas of expenditure, Government seems to have zeroed in on areas which were already outlined - issues to do with surveillance and increasing the ICUs in the regional referral hospitals. However, as I speak now, there are situations where when the COVID-19 patients are taken to these regional referral hospitals, they are referred back to their districts. The districts have been told to establish their own treatment centres. I do not see this being catered for. 

The feeding being talked about here is also meant for those who are undergoing treatment, but some of these quarantine centres in some districts are crippled. I had a conversation with the District Health Officer (DHO) in my district and he told me that the number of people in the quarantine centres had increased yet funding had stopped. 

I appeal to Government that on this issue of COVID-19, the expenditure areas must be revisited. Since districts are being told to treat their patients, they should establish their own ICUs in the district hospitals because most of them are being referred back.

I wanted to comment on the Emyooga, but since we have agreed that the Shs 50 billion should be spread over the districts - I had divided 19 by the number of subcounties and the nine town councils which I have. That means that in a whole sub-county, there are going to be only two groups, yet when you look at the guidelines, they are talking about boda boda groups, salons and many others. There are several groups. So, if we are taking about two per subcounty, which categories are these?

I also feel that if Government really wants to make an impact with the Emyooga campaign, it should be properly planned and financed. Further still, the groups must be identified properly at sub-county level. There should be around 10 groups at the sub-county, not just two.

Are we doing this just to create an impression or is it supposed to bring about real impact in the community? With the Youth Livelihood Fund, the important criterion was the group’s ability to pay back the money. It did not matter whether the Youth Livelihood Fund was to cause impact; what was emphasized was paying back the money. 

So, in this Emyooga initiative, if we are looking for impact, it should have been better financed and more groups should have benefitted other than the 19 per constituency. Thank you.
	
2.44
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding compensation, in 2017, the Cabinet passed a transitional justice policy that brings on board the entire process of how we deal with legacies of violence and among those is compensation.

To date, Government has not put in place a commission that should be overseeing and implementing these processes. We expected this budget to include the Transitional Justice Commission, which was recommended in the policy passed by Cabinet.

The responses we are getting from here are challenges of why Government is failing to do what they are supposed to do. It is important for the Attorney-General to explain to the House why to date there is no implementation process.

Why has the Transitional Justice Bill been put on zero draft? When is it coming to the House so that we deal with this matter once and for all? The four pillars of how Government should respond to conflict in this country are very clear and compensation is just one element. Under reparation, we can get all these things done.

There are people who lost lives, property, opportunities like the young. Where do you categorise them under this? It is important for Government to expedite the implementation of the Transitional Justice Policy. 

Secondly, in regard to this supplementary. You remember the motion that we passed in this House regarding the building of capacity of biosciences laboratories in this country?

I am happy that some of those responses have been put here but in a bigger sense, the core institutions that should be given enough funding are missing.

I site Gulu University not because I represent Gulu but as one of the Government institutions with the greatest potential on handling the issues of COVID-19. Gulu University has a bioscience laboratory that was built by the ADB loan to the tune of $5.6 million.

When are we going to use this laboratory? I have looked through this and there is nothing like Gulu University. Among the universities or institutions that were included in this supplementary.

I do not know whether it is an omission or a missing of the minds. I would need a clarification of why Gulu University biosciences laboratory under the Faculty of Medicine is missing. 

This is one of the institutions that should be leading in the struggle against COVID-19. The Virus Research Institute of Nairobi is collaborating with Gulu University. It has capacity of the capacity. What they are lacking are reagents to begin some of these processes.

I request the committee to reverse and include Gulu University. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let us go to the committee stage. We have made enough comments and agreements on how to move.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Recurrent Expenditure Schedule No.1

Vote 001 - Office of the President

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 347,166,079 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002 - State House

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 201,091,464,657 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 111,482,607 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 27,103,599,568 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of 10,727,007 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 -  Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,670,086,000 be approved.
(Question out and agreed to.)

007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the Chairperson would have to reconsider their recommendation and include that money for verification.

I would like to plead with the people of Teso because again going to court - two years now regarding the verification. Specifically, how much is going for compensation for Acholi, verification for Teso, verification for Lango because they are separate.

I guess when they were submitting the details, they should have clarified that if you are deferring compensation but verification should go ahead. That is the argument the Attorney-General always gives when we go to court that they have not given them money for verification.

It is unfortunate again that the Deputy Attorney-General has walked out because he told me that he had not been briefed about the details, he would have categorically specified what it means because he even does not know how much. He is trying to call his office to find out how much is needed for verification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this the money for compensation, under Supplementary Schedule No.1? – No. It is under schedule no.2.

I put the question that the sum of Shs 1,722,261,809 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CLERK-AT-TABLE: Vote 008 is being verified.

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of sum of Shs 15,399,596 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 48,306,688. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 351,555,696 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 78,516,024,843 - 

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know where Gulu University falls. Is it under Ministry of Health on the issues of biosciences laboratory? We cannot miss that.

MR BAHATI: We are still on Schedule no. 1 and these are resources that have already been spent. Therefore, if Gulu University was not considered under Schedule no. 1 and the money has already been spent, it cannot be considered at this stage.

Madam Chairperson, we process these supplementaries from the requests of different sectors. If a sector has not put in a request, we cannot, from nowhere, start processing it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 78,516,024,843 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 130,026,243,403 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 1,820, 000, 000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 39,018,190 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,049,743,008 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 020 - Ministry of ICT and National Guidance

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,790,844 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,245,431,760 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 101 – Judiciary

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,639,108,113 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 375,620,491 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 476,718,834 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of -

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like clarification from the Minister of Works and Transport whether Kamdini-Lira road has been incorporated as it has been requested as an emergency -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us first finish with Schedule no. 1. We will come to that in Schedule no. 2.

Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 400,181,533 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,698,117 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,704,079 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122 - Kampala City Council Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,403,189,671 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 125 - National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,462,006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 27,341,426 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 127 - Muni University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 487,766 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,524,871 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133 - Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1 billion be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134 - Health Service Commission 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 41,181,072 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 36,476,790 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,003,177 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 138- Makerere University Business School

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,922,453 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 141- Uganda Revenue Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 60,855,401,832 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,417,439 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,659,740,864 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,300,434,133 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CLERK-AT-TABLE: Vote 008 has been verified. Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How much is it? Is it the same one?

CLERK-AT-TABLE: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 615,510,387,002 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,770,737 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149 - Gulu University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 57,881,721 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 42,405,953 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152 - NAADs Secretariat

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,740,388,672 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 – PPDA

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,311,679 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,159,820,728 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 73 billion be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161- Mulago Hospital Complex

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,372,516,025 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,001,639 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 163- Arua Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 24,492,343 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 164- Fort Portal Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 99,736,251 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 165- Gulu Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 27,289,471 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 166: Hoima Referral Hospital
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Shs 43,030,072 be provided for.


(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 167 - Jinja Referral Hospital
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 16,063,641 be provided for.


(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 168 - Kabale Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 44,375,044 be provided for.


(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 170 - Mbale Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 4,883,128 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 171 - Soroti Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 73,538,280 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 172 - Lira Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 61,600,883 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 173 - Mbarara Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 165,217,049 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 175 - Moroto Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 736,405 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 176 - Naguru Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the question is that Shs 280,438,285 be provided for.


(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 301 - Lira University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 969,536 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 302 - Uganda National Meteorological Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 6,023,787 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 303 - National Curriculum Development Centre

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 6,365,400 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 308 - Soroti University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 21,715,212 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 10,918,076 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 310 - Uganda Investment Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 4,453,606 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501 - Adjumani District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 87,486,526 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 502 - Apac District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 59,980,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 503- Arua District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 107,280,886 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 504 - Bugiri District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 43,258,552 be provided for.


(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 505 - Bundibugyo District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 95,168,411 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 507- Busia District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 10,762,277 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 508 - Gulu District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 43,486,791 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 510 - Iganga District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 13,024,480 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 511 - Jinja District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 74,249,423 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 512 - Kabale District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 343,317,585 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 513 - Kabarole District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 79,980,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 514 - Kaberamaido District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 20 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 517 - Kamuli District
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 54,326,585 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 518 - Kamwenge District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 4,616,418 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 519 - Kanungu District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 49,084,891 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 520 - Kapchorwa District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 59,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 521 Kasese District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 66,278,364 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 523 - Kayunga District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 37,383,443 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 524 - Kibaale District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 40 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 525 - Kiboga District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 526 - Kisoro District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 28,138,663 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 527 - Kitgum District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 22,714,205 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 529 - Kumi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 40,507,645 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 530 - Kyenjonjo District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 13,876,396 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 531 - Lira District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 16,729,930 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 532 - Luwero District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 127,153,706 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 533 - Masaka District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 40 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 535 - Mayuge District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 75,630,537 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 536 - Mbale District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 58,576,394 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 537 - Mbarara District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 161,978,574 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 539 - Moyo District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 540 - Mpigi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 78 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 541- Mubende District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 27,879,895 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 542 - Mukono District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 264,442,333 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 544 - Nakasongola District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 6,478,700 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 545 - Nebbi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 65,999,612 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 546 - Ntungamo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 42,161,953 be provided for Vote 546, Ntungamo District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 547 - Pader District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 36,667,714 be provided for Vote 547, Pader District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 548 - Pallisa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that a sum of Shs 66,354,608 be provided for Vote 548, Pallisa District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 549 - Rakai District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that a sum of Shs 74,697,883 be provided for Vote 549, Rakai District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 550 - Rukungiri District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that a sum of Shs 21,180,566 be provided for Vote 550, Rukungiri District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 551 - Ssembabule District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that a sum of Shs 146,993,674 be provided for Vote 551, Ssembabule District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 552 - Sironko District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put a question that a    sum of Shs 53,556,050, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 553 - Soroti District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 27,051,051 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 554 - Tororo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 68,844,526, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 555 - Wakiso District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 99,086,156, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 556 - Yumbe District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 221,711,881 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 557 -Butaleja District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 28,002,884 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 558 - Ibanda District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 79,980,000 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 559 - Kaabong District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 1,301,391 be provided for Vote 559, Kaabong District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 560 - Isingiro District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 198,664,943 be provided for Vote 560, Isingiro District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 561 - Kaliro District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 55,470,650 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 562 - Kiruhura District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 565 - Amuria District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 566 - Manafwa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 181,968,574 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 567 - Bukwo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 568 - Mityana District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 79,990,000 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 569 - Nakaseke District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 4,120,024 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 570 - Amuru District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 28,921,864 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 571 - Budaka District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 47,835,209 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 572 - Oyam District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 119,740,959 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 574 - Namutumba District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 62,348,924 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 575 - Dokolo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 3,734,172 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 576 - Buliisa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 39,980,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 577 - Maracha District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 40,930,259 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 578 - Bukedea District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 9,003,548 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 579 - Bududa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 58,013,030 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 581 - Amudat District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sum of Shs 40 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 583 - Buyende District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 64,095,701, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 584 - Kyegegwa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 74,012,073 be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 585 - Lamwo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 14,252,744 be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 586 - Otuke District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 587 - Zombo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sum of Shs 4,437,699 be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 588 - Alebtong District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sum of Shs 41,184,875 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 589 - Bulambuli District
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of 68, 870, 954 be provided for Vote 589, Bulambuli District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 591 - Gomba District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 45,983,486, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 592 - Kiryandongo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a sum of Shs 13,948,801, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 593 - Luuka District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 36,218,986, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 594 - Namayingo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 29,030,159, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 595 - Ntoroko District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 40 million, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 596 - Serere District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 35,257,165 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 597 - Kyankwanzi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 12,729,479 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 598 - Kalungu District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 39,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 599 - Lwengo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 6,575,863 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 602 - Rubirizi District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 59,980,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 604 - Napak District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 41,964,902 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 605 - Kibuku District

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 207,125,215 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 606 - Nwoya District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 72,880,173 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 607 - Kole District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 68,377,760 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 609 - Sheema District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 59,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 611 - Agago District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 50,313,010 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 613 - Kagadi District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 85,859,829 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 614 - Kakumiro District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 25,444,636 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 616 - Rubanda District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 1,406, 232 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 617 - Namisindwa District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 34,526,858 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 618 - Pakwach District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 19,990,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 619 - Butebo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 110 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 621 - Kyotera District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 4,065,252 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 622 - Bunyangabu District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 40 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 625 - Kassanda District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 45, 673,206 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 626 - Kwania District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 3,646,884 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 628 - Kikube District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, a sum of Shs 11,219,592 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 633 - Madi-Okollo District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 3,055, 393 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 635 - Kalaki District 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members a sum of Shs 20 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Recurrent Expenditure for Supplementary Schedule No. 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 1,302,375,387,693 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure under Schedule No. 1

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put a question that a sum of Shs 10 billion be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 6,398,920,544 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 17 billion be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 15,787,081,872 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 125 - National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 2.430 billion be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133 - Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 2,648,689,999 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 537 - Mbarara District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 210,522,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 542 - Mukono District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 210,522,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 566: Manafwa District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 210,522,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 605 - Kibuku District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a sum of Shs 210,522,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Development Expenditure under Schedule 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, a total sum of Shs 55,106,780,415 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure under Schedule 2

Vote 002 - State House

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I see you reading Vote 002: State House. Under Annex Supplementary No. 1, we approved Shs 201 billion. Now, under Supplementary No. 2, we have Shs 250 billion, that means that is Shs 451 billion. We passed a budget for this year of Shs 465 billion. That means before we enter Quarter 2, State House has spent Shs 951 billion. 

Is it rational for us to budget for State House? Why don’t we just have a blanket - that you can take as much as you want? If we have the budget to follow, is this Shs 251 billion the same as the Shs 201 billion?  I would like to seek a clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we all appreciate the importance of the institution of State House and the kind of work and the pressures that they handle on our behalf and the nation. The Shs 250 billion is an addition to what we have already appropriated.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, now if Shs 201 billion is additional to the Shs 250 billion, yet we have already passed Shs 465 billion, that means Shs 201 billion plus 250 billion plus 465 billion, which is equal to Shs 916 billion - and that is within four months, which have not even expired.

We agree that State House has a President to do functions but we have the Ministries of Education, Works, Water, etcetera to do what it is supposed to do; could we be privy to the information to understand the pressures that within less than four months, you are about to reach a trillion shillings. I am sure the remaining eight months - that means if Shs 916 billion is for four months, it means for the remaining eight months, you will need Shs 2 trillion. What are these pressures so that we understand?

MR BAHATI: We do not handle issues in anticipation. What is on the Floor of the House, is a request of Shs 250 billion for State House. Madam Chairperson, as you have already mentioned it and informed the House, we have a classified committee of Parliament, which looks at all classified expenditures. This was also looked at and passed, and we know how the classified committees work in this House. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I know you have ambitions for these positions; you will see the pressures that will be there in future. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in the past, you guided Parliament to agree on what the demand of State House would be in terms of arrears. You will remember a couple of years ago, we agreed on a specific figure so that State House does not have to feature every year for supplementary because this also puts the status of the first family in bad light. Maybe, we need to do the same. If we are to approve this Shs 250 billion, can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tell us the absorption capacity or demand of State House so that we can agree once and for all that when we give you this amount of money, you will not keep coming to us for supplementary. 

By so doing, we are actually putting the image of the first family in bad light. I think all of us are entitled to defend the image of the first family. Therefore, can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development guide us on how much State House needs. We will give it to you and you should assure us that you will not be coming every year to ask for Supplementary in the name of State House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are now legislating in the anticipation because we are now saying, maybe you will come or you might come. Let us deal with what is here. I put the question that – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is okay, let us deal with it. However, we need to put it in context. The context is in schedule no.1; we have Shs 201 billion, add on Shs 250 billion, and add on Shs 465 billion, which we passed. It means when you come for a supplementary, the earlier money is finished. Therefore, Shs 465 billion and Shs 201 billion is finished, and Shs 250 billion is most likely also finished. 

Now, we are remaining with almost nine months to go. Can’t he have an idea of what is the appetite for State House so that we can also adjust the Supplementary here on the Floor to avoid coming back, asking for more money. The appetite looks to be very high; given this circumstance, you can guess that we maybe need Shs 4 trillion or Shs 5 trillion and we give you and call it a day.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will have an opportunity, especially with the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and you will have an opportunity to examine these accounts. I put the question that the sum of Shs 250 billion be provided for State House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 24,514,140,700 be provided for Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 2, 439, 719,080 be provided for Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have already reconciled our position and agreed as per page 22 of the report. If you recall, on page 22, we agreed that the Emyooga fund, the additional Shs 50 billion will be added on to the original amount and distributed to all the districts. It will not be restricted only to the 19 districts but it will be spread out to all the SACCO groups, who have been trained and qualify as somebody articulated on the matter. We do not need to restrict ourselves to Shs 30 million per group but we could spread it according to what our respective districts will demand. I beg to make this particular amendment on page 22. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the amendment we made was to say, let the Shs 50 billion now cover the whole country. However, to say in my district we want Shs 20 million and the other district we want Shs 3 million, I think we cannot do that.

Let us just say that the Shs 50 billion is for all the districts. 

MS OGWAL: Yes, all the districts and we are not going to restrict to the 19 districts. You remember the ministry was talking of the 19 districts. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: All the districts, in addition to what was provided. No more Wakiso and Kampala.

MS OGWAL: No more special interest groups of Kampala and others.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 95, 600,000, 0000 be provided for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 50 billion be provided for Ministry of Health.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 50 billion be provided for the Electoral Commission.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 116- National Medical Stores

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 50 billion be provided for National Medical Stores.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 30 billion be provided for Uganda Police Force.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total recurrent sum of Shs 552,553,859,780 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1.1 trillion be provided for Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 - Ministry of Transport and Works

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 220 billion be provided for Ministry of Transport and Works.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, on Vote 106 – Ministry of Transport and Works, we agreed here that since this money is going to Congo for very important roads there, and we have not seen the agreements, the Budget Framework Papers and the ministerial statement have not been processed, we put this on hold; Shs 220 billion needed for that road in Congo. (Interjections) That is what we agreed here; it is not just about passing it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, give us a commitment.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Madam Chairperson, the draft of these documents; the inter-government agreement and the project draft agreement was laid before the committee. However, on the next sitting, I promise to bring the signed documents and lay them on the Floor of Parliament.

This is not a project, which is being rushed for implementation. As already provided to the committee, we shall lay the relevant documents on the Floor of Parliament before the implementation.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, if you pay attention to the draft documents, we are not asking for the draft documents to be brought here. Why are we hurrying? This is a draft and it shows you that whatever the minister is pursuing is not even conclusive. As a House, we cannot sit and act on something being drafted somewhere, and we are passing Shs 220 billion, yet we have several roads that have not been worked on. If we have this money, let us use it for our roads first, as we wait for them to finalise and bring conclusive documents.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister has undertaken that before commencement of this project, the documents will be laid here for the scrutiny of this House. I put the question that Shs 100 billion be provided for NAADS.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

CLERK-AT-TABLE: NAADS Secretariat, Madam Speaker.


THE CHAIRPERSON: We finished that. Kabale now? I put the question that Shs 370,545,451 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

CLERK-AT-TABLE: NAADS Secretariat -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you? 

CLERK-AT-TABLE: I am on the item after Ministry of Works and Transport, which is NAADS Secretariat.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs – 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we had agreed that Teso needs verification to be done prior to compensation. I would like to be guided; now that we are concluding, how we are going to handle the verification money? Can the minister guide us; under what does it come? The verification for compensation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish with the development expenditure of the districts. We finished with Kabale, call the next one. 

Vote 517 – Kamuli District

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that Shs 914,159,286 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 522 - Katakwi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Shs 28,906,130 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 524 - Kibaale District. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 159,030,355 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 527 – Kitgum District.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 599,091,800 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 539 – Moyo District

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the sum Shs 6,429,800 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 544 – Nakasongola District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 54,761,434 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 550 – Rukungiri District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 73,760,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 551 – Sembabule District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 582,050,254 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 556 – Yumbe District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 856,856,505 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 561 – Kaliro District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 22,283,072 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 562 – Kiruhura District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 359,955,935 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the money for some of the districts is quadrupling the money for some other districts. We need to be advised how we get to those figures. For example, Pader got Shs 36 million, now Kiruhura is Shs 352 million. (Interjections) We need to know how some districts get more than others. How do you arrive at those figures where one district gets 10 times the amount of other districts and we are here saying “aye” in good faith? What is going on? Kaabong got Shs 1 million. How? 

MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate my honourable colleague’s concerns but districts have different demands. Some of them had money returned and that was supposed to construct seed schools, others health centres III others Youth Livelihood Fund money. That is why the figures vary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to Mityana. Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 250,604,914 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 570 – Amuru District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 1, 018,718,213 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 571 – Budaka District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 1,336,316,990 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 581 – Amudat District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 426.7 million be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 584 – Kyegegwa District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 259,765,919 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 585 – Lamwo District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 109,970,715 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 596 – Serere District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 466,741,737 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 602 – Rubirizi District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 283,823,910 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 606 – Nwoya District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 439,429,167 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 607 – Kole District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 343,702,418 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 609 – Sheema District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 180,434,872 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 611 – Agago District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 912,766,576 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 625 – Kassanda District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 231,347,821 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 770 – Kasese Municipal Council

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the sum of Shs 6,257,124 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total development expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the total sum of expenditure Shs 1,420,294,410,398 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, some votes will go together. I am just correcting figure of the development expenditure. It is Shs 1,430,294,410,398. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ADDENDUM NO.1 TO SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE 2 FY 2020/2021

Recurrent Expenditure

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 483,991,417 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 167 - Jinja Regional Referral Hospital.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,630,570,991 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 173 - Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,966,564,294 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: From vote 503 to vote 860 are the local Governments and that includes the cities.  I put the question that the sum of Shs 187,579,021,208 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 650 million be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 636 - Terego District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,858,737,444 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 851- Arua City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 14,340,000,000 be provided for.

Vote 852 - Mbarara City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 18,780,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 853 - Gulu City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 41,040,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 854 - Jinja City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 12,680,000,000 be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 855 - Fort Portal City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 9,490,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote856 - Mbale City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 21,290,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 857  - Masaka City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that a sum of Shs 28,750,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 858 - Lira City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that a sum of Shs 14,180,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 859 - Soroti City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that a sum of Shs 5,590,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 860 - Hoima City

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that a sum of Shs 31,140,000,000 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we had requested that before we pass the budget of cities, the ministry lays the list of accounting officers. Was it done when I was out of the House? We agreed in principle and I would not like it to be delayed because all of us have personal interest in this list. Can we be assured that accounting officers have already been appointed as directed by Parliament earlier on. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this is an old directive. It dates as far as August. Where are the accounting officers?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to take you back. This is the first time votes for cities are appearing and I thought that they would appear on the Hansard. We have skipped them especially on recurrent expenditure.

We read the total but it would have been prudent to have read these cities. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I said from Vote 503 to Vote 860.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, we summed it up but-

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, for recurrent, they read one by one. Now, we are moving to development expenditure where they will do the same thing. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, we did not read one by one. It was omnibus.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, I said that from vote 503 up to vote 860. That was the total.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, as we call the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the question about the accounting officers, he should also answer this. In the list of the development budget, Soroti City has only Shs 5 billion but the rest are above 15 and 20 billion.

What was the criteria? And yet they are all starting at the same time. Even Hoima is Shs 31 billion but for Soroti City? Even the district had been struggling to complete the structure for the district headquarters. Soroti has a meagre Shs 5.5 billion and yet, the rest are in 14, 41, 12, 21, 28 billion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under annex No.3, let the Hansard capture all the districts individually but we have already done the total. Let me do the total first before we talk about the accounting officers.

I put the question that development expenditure of Shs 201,788,737,444 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKUPA: I raised the issue of Soroti with the smallest - we need to explain to our people the reasons it has only Shs 5 billion. The recurrent expenditure of the cities is within the same range but not development.

I know there are many things that need to be put in place in the Soroti City but only Shs 5 billion? What happened?

MR BAHATI: Hon. Okupa, we are not voting new money for the cities. We are getting the money from the municipalities that were existing.

The budget of the city depends on the money that we had already appropriated for the municipalities. The good thing is that cities have now got a vote and they are going to run. Those other things of how much each city is getting will be worked on in the next financial year.

MR OKUPA: When they were doing the cities, they expanded and so, the current soroti City is not the same as the municipality. They should have taken that into consideration because there are more demands now.

MR BAHATI: That will be handled in the next financial year.

MR OKUPA: No. No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, they transferred the money that was in the municipalities to the cities.

MR BAHATI: We can only transfer what you had. On the Accounting officers, we have appointed them in the acting capacity for cities. I want to crosscheck whether this list was submitted to the House. If it was not -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. It was not.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will bring it at the next sitting. However, if we are coming back after lunch, we can send someone for it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, send someone to bring the list since your office is very near. I hope by the time we are finished with lunch, they would have brought the list.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are going to bring it. The issue of the Supplementary Schedule, No. 2 has been clarified.  We captured it under the Ministry of Works and Transport properly and voted on it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have worked hard and I think we have earned the right to have lunch. Let us break for 45 minutes. House is suspended for 45 minutes.  When we come back, we shall do the other business.

(The House suspended at 4.04 p.m. for 45 minutes)

(On resumption at 4.54 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

report from the committee of supply

4.54
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved the Supplementary Expenditure 1 and 2 and Addendum to Supplementary Schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2020/2021 with amendments.

Motion for adoption of the report from the committee of supply

4.55 
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

4.56
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I also have the list of accounting officers. I do not know at what stage I can lay it.

The Speaker: You should lay it.

Mr bahati: These are the accounting officers for;

    1.  Terego District Local Council
    2.  Hoima City
    3. Soroti City
    4.  Lira City
    5.  Masaka City
    6.  Mbale City
    7.  Fort Portal City
    8.  Jinja City
    9.  Gulu City
    10.  Mbarara City 
    11.  Arua City

We have appointed them for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I beg to lay.

The Speaker: They will be submitted to the Committee on –

4.57
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, after consultation with the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have also agreed that the Shs 30 billion for the compensation be approved because we believe that some administrative work can be done without necessarily involving Parliament. Let Parliament do the approval and administrative matters can be handled at the district level.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think when we took that decision, we were not sure where the money is going and how it will be managed. Therefore, let us retain our decision. We instruct the Attorney-General to act quickly within a month, do the verification and they come back to this House. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE of Parliament

4.58
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion for reconsideration of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as returned by His Excellency the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded. Can we now hear the report from the committee?

4.59
The chairperson of the committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as returned by the President and made the following observations:

His Excellency the President returned the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 for reconsideration of clauses 2, 3(b), (d) and 7(a)(i) by Parliament for the following reasons:

    1. Clause 2 that sought to amend section 4 of the Income Tax Act provides that taxpayers who declare tax liability for a consecutive period of five years of income to less than 0.5 per cent of their gross turnover should pay a minimum tax amounting to 0.5 per cent of the turnover for each year commencing with the sixth year. This measure is projected to raise additional revenue amounting to Shs 178 billion. 

	This was one of the measures that were proposed in the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy to generate revenue from taxpayers who have colossal turnover but because of the generous deductions in the income tax, they use them to defeat collection of revenue. Such a tax is not peculiar to Uganda as the United States of America, Kenya and Rwanda do employ it.

    2. Clause 3(d) of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020, which proposed to introduce a new sub-section 3(a) section 5 of the Income Tax Act. This provision would require a person who earns rental income from more than one building to account for the income and expenses of the buildings and pay tax for each of the buildings separately. 

	The objective of this reform is to increase revenue contribution of owners of multiple buildings by obliging them to account for rental income tax for each building separately. 

The current legal framework contains a loophole, which enables owners of multiple buildings to shelter taxable rental income of a profitable property with expenses and losses of a non-profitable building, which leads to unjustifiable deferral of Government revenue.

    3. Clause 3(b) and 7(a)(i) of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020, which proposed to cap the deductible expenses for purposes of determining the tax on rental income for any person. 

Currently, an individual who derives income from letting out property is allowed a deduction of 20 per cent from the rent received as expenditure incurred in producing the rent. 
	
On the remaining amount, he pays 20 per cent of the income in excess of Shs 2,820,000. The company pays 30 per cent tax on its rent after deducting all expenditures incurred in producing the rent. 

Whereas companies have been receiving rent of about Shs 800 billion annually, the tax contribution is less than Shs 9 billion amounting to 1.12 per cent as the effective tax rate. 

The Bill, therefore, proposes a ceiling on deductible expenses on rental income and also a limit on expenditure incurred in respect to the property from which the rent is derived. 

Madam Speaker, with this background, the committee observes as follows: 

Alternative minimum tax is a mandatory alternative to the standard income tax that gets triggered when taxpayers make more than the exemption and use crowded itemised deductions. The reason alternative minimum tax affects those in the higher tax bracket is because it eliminates many of those deductions. Therefore, an alternative minimum tax is a tax that ensures that taxpayers pay at least the minimum. 

In the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy, one of the targeted challenges affecting the performance of corporate income tax is the wide range of allowances including capital allowances and deductions, which reduce the chargeable income and the effective tax rate. 

Uganda has historically used taxation instruments, including limited exemptions and holidays, to pursue economic growth and investment. The success of this approach is reflected in the businesses that have chosen to invest in Uganda but has an impact on the overall tax yield. This has particularly reflected on the Corporation Tax performance. For instance, the capital allowances including depreciation allowance, initial allowance and industrial building allowance are more generous than economic depreciation, ultimately contributing to the large tax losses claimed by businesses. 

In addition, the ability to carry forward losses indefinitely may incentivise companies to remain artificially in a tax loss making position over claiming losses. 

Tax losses carried forward within the Corporation Tax System are currently substantial and restore the yield from Corporation Tax. 

The proposal to introduce an alternative minimum tax is not because of weaknesses in administration but is a practise used by many countries to generate revenue from companies that are actually making profit but because of the generous deduction in the law, which are good for most of the businesses, some taxpayers use them to continuously register tax losses. 

Alternative minimum tax has already been imposed in various countries, as I earlier mentioned, Madam Speaker. 

The reforms in the Rental Income Tax are aimed at increasing the revenue effort of Rental Tax. It is proposed to curb the expenses on rental income to 50 per cent. This reform will improve revenue productivity of rental income taxed by capping the deductible expenses for all rental taxpayers to 50 per cent of rental income with the carry forward of the excess for future deductions.

The individual rental taxpayer, without record to support their business expenses, will make a minimum of 50 per cent deduction in lieu of the rent.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the returned clauses of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed by the House and the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I would like you to be clear. Are you saying that you stand by the original decision of the House? Is that what you are saying? 

MR MUSASIZI: No. Madam Speaker, the committee is agreeing with the President. The committee recommends as follows: 

The returned clauses of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed by the House and that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law. In other words, we agree with the President’s concerns.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the minutes, together with the original report and other materials the committee used in considering this Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: I think your Clerk should write proper English. I think they should have said, “The committee agrees with the proposals made by the President.” Your Clerk should improve the English. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson for the presentation. However, for those of us that have not been following the details covered by the committee, I would expect the chairperson to be a little bit more generous with information. 

When do you say, “The committee recommends the decision of the President?” You should have given us the justification. How did you arrive at that final decision that agrees with the President? I believe Parliament can also advise the Executive for certain specific reasons. Therefore, can you advise us as to why you agreed with the President on item 1 and 2 in order for us to discuss it and agree? The way you have left us hanging makes it difficult. 

My simple understanding, Madam Speaker, is that the presentation of the chairperson here is that they want your permission; mine or Parliament’s to tax losses. That is if I have understood it – because I have read it. 

I know they said that America can tax losses but I do not know whether we can allow ourselves to tax losses. I feel that you need to equip us with more information to justify this decision the committee has taken. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I so happen to have studied American taxation and passed it. What they do is they ask questions such as, “Do you want to pay tax on gross or do you want to prepare books and be taxed? That is the time when you make a decision. If you have agreed on gross, it is on gross. If you are preparing your accounts, it means you will be taxed on profit or you will not pay tax if you make a loss.

Madam Speaker, there are four types of losses. The first is a trading loss. This is when you prepare your income books and make a loss. The second is where you have made a profit but the capital allowances make you - because of the law, you have only granted capital allowances. You make a tax loss and that means a loss carried forward. That loss carried forward means that it will be carried forward to the following year. In the following year, you may make a profit and capital allowance after deducting and you have a taxable income but because of the loss brought forward from the previous year, you make a loss. 

The other loss is genuinely from day one where you are trying to eliminate somebody in business. For example, if I want to eliminate my brother, the congressman, from business because he has opened a shop next to mine - I sell fuel and he is selling fuel, I buy mine at Shs 3,000 and he also buys at Shs 3,000. I then decide to sell mine at Shs 2,700 so that I eliminate him immediately - things like that do happen. After eliminating him, I now take over the business and recover the losses I made after eliminating him and make profits.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, what the committee chairperson is bringing is his personal view because we agreed that there is no way in the world that you can tax a loss unless we want to make another law, called the Loss Tax Act but not the Income Tax Act.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, he has given the type of losses. In this law, which type of loss is he going to tax? A tax is always on income. The chairperson must be clear.

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that this matter has come before Parliament. In the last two years - I remember hon. Nandala-Mafabi still insisting on this - the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because of failure to get other avenues of collecting tax, has kept bringing the issue of taxing losses.

I remember one time I attended a meeting of the Committee on Finance and the argument given by the finance people was that there are people who are intentionally declaring losses. The problem is Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). When we used to work with URA - hon. Nandala-Mafabi used to be the head of investigations - there was the Investigation Department, which was supposed to follow those you suspect are declaring losses year in, year out. 

Therefore, if there is a weakness with the administration, staffing or professionalism in URA, you should not shift it to the business community. That should be the work of the investigative department of URA.

If you are going to start taxing losses, will businesses ever grow in this country? This is the worst time for such a law to come because of COVID-19. Everybody is almost making losses. I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be able to advise the President that this cannot work. Strengthen URA auditors to be able to track, capture and arrest people who are defaulting by declaring losses when they are making profits. If you have that body, you should be able to do it.

When I read here, they say, “Expenses of a person who purchases goods or services from a supplier who is designated to use the invoicing system unless the expenses are supported by invoice or receipts.” That should be able to help.

Madam Speaker, I think it is going to be very dangerous for the business community to grow and especially during this time of COVID-19. We should be able to deal with this the way we dealt with issue of the Sugar Bill and return it to the President the way we did with the Sugar Bill because we have always rejected it not twice or thrice.

Therefore, what has changed the mind of the committee? The same reasons - Hon. Musasizi, you are part of the professionals. We went to school and read the same books. These are the same reasons we advanced to reject - I do not know what has changed today. We should be able to advise the President. If there are people they are targeting, we can use other means but not this one. This is going to kill investments in this country.

5.18
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was surprised that the committee changed its position. If you read the reasons the President gave and the reasons the committee has given, they say it is because businesses have taken advantage of generous deductions allowed in our law. That law was made here; this Parliament allowed for deduction of capital allowance, depreciation and all those deductions are provided in the law. Therefore, if we turn around, it means we are actually putting two of our laws in conflict.

The first reason that was given means that even URA is doing their job very well. It is because in another law - the Tax Procedures Code and in Income Tax, we have allowed for those deductions. How do we turn around and say those deductions are now bad in law?

Secondly, if you look at the report, the committee met with 17 stakeholders the first time and they rejected that provision. I can mention some of the key stakeholders; the Uganda Law Society, the Tax Justice Alliance, the Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group, the Private Sector Foundation but this time, they only met the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and changed their decision without involving these stakeholders.

Madam Speaker, I remember you guided that the Government should go and study this matter so that we understand it properly. 

Coming to the proposals they are making, when you are taxing a loss, it means that you already do not have money. It means you are asking businessmen to go and borrow money from the bank to come and pay tax. Where on earth does that happen?

Secondly, when you mention India, Kenya and Rwanda, what they propose in those countries is different. First, if you are not in the corporation tax bracket, you are given the alternative meaning that a company that is already paying the 30 per cent corporation tax is not subjected to this other. This one was proposed for companies that are not registered and have to contribute to avoid paying.

Lastly, if we pass this law as it is, it means we are killing businesses in this country. It took Airtel about 12 years in Uganda to become profitable. The companies owned by this Government are making losses; UTL has just gone. Therefore, we are not talking out of nowhere; companies actually make losses.

I am going to invite this House that since proper consultations were not made, this U-turn was just made with one entity, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who are the proponents of the Bill and yet we have a number of stakeholders and some of them are statutory bodies that we have put in place to advise this House. We should reject the 0.5 per cent because it is going to cause immediate collapse of businesses and this House will be blamed. I beg to submit. 

5.22
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not understand why the committee made a U-turn regarding the report they presented in this House. This House extensively evaluated the report that was presented to us; we discussed this and after a careful study, this House came up with a position that this was not a good position and we rejected it at that time. 

I do not understand why Government should say – because entities continue staying in business even when they are making losses. Therefore, they assume that these businesses make profits; it defeats logic. Even the simple economics we study, there are reasons entities stay in businesses even when they are making losses. One of them is that they offer employment to the population and these employees pay taxes. 

Even when a business is making losses, it does not mean that it does not contribute to the treasury coffers. Actually, the employees there, already pay taxes; it is the corporation tax that the company will not be paying but for these entities to continue operating, they are contributing to the treasury coffers.

Madam Speaker, I implore this House to stay with its earlier position. It was arrived at after a very thorough discussion and we examined the consequences. Now, to impose taxes on losses is actually passing a death sentence to these entities. It means that these entities are going to close. The country is already suffering with high levels of unemployment and the situation is bad. 

Therefore, you want to make a bad situation worse by collapsing all these entities that are trying to provide employment opportunities to our Ugandans, and you say that you will get more revenue by closing them. This is a self-defeating argument and this House should not allow it.

Finally, the committee seems to base itself on a comparative analysis; they are using Tanzania and Kenya. How come when it comes to other useful parameters, they do not want to emulate Tanzania? Here, you are saying Tanzania is a very a good model but they are doing business as usual. You are complaining of COVID-19 but Tanzania is not complaining of COVID-19. Due to Tanzania’s model of doing business as usual, they have entered the middle income status with five years to spare beyond their target but you are still struggling here.

Madam Speaker, if we are to use a comparative analysis, let us be sincere; let us identify what works. If something does not work, do not use convenience because it is convenient for you. When we ask whether we can also follow Tanzania’s example, they say, no, we cannot do that.

This argument of taxing losses does not make sense; you are trying to make entities collapse and you are going to worsen the unemployment situation in the country. Even the little revenue Government is getting through Pay As You Earn, will be lost. Besides, in Uganda, truth be told, it is the indigenous Ugandans who are suffering the tax burden and not the foreigners.

Through these measures, you are trying to burden the indigenous Ugandans. When these foreigners come, we give them a lot of privileges; they do not pay taxes and when their tax holiday period ends, they fly back to their countries or if they stay, they change ownership of these entities.

Madam Speaker, why do we hate Ugandans to the point that we always want to hurt them? I implore this House to maintain its position and reject this amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.27
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to seek the indulgence of the House. Sometimes, it is very important to think outside the box. I want to believe that there must have been a thinking before this idea of introducing 0.5 per cent. What are the conditions? Somebody could have consecutively, for five years, made losses. It must be either a trade loss or a net profit loss and that is up to you to interpret. 

Secondly, why should someone start a business enterprise? The essence of business is to make profits. Isn’t it? If it is, what could be that motivating factor that keeps you running a business and after five years, you are still making losses? Just think outside the box. The fact is that in this country, we still do not want to pay taxes. I read foreign papers; even some presidents avoid paying taxes –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason we have come to this point is because the letter from the President and minister has explicitly stated that the losses are due to very generous deductions that are provided in our law. It has not pointed anywhere that there are people who are running away or refusing to pay taxes. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to suggest outside – because in our Rules of Procedure, we are supposed to confine our debate only on the issues that the President has returned; in this case, that there are generous provisions in our tax laws that have allowed people to take advantage. Is he in order to introduce something else outside the point noted by the President?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Asiku, can you substantiate why you are moving away from the President’s letter?

MR ASIKU: Madam Speaker, when someone refers to generous deductions, my mind runs 360 degrees. One aspect of this generous deduction could be giving opportunity to someone to include things that he or she should not have included as deductible -

THE SPEAKER: Is he a member of the committee? No, please sit down.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, let me give him generous information. Capital allowances are given by the law –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you also a member of the committee?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I am the one who wrote the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are discussing your report and you are also submitting, please.

MR ASIKU: Madam Speaker, I am just giving information.

THE SPEAKER: There was nobody on the Floor, take your seat. 

5.32
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, when you look at this, there are two aspects. The aspect of the losses and I think we have given reasons, which we have always given in the last financial years. The other element, which is on this Bill that has been returned, is (Amendment) of Schedule 5 of the principal Act, which states that a person who earns rental income from more than one building shall account for the income and expenses of the building, and shall pay for each of the buildings separately.

Madam Speaker, if one is in the business of property, how do you prepare accounts for each building? They are complicating the matters because I employ one manager - one accountant - but I am asking that person to prepare accounts for each building. How do I apportion those expenses of the people employed? 

You know very well that if you are in business, some people use the first property to get a mortgage in order to build the next property. So, how do I apportion those expenses if I have used the first building to get a mortgage from the bank? I cannot build the next building without a mortgage. If not, I must use the money from the first building to build the subsequent buildings. Now, how do you expect me to start preparing accounts for each building? 

We have reasoned, and I think with sober minds, in the last two financial years.  Hon. Lugoloobi, do you mean to say that our minds were not sober at that time, when we disagreed and reasoned saying that “no”, it cannot be? You are a professional and those are the professional reasons and ideas we gave. What is that professionalism we have got now –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is information, Madam Speaker. First, what hon. Okupa has raised – for instance, if I had a building for which I have been paying taxes and I have used the net profit, which I have reserved, to construct another building; I am just using it as an illustration. That means that the money I am using is already taxed. It means that it is good for me to have my other income merged with this income. 

The second issue is on what hon. Okupa has raised; that there are expenses which cut across and cannot be segregated. You are increasing the costs on the landlords. If the issue is tax, let URA improve the methods of tax collection. That is what I wanted to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are you still standing by the letter of the President?

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving us the opportunity to make closing arguments on this important matter. We have been with it for some time. 

I would like to let you know that tax collection is not an easy job. Those of you who have been there like hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Nandala Mafabi know that to raise revenue in this country is not easy. We must look at different options of how to raise money.

The issue of taxing companies that have been making losses for five years – we are proposing that in the sixth year, we implement a small tax on the gross – not on the losses. What we have discovered – (Interjections)– it is true that if we had the capacity to follow all these companies, we would know whether they are actually telling us lies or not. Now that we are in this situation, we are saying that if we put this tax, it would work as a disincentive for companies that are lying to Government so that we start getting some money to finance our budget. 

Madam Speaker, I am still fully convinced by the reasons advanced by His Excellency the President, that we can get revenue from these companies. Do not look at it as if we are taxing losses; we are not taxing losses. We are putting a tax on the gross income so that –(Interjections)– gross income is different from what you are talking about. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know my credentials about accounting– (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know my brother hon. Bahati has very good credentials. He is a trained boy. He is a professional accountant by a member of ICPU. I have not doubted him. 

While studying taxation, there was a subject called income tax, which is derived from the Income Tax Act; income means earnings after all expenses and deductions. When you get income, it is the one to which you apply tax. Now when you talk about Gross Income, you are introducing the Gross Income Act and so, it cannot be in the book of Income Tax. 

Therefore, is it in order for hon. David Bahati, who knows accounts, who knows Frankwood 1 and 2, to come here and start changing that he wants to create a tax called Gross Income Tax? Is he in order to bring turnover tax, into the Income Tax Act? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying the turnover tax should be separate from the income tax?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg this House to reconsider the arguments that we have been giving you and the circumstances we are in. We cannot hurt the businesses where we get revenue.

The second point was on real estate. If you are in the real estate business, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi is, what would be very difficult for you to account for the property separately? The tax we are charging is being charged on the property individually. If you have a building, we assess how many square meters you have and then tax you on that. Why would it be very complicated?

We have discovered from experience –(Interjections)– this is researched information; it is not just an opinion. You have put in place the Uganda Revenue Authority, which does research. The information we are giving you is research with empirical evidence. We have seen people who mingle expenses to cheat the Government. What we are saying is that if you own three assets, why can’t you account for each of these assets? 

Therefore, in the spirit of bi-partisan arguments, I think we should not get out of this House, this afternoon with nothing. We have two issues on the Table, Madam Speaker. I beg that we do not get out with nothing because we need the revenue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the minister should at least consider the fact that we are suffering already from the COVID-19 Pandemic. 

Madam Speaker, you have been waiting for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to this House with the bail-out packages and how we are going to deal with companies, which are already collapsing because of the Coronavirus Pandemic. Now the minister has come to the House to say that he does not have the bail-out packages at the moment, but he is asking us to tax losses. In other words, he is strangulating even those who are still surviving, despite the fact that they are making losses. Instead of encouraging them to continue with the business, you are further pushing them downwards. 

Madam Speaker, the minister is completely out of order.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, before this House, there are tax proposals we moved to the House to help relieve businesses during this time of COVID-19 and they are on the Order Paper. Is it in order for hon. Cecilia Ogwal to suggest that Government does not care about the businesses which are hurting yet we have the Bills on today’s Order Paper? The Rt Hon. Speaker knows that they are there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we ready to handle this matter today or should we defer it?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, there is no case given the situation. Perhaps for the minister’s information, when I was in Uganda Revenue Authority, I headed a department on property tax in Kampala City but we did not have this problem, which the minister is alluding to.

The problem goes back to what we told the minister; failing to recruit professional people to handle these matters is what is causing problems. The minister is trying to move but we do not have quorum, even if you want to move in that way. 

You have heard how the tenants down there are crying that they should be exempted for the months they were not working. Given those challenges and the reasons which were given before, I would like to move that this matter be deferred for thorough scrutiny and let it be brought in the next financial year, when we shall be able to discuss it at that time. 

The only thing the minister can do now is to remove the exemptions of corporation tax that they gave to some taxpayers in order for us to realise more revenue. I beg to move that this motion be supported.

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, hon. Okupa is suggesting that we push this to the next financial year but this is a tax Bill that has to feed into the Budget - so we cannot; we either decide on it now or never.

MR OKUPA: I am asking that we reject it because not everything that is brought here must be taken in wholly. Let us drop it like we did in May. If they want, let them bring it in the next financial year. Let us send back the Bill the way we passed it last time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, given the fact that we are now almost four months into the second quarter, as we speak, the tax law applicable is there. The income tax is still applicable – it is only the Bill of 2020 which was brought here that we have not handled until the President assents to it. 

It will become effective on the day he assents to it because it should have been with effect from 1st July. I agree with hon. Okupa that given the fact that we have all deliberated and talked and from the whole House, including hon. Lugoloobi who supported the minority report, it is general consensus that we ask the President to sign the original Bill which was brought before him. We shall wait for the next financial year, study the situation and see how to move, since we are in bad times so that we understand the losses.

I gave you four losses; we do not know which loss they are talking about in the Income Tax Act and I propose that the Ministry of Finance comes with another Bill called “Taxing Losses” which will be called “The Losses Act”. 
Bring it to the House and it will handle the matter you are interested in.

THE SPEAKER: I ask hon. Lugoloobi to say something; you have been standing up for long. 

MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, this is the third time such a Bill is coming to this House and our position has always been the same. I do not see the reason one would propose that it should come back here next financial year. We have very valid reasons - if someone looked at them - and I would not like to enumerate them again.

We rejected it in the Ninth Parliament and in the 10th Parliament, it is coming for the second time. Our position has been very clear on these two issues. We should maintain our ground and reject it completely; it should not get back here. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, it is true that this is something we are not debating for the first time in this House. Actually, this is the third time the same proposals are coming here.

The first time the committee agreed with the proposal on taxation of 0.5 per cent losses on turnover. The minority report by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and others carried the day and we conceded. 

The second time, the committee for some reasons, agreed that taxation of losses is not logical. Madam Speaker, in May, when we were considering the tax Bills, I proposed deletion on almost all the clauses Government had proposed. You asked me that if we deleted everything how Government would get money to finance the budget, which we are currently running.

I would like to inform the House that the proposal to deduct 0.5 per cent on companies which consistently report losses for more than five years would bring Shs 178 billion to Government. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make you clearly understand the information about this whole subject. One time the committee went further to ask about the names of companies which are involved. Madam Speaker, to your surprise, these are prominent companies you see around town. The question of who the directors are, I am sure you know them but all the big hotels around belong to the same category. They are reporting losses year in, year out. 

Madam Speaker, logically, it is true that most these successful companies around town are not making profits. Perhaps that is why Government is saying that if they want to use this window as a route to avoid taxes, let us now go to their turnover. Turnover in the simplest terms means total sales. What you get after trading is turnover before you deduct your expenses. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that if a company is consistently registering growth in turnover, it means something is doing well and therefore, it should pay some taxes to Government. It is upon this background that I am finding it difficult to concede because I know what effect this Shs 178 billion can have on service delivery to the people of this country.

Lastly, on rental tax, I have been asking myself as a lay man thus: If I own property giving me for example, Shs 10 million per month, what is wrong with me accounting for this property separately from the other properties I own. I just wonder! The logic, why they do this is because –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I have been looking at my watch; the chairperson took about 16 minutes talking about a subject, which is completely irrelevant to what we are talking about. It is good to give us information, which will help us solve a problem before us now. 

We have looked at this report and there is general consensus on both sides of the House that in the situation we are now, where many companies are collapsing for reasons you know best as our chairperson, and considering the fact that this House is guided by decisions of the committees; the committee should consider the position of Parliament and advise accordingly.

However, the chairperson seems to be in the middle. He is speaking as if he is both a member of the Executive and the chairman of the committee yet he is very much left alone at the moment. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not be heard and that I put him to order for lecturing us on a matter, which is absolutely irrelevant to what we have discussed exhaustively and decided on. Is he, in order to continue talking to an audience that has already made up its mind?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, but he is the chairperson of the committee and he has taken a position in his report and all he is doing is to market his position.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on a procedural issue, I do not want us to move on wrong grounds. I would like to help and share some small knowledge. If you gave me a capital allowance of 100 per cent like hotels here in Kampala are entitled to a deduction of 100 percent - I have invested $10 million, which is Shs 37 billion; in the first year, I make profit of Shs 1 billion, but I have capital allowance of Shs 37 billion from day one, which it means I will have a carry forward of Shs 36 billion. The following year, when I make a profit of Shs 2 billion, I will have a carry forward of Shs 34 billion. 

Madam Speaker, it is the laws that we have put in place that give capital allowances. It is the capital allowances that are causing people to make taxable losses. If you believe that you want to tax gross income, then you apply VAT 18 per cent on sales turnover; and add another one per cent if you want to say we need 19 per cent of which this one per cent is income tax; that is if you want.

Otherwise, to say that after making a loss, you come and say - I see big people here - I can give an example of Imperial Royale Hotel. During CHOGM here, it came with a claim of Shs 106 billion as its investment. If you allow Shs 106 billion to be invested, even if it makes Shs 10 billion per year, it will take 10 years to cover the Shs 106 billion and the investor drive their Benz around after all they are recovering.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, don’t you think it would be procedurally right to tell the chairperson of the committee man, who said in his report of May that we should strengthen URA so that they can do tax investigation for those who have erythematic errors in 0.5 per cent gross turnover? That URA should consider PPP and partner with private experts to license and strictly use it to conduct tax audit and assessment on behalf of Government. That Government should conduct a study on rental income and how its performance can be improved without affecting growth in the real estate sector and URA should increase sensitisation and awareness campaign to ensure compliance with the law.

If I read everything, - those were the chairperson’s words and they are very good. It will be wrong for us to change the words of the chairman in just one month, which were very good words –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Those very good recommendations from the committee are because the chairman at that time had Members and interfaced with the different entities. However, on this particular one, the chairperson was alone and he met one person from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Sydney Asubo. After the meeting, the two sat and came up with this –(Interjections)– I have the minutes.

Therefore, previously, there were members of the committee and they gave good recommendations. However, this time since the chairman was by himself and the person from the finance ministry, he couldn’t come with good recommendations and this House cannot rely on one man’s recommendations.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before hon. Lugoloobi comes in with more information, the chairman is trying to explain that there are very big companies - and gave an example of hotels - but we know how much, if you are to build a hotel like Serena or the Pearl of Africa - those investors have put in a lot of money.

Even in 10 years, they are cannot make profits because we know how many tourists use hotels here. Even in 10 years, the Pearl of Africa Hotel cannot make profits but as long as you realise that their sales are increasing, someone will continue making profits. That means they are not dodging to pay taxes; that is wrong –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, this morning, we were dealing with a matter of tax administration and considered the issue of digital tax stamps as an administrative measure. We talked about increasing revenue as a result of that intervention. Therefore, these are kind of measures that we need to fix the problem that the chairman is raising. 

To enhance tax administration, we need to come up with solutions like the digital tax stamps that the Government is introducing to forestall loss of revenue as a result of under declaring. They have done that on Excise Duty and Value Addition Tax (VAT) and they are succeeding. We adduced the evidence in the report of the committee.

Therefore, we just need to enhance tax administration but not to go by the chairperson’s proposals. It is very dangerous to this economy. We are going to kill all the incentive for investment in this country and we shall lose all the jobs.

Madam Speaker, we need to put the question on this and proceed.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and negatived.)

Report not adopted.

The Speaker: Since you voted “No,” we retain the original position. Honourable members, the Clerk will advise and we shall inform the President that we are returning the Bill in its original form. 

Honourable minister, I have looked at the list of the accounting officers you gave us but these are all town clerks; acting Town Clerk, Fort Portal and acting Town Clerk, Jinja City - I do not know whether these are the accounting officers for the cities now. What is the accounting officer for a city called? City clerk?

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, like we have the Executive Director in Kampala –

The Speaker: You need to appoint them city clerks because they are no longer in the towns or municipalities. You may have to make them acting city clerks or something of the sort. 

Mr bahati: Madam Speaker, we will comply with that.

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, I also need clarification from the minister. How different will they be from Kampala Capital City Authority? In Kampala, we have the Executive Director. Are we going to use different names? I thought they are all cities. 

I need that clarification because some of these people have started calling themselves Executive Directors.

6.07
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as we all know, Kampala Capital City has a law that governs its legal status. It is different from the other cities that we have created. Therefore, for now, Kampala City has its own law as the capital city of the nation. Other cities will be administered differently until a law is made to correct that. 

The Speaker: Honourable minister, we have said this before that ultimately, you will have to make a law to govern those other cities so that you establish their structures. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT] BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE of parliament

6.08
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for reconsideration of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as returned by His Excellency the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Is it seconded? (Interjections) – It is. Chairperson, please give a report.

6.09
The chairperson, committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the committee considered the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as returned by the President and made the following observations.

I will not go into the reasons the President returned the Bill; Members can access them on their iPads. Let me straight away go to observations.

The Bill proposes to increase excise duty on beer made from local raw materials. An increase in excise duty will generally result in higher prices of beer for consumers. The reduction in the volume of beer consumed will result in a reduction of tax collection by Government. 

The major objective of introducing affordable local raw material beers was to provide a product to the low income consumers that is hygienic and affordable as an alternative to illicit and informal local alcoholic beverages that do not contribute to tax revenue but are also a health hazard for the people. 

If Government prices formal beer or alcohol out of reach, the sector will revert to a worse situation with people opting to drink the harmful illicit brews that can result in death. This will have a negative effect on the locally produced raw materials like sorghum, barley, maize and cassava, which with decreased demand will in turn affect household incomes. 

The main rationale for increasing excise duty on lubricants is to raise revenue. Lubricants are an important component of usage of motor vehicles as it is used by all vehicle owners including the non-compliant taxpayers. The increase takes into account the contribution of lubricants to pollution of the environment.

The Bill seeks to increase excise duty on wine made from locally produced raw materials to 20 per cent or Shs 2,300, whichever is higher. This will discourage domestic production, especially the small and medium enterprises, discourage agro-processing in the fruit and vegetable sectors and specifically the processing of wine, which is one sure way of fruit preservation and value addition. 

The new proposed excise duty will reduce the number of those engaged in processing fruits and vegetables hence reducing the returns to farmers and exposing them to few processors who will pay low prices because of reduced demand and lack of competition. This sector is still growing and needs to be protected as much as it is still exporting raw fruits, especially pineapples. 

There is need to maintain the current excise duty rates to encourage more investment in this sector to boost production and generate more revenue. 

Government proposed increase in excise duty rates on sodas, spirits and beer to support the implementation of the digital stamps solution. This followed a decision by Government to meet the cost of implementation of digital stamps for an initial period of one year, after which the reform will be reviewed. This was in response to protests from the manufacturing sector who argued that transferring the cost of implementing the digital stamps to them would grossly impact their business cash flow negatively.
 
Madam Speaker, the committee recommends as follows: 

    i. Paragraph (b), item 2(b) and (c), paragraph (d) and paragraph (k) returned by H.E the President be rejected by the House for the above mentioned reasons.
    ii. The other paragraphs returned by H.E the President be approved by the House as requested.
    iii. The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the original report signed by the required number of committee members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Given the fact that hon. Bahati said that he never wanted to leave barehanded, maybe we should allow him go with those in hand so that he does not – hon. Bahati, please carry that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to know whether the committee had an opportunity to listen to the barley and sorghum farmers of the country. The farmers complained about this issue; so, I would like to know whether their interests were taken into account. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, while considering the Bill, we received presentations from a number of stakeholders, including the sorghum farmers and other farmers across the country. This is why we are standing with them. The proposals we are rejecting directly affect the farmers on ground. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you have any comments before we go to the committee stage?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is clause 1 also for reconsideration? 

6.18 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 1. 

The justification is that the new taxes should come into force on publication. It is not fair to charge tax retrospectively during these COVID-19 times. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? 

MR MUSASIZI: Our proposal is that clause 1 be deleted and the date of commencement be the date on publication. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we say, “The Act shall come into force upon publication?” 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you make that amendment; instead of 1 July, the Act shall come into force on publication. 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 2, the committee agrees with the position of the President to have the following paragraphs standing part of the Bill:

    1. Paragraph (b), item (a)
    2. Paragraph (c)
    3. Paragraph (f)
    4. Paragraph (g)
    5. Paragraph (i) 

However, still in clause 2, the committee disagrees with the position of the President in the following paragraphs and maintains its position that they should be deleted. 

Therefore, in paragraph (b), delete item (b) and (c). Delete paragraph (d) and (k). 

The justification is to maintain the current rates of tax and encourage more production thereby generating more revenue. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding,)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY AMENDMENT BILL, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Excise Duty, title settled and Bill passes.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Can the committee report?

6.24
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Madam Speaker, the committee reconsidered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” as returned by the President. Due to constraint of time, the Members can read the reasons and the other part of the report. I will go straight to observations.

The committee observed that the Bill seeks to differ taxes for persons carrying on the business of tourism, manufacturing, horticulture or floriculture for a specified period of time. These are stated as the sectors, which were most hit by the COVID-19 pandemic and this incentive will ease their cash flow during this period so that they can remain afloat. 

This will not only provide the much-needed relief to individual tax payers but will also offset the financial loss suffered and compensate for the earnings lost during the lockdown. However, the proposed provision does not include the education sector, which is still closed due to the pandemic. This sector should be added among the most hit. 

The Bill proposes to waive interest on tax arrears that were unpaid by 30 June 2020 by a taxpayer who voluntarily complies with their tax obligations. However, the proposal only covers taxpayers who “voluntarily comply” leaving out those who do not file their returns voluntarily. 

It also does not cover the penalties, which is a big burden on taxpayers. The provision should cover arrears of all taxpayers as well as penalties. This will provide a stimulus to taxpayers and the economy as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic outcomes and also clean up the URA books because they have a lot of arrears which they are finding difficult to collect because the penalties and interest in most cases are much higher than the principal amount.

The Committee recommends that:

    i. The education sector be included among those worst hit by COVID-19.
    ii. Penalties be waived along with arrears.
    iii. Al1 taxpayers be considered for the waiver on penalties and arrears.
    iv. The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020, be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes and a copy of the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, COVID-19 has not affected the hotel industry only in Kampala but the entire country. The chairperson is talking of a radius of 50 kilometres off the boundaries of Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: Where is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On page 2. “COVID-19 has affected the tourism sector largely yet it is one of the biggest foreign exchange earners for the country. There is need to grant temporary relief to hotel owners especially those inside the radius of Kampala or radius of 50 kilometres from the boundaries of Kampala. Hotels outside Kampala already have such tax incentives provided for under the Act. This will help reduce on the cost of accommodation.”

Madam Speaker, there is no incentive for hotel owners apart from the capital allowances which were higher outside Kampala. Therefore, given that COVID-19 has affected everyone and in fact, most hotels are currently suffering; if you do not have clearance from the Ministry of Tourism, nobody can sleep in your hotel. Therefore, this law should not apply selectively. It should be for the entire-

THE SPEAKER: I am still trying to find the Kampala thing, where is it in this report? Oh, now that means Century Hotel will not benefit - you know Century Hotel is in Kamuli. Honourable members, really, that is how the food ended up in Kampala, the skilling is in Kampala, today the Emyooga is in Kampala and Kampala is not the whole Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we should expunge this and make sure that everybody is a beneficiary. In fact, there should be more affirmative action for up country hotels because they are in a disadvantaged position and they are the worst hit.

THE SPEAKER: I give up! Minister of Finance - 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, aren’t we considering the Tax Procedures - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Tax Procedures Act amalgamates all the taxes. It talks about VAT, Income tax, etcetera. If you have seen where there covered, they are talking about-

THE SPEAKER: Hear this; “…hotels outside Kampala already have such incentives provided for under the Act. This helps to reduce on the cost of accommodation.” I am a hotelier, what incentives do I have?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, if you look at the committee’s proposals to amend the Bill, we do not see that specific amendment.

THE SPEAKER: It is on the committee report of the VAT.

MR BAHATI: It is on VAT but we are now considering the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill and that is the item we are considering right now. If we could first finish one Bill and then go to another. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we are also going to the VAT Bill but really, this is madness to say hotels outside Kampala have incentives.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal. If he is saying that this is the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill; the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill is applicable after passing the taxes. 

Therefore, let us deal with the tax heads, sort them out and then we go to the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as we have always done in this House, hon. Nandala-Mafabi can move an amendment. It is not so complicated to adjust the amendment and we move on. Do not make us stuck; if there is something that needs to be corrected, let us correct it here in the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is very good. If you want us to correct it, let us do this; Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal. If he says that we should go for all the taxes, then we go for the procedures on how to collect the taxes.

Let us finish with the taxes and then go to the procedures.

MR OKUPA: The proposal that the honourable minister is pushing is right. However, I do not think that we can be able to conclude it here because there are a number of them. Why don’t we agree to meet in the morning tomorrow, thresh it out with the minister together with the committee and then in the afternoon, pass it if that is agreeable. I do not think we will be able to handle it here and conclude. I do not know how the Speaker could find it.

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to keep you here but if we have not finished this work – one more day is okay? Okay, honourable minister, I really have vehement disagreement with that provision and I am surprised our Members wrote it. I do not know whether they have got to Desert breeze in Arua and they have gone to Lira hotel and found –

Honourable members, for now, let us adjourn and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and minister touch base tomorrow. We can complete the work in the afternoon. House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 October 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 


























 














