Wednesday, 12 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you and today in the public gallery we have our distinguished visitors, children from Kaliro Model Primary School in Kaliro District; and students of Pallisa Secondary School in Pallisa District who have come to see how you carry out your work. You are most welcome to your Parliament.

As I indicated yesterday, we have serious work to do especially this month. Everybody is aware that we are preparing for a transition from the Movement to the Multi-party System, which will be climaxed with elections in March. Because of these elections it is necessary that we make a number of amendments to the laws under which we have been conducting elections for the past 10 or so years. This work of making amendments or putting in place these laws is the responsibility of you, Members of Parliament. This matter is no longer in the hands of the Executive because the Bills were brought here they received their first reading and it is for us to pass or reject them.

It is true these Bills are still with the committee but I am reliably informed that reports should be out by Monday. Therefore, from Monday we shall be embarking on dealing with these Bills because they are necessary not only to you but to any other person who is interested in the orderly manner in which the transition is managed. Therefore, I am requesting you, honourable members present to inform other friends who are not here that as from Monday I expect everybody to be here, but because we have urgent work, which has not been completed and we want to complete it now that is why we have also to be here to complete that work so that next week when we start working on the Bills we do not have to be worried about this work. So, it is equally important that we dispose of this pending work. I do not feel easy to always remind you about this but then it is my duty to do so.

At the same time as I said yesterday when I announced the sudden news of the demise of the former President I have seen in the papers that a decision has been made that we shall have a state funeral for the former President. If this is the case - and I have no doubt that this is the case - there are necessary arrangements that have to be made and these arrangements involve Parliament. I, therefore, appeal to those concerned to as soon as possible give us the details so that the Parliament can know when to be involved and therefore we can make arrangements for transacting our work. I thank you honourable members.

2.55
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mr Speaker, you are right; after a lengthy meeting yesterday afternoon and evening the Cabinet, chaired by His Excellency the President, unanimously agreed that the late former President Milton Obote be accorded a state funeral. As a matter of fact I had hoped that a Cabinet statement should have come out any time after 8.00 O’clock last night but I am not sure whether it happened, but I would like to inform the House that even this morning a Cabinet sub-committee in connection with funeral arrangements was holding a meeting. 

What is important is that there are a number of interested parties in this process: we have the Government of Zambia where the former President was staying, we have the family of the late former President Obote, we have his relatives and other people and it was clear and agreed that we would have to co-ordinate with everybody. So, even if government has made decisions we have these people to deal with and co-ordination sometimes takes a bit longer than would otherwise be desirable.  

So, as of now I cannot tell this House exactly what is going to happen but I am sure in the not too distant future this House will know exactly what is going to be done. Sir that is what I would like to say at this point. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the information.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the chairman of the committee can present. Who is the chairman? Dr Kasirivu. He is not here, so we call another one.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE

THE SPEAKER: Who is the chairperson? Hon. James Mwandha is not here.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATUS OF THE ECONOMY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our children came to see you transacting business, and they will go away disappointed that you have not transacted business and they carry this home that, “We went but only saw the House failing to transact business.” I do not know what to do whether - is it that members are busy with the –(Interjections)- but definitely we have to transact business. You see party elections will not be effective if the laws for elections are not in place and we cannot use the old laws because the system is different. Yes, hon. Patrick Mwondha.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I would just chip in in the case of hon. James Mwandha who must still be mourning; he must be still with mourners because he lost his son and we buried the son about two weeks ago. So, it is possible that is why he is not here.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, but apart from that, we have three reports and the chairpersons who should present them are not here. Well then, I really have nothing to do other than adjourn the House, to the disappointment of our children who came to see you debating.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, looking at the trend of things, if the House is adjourned to tomorrow and the business, which we have is still the same and these members are not even here today to know that the House has been adjourned because they are not around to present their reports, then how do you intend to move from tomorrow onwards? You started in your communication by asking us to inform other colleagues to come and attend Parliament. The fact that we are here and they are not to me seems to indicate that they are actually not within the vicinity of Kampala. So, how shall we inform them? That is my dilemma. 

Is there not a way of compelling people to come and attend Parliament other than just appealing and appealing and appealing because this is an embarrassment to all of us including us who are here?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, mine is just a request to the parties that because we have to make these laws, the political parties, which have been registered - because I see they are the ones interfering with the work, my appeal to them is that these elections should be held over the weekends because some colleagues when I left Soroti, they were saying, “No, we will have elections on Friday and also 21st”, which is also a Friday. So my appeal is, let us put these elections to be held over the weekends to enable us make the laws that will enable us be elected because it will be useless as you have put it that we can not hold these primary elections if – it will be of no consequence if the laws are not there. 

I see it that tomorrow we may not be able to get them because people came back because it had “rained”; they just collected the “water” and went back to the constituencies to ensure that they are able to mobilize the people on Friday and other days. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made a good point. Let me from here appeal to the leaders of various parties that are conducting election that involve honourable members to re-schedule these elections that have attracted our members from Kampala to their villages, to re-arrange these elections so that they are held over the weekends. As the honourable member has said, conducting these party elections for purposes of elections when the laws under which the elections will be conducted are not in place is a futile exercise. 

Bear with us at least for this month re-arrange so that we can deal with these four Bills, they are for presidential, parliamentary, local government and police amendment Bills. These need to be in place and then you will have the laws in place then you can conduct your party elections.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker Sir, I can understand your disappointment and the disappointment of the members who are here but I was wondering if it were possible - our Rules of Procedure say that debate on a report in the House shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the chairperson or the deputy chairperson, or a member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker. So, is it possible that if any member of the said committees is here, may be these persons could be asked to present the reports of their committees because I think we have a respectable number of members of the House here who could proceed to do business?  

So I would like to appeal to you and the House that if there are any members of these committees here, we request them to present the reports so that business of the House can continue. I have trepidations about the future, does the situation get better than this or not? So, if we could do business with the minimum of intervention it probably would help, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But we cannot be so ad-hoc in handling parliamentary work. I cannot now sit here - because I expected the chairpersons to be here and present. There were no arrangements for me to know the chairpersons will not be here so that I alert somebody else. Somebody cannot say, “I was not aware.” Anyway, this is not good for us. Let us have our priorities right. It is not the party elections; it is our work. We are here to legislate for the country not for our parties and it is necessary that these laws are in place because elections are due in March by our Constitution. The roll call will not help so what I will do - again I appeal to members to be here tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. And definitely I will try to use the roll call. So member No.1, hon. Aachilla, is put on notice that tomorrow I will use the roll call so that even your people know who is here and who is not. Let us do that.

3.08
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tomorrow use your roll call but I would like to remind you that some of us are Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. We have a programme in Mukono and you are aware of it, therefore, I beg to request you that this roll call should not apply to the Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, that is quite a point. I will definitely take note of that fact and I know that you are working on our reports.  

3.09
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some of the members are in Hotel Equatoria for a workshop of the Parliamentary Pastoralists Group where hon. Aachilla is. I have just been there and I left him presenting a paper. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I am giving you notice for tomorrow; as for today, it is okay and there is nothing I can do about that. Hon. Opange, your voters or your constituents, the students of Pallisa Secondary School have already been introduced in your absence. It is good that you have come so that they will be able to report that our Member of Parliament actually sits in the House.

3.10
MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, I think what applies to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee also applies to the Committee on Local Government because we have a workshop on the Local Government Act starting today throughout tomorrow.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but you will be here.

MR MWONDHA: We are in Entebbe.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Would you request the chairperson to give me a list of those members who will be in Entebbe by fax?

MR MWONDHA: Okay. I will do that.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I think we need to streamline how these committees’ work can be handled. This week alone, there are so many Parliamentary committees having workshops outside Kampala, sponsored by donors. I think you need to take charge here and streamline the way these committees are doing things. They are taking a number of members outside and yet this is a very critical point in time. This needs to be streamlined because we have this Parliamentary Forum for Children and AMANI Forum starting tomorrow and now we are told that the Local Government and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committees are sitting. I think the way they handle their business needs to be streamlined.

THE SPEAKER: No, what we can say is that the only committees I expect to be really working on this are: Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Local Government and actually Defence and Internal Affairs for the Police. Other committees’ work, unless it is done in the morning, should not take place until we have completed this work.  Therefore, this question of donors, we can advise them that we have urgent work and then we can reschedule these meetings afterwards.  

Honourable members, I thank you, those who have been able to come but please, carry my message to our friends who are not here to come tomorrow because definitely tomorrow I will use the roll call so that we can transact business. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


