Tuesday, 1 October 2013

Parliament met at 2.35p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to warmly welcome you to this special sitting to pay tribute to hon. Gregory Matovu, who passed away on 30 September 2013 at NakaseroHospital. That was yesterday.

As you may be aware, hon. Gregory Matovu has been a Member of Parliament representing the people of Bukanga County in IsingiroDistrict. He served on the Committee of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and the Committee on Natural Resources. He had a long service in the civil service, from 1980 to 2010, before joining Parliament.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to register our utmost condolences to the bereaved family and the entire nation upon losing the personality of hon. Gregory Matovu. I also wish to recognise the presence of his family members who are seated on the technical bench behind my seat. We will continue to pray for the family.

I also now just received a telephone call from H.E the Vice-President saying he is attending a function in Kaberamaido and he will not be with us, but he has expressed his condolences. He joins the rest of Parliament in expressing the same to the bereaved family, this august House and the country at large. I will deal with the rest of the condolence messages after the body has entered. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late hon. Gregory Matovu)

The National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before the motion is moved, honourable members, allow me to recognise the people who are in the gallery and also to convey some condolence messages. This would be a proper time to sound them out. 

In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students from Uganda Martyrs University,Nkozi. They have come to pay their last respects to the late hon. Gregory Matovu. Please, join me in welcoming them. I do not know which side they are seated.

In the Distinguished Strangers’Gallery, we have the former Member of Parliament for Bunyaruguru, hon.GaudiosoTindamanyire. He is also the chairman of Kitabi Seminary Old Boys Association. He has also written a condolence message here. We have hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of the EALA, up in the gallery. I do not have the details of the others. When I get the details, I will announce them. 

We have some condolence messages here; one is from the Speaker, who is out of the country. She sends her condolences to the family. We will have time to read the message at the burial because it is addressed to the family and signed by hon. Rebecca A.Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament. 

We have a condolence message from the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association addressed to the Speaker. It is signed by Mr Moses Kajangu, Secretary-General. We have a message from the office of the Government Chief Whip.It is a tribute message signed by the hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. 

I have a message from Bukanga Youth Development Association signed by KamuraliBirungi Jeremiah,chairperson. I have a message from the Acholi Parliamentary Group signed by the hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu.There is a condolence message addressed to the Speaker from the hon. AmonginAporu Christine Hellen, Minister of State for Teso Affairs and chairperson NRM,Kumi District. I have a condolence message from FRONASA Veterans Association Uganda, signed byMatovu Vinnie Ngoma. 

I have a condolence message from the honourable Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye; it is addressed to the family.There is a condolence message from the Committee on Information Communications and Technology (ICT), signed by hon.Turyahikayo Paula,Chairperson. I have a condolence message from Web Advocates and Solicitors, signed by hon. Lydia WanyotoMutende, who I have just introduced. I have a message from the hon. Kabasharira Naomi, Woman Representative of Ntungamo. Those are the messages I have received and we will be passing these to the family.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. GREGORY MATOVU, MP BUKANGA COUNTY, ISINGIRO DISTRICT


3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr AmamaMbabazi): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I rise under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Gregory Matovu. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of hon. Gregory Matovu, MP Bukanga County, Isingiro District, which occurred on Monday, September 30 2013, at Nakasero Hospital;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Gregory Matovu was 58 years old, before succumbing to throat cancer which he had been suffering from for quite some time;

NOTING that the late hon. Gregory Matovu’s tireless quest for knowledge saw him join Makerere University, graduating with a Bachelor’s degree in political science and public administration in 1979 and a master’sdegree in public administration in 2006;

RECOGNISING that the late hon. Gregory Matovu served in various capacities in the public service of Uganda, working in the Ministry of Education and Sports between 2002 and 2010, Office of the President as a Senior Assistant Secretary from 1987, and President’s Commission on Teso between 1993 and 1999, Prime Minister’s Office between 1983 and 1987, Uganda High Commission for some time, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs between 1980 and 1987. 

APPRECIATING that the hon. Gregory Matovu served on the Parliamentary Sectoral Committee on Information and Communication Technology and the Standing Committee onCommissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises respectively, which committees he served meticulously;

ALSO APPRECIATING that the late hon. Gregory Matovu was a humble, hardworking, and diligent legislator who served this country selflessly;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1) 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives and friends upon the loss of the hon. Gregory Matovu.

2)	 It takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Gregory Matovu for the people of Bukanga and Uganda at large.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member representing Independent Members of Parliament, hon. Sam otada.You can justify your motion.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is indeed with great sadness that Government has learnt of the untimely demise of the late hon. Gregory Matovu, the MP for Bukanga County,Isingiro District, which occurred in the morning of 30 September 2013 at Nakasero Hospital. His death comes on the heels of yet another loss that we suffered as Parliament, when we lost the late hon. Joy KariisaArinaitwe, which happened hardly a month ago. 

The late Gregory Matovu was born on 21 June 1955 in IsingiroDistrict. He attended Kitabi Seminary where he acquired the East African Certificate of Education in 1975. He later joined Busoga College Mwiri, where he acquired the East African Advanced Certificate of Education. He later joined Makerere University where he pursued a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science and Public Administration, graduating in 1979. 

The late Gregory Matovu was later to earn several qualifications in various disciplines, which included an Executive Procurement Certificate of the World Bank and a Certificate in Project Planning and Management. In 2006, he graduated with a Master’s Degree in Public Administration and Management. 

The late Matovu, having been a first-timer in this House, had a lot to offer even when his health condition could not allow him to spend much of his time in Parliament.He served on the sectoralCommittee on Information and Communication Technology, and the standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

Mr Speaker, the late Gregory Matovu was indeed a diplomat by making, given that he was soft spoken. He would submit on the Floor of this House in an articulate manner on issues which he was well conversant.The late Gregory Matovu did a lot in offering advice to this House on matters concerning international relations and diplomacy. 

Outside Parliament, the late Gregory Matovu, having had a wide experience in matters of diplomacy, helped a lot in marketing Uganda internationally.He did this business because had worked in the Prime Minister’s Office protocol desk, the Uganda High Commission and the Foreign Service Protocol Department between 1983 and 1987. 

The late Gregory Matovu has been a national leader who believed in serving his people above self. He tried to lobby for better service delivery to his constituency, especially in terms ofclean water, better roads and rural electrification. It is no secret to you, honourable members in this House, that IsingiroDistrict is one of the most water stressed districts in this country. Every effort was being made by the late hon. Gregory Matovu, together with all the MPs who stood here to pay tribute to him from Isingiro, to have a project providing clean water to his district. Government appreciates this effort so much and is committed to providing clean water to the people of Isingiro. 

Mr Speaker, human resource is so important in the development of any nation and this pillar of development did not escape the late Gregory Matovu’s mind. He has been running a scheme that has benefited over 100 Ugandans who are in various Indian universities on scholarship. 

I beg this House to take cognisance of the services that the late hon. Gregory Matovu has rendered to this country as a dedicated and committed civil servant. The late Matovu worked in various capacities in government; he worked in the Foreign Service Department, Uganda High Commission, Prime Minister’s Office protocol desk, Presidential Commission for Teso, Office of the President and the Ministry of Education. 

I take this opportunity to send my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Matovu, the people of Bukanga and the country at large for the loss of this gallant son. May the Lord rest the soul of the deceased in eternal peace and sustain the bereaved. Thank you.

3.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker,  I stand here to second a motion moved by the RtHon. Prime Minister, hon. AmamaMbabazi, on the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, Gregory Matovu, who happens to be my OB from Busoga College Mwiri. 

To the family and friends of the late Gregory Matovu, it is sad. The late honourable Gregory Matovu can be described as somebody that walked with us briefly in this life and then suddenly disappeared, somebody who touched us all with his simplicity. On behalf of the Opposition and on my behalf, we send our sincere condolences to the family, the relatives and friends of the late Gregory Matovufor the loss of their loved one. We also send our condolences to you, Mr Speaker, for the frequent sad moments that are coming your way in a short period of time. 

It is hardly a month that we were here paying tribute to our colleague, the late Joy Kariisa. Again, we are here to pay tribute to our own. Does this send a signal to all of us that after all, we are all pilgrims in this world? Is it possible that death can knock on any of our doors any time from now? 

Honourable members, it is very possible that as we leave thisChamber today, one of us can go down. Therefore, let us work for this country. Let us not cheat our people.Let our great grandchildren have something to thank us for in the next generation rather than curse us for how we plundered this nation. Let us do everything possible to increase on our public healthcare services. 

The late honourable Matovu had a very good career as an administrator in different government institutions.He was a disciplined diplomat and a politician. In spite of these great accomplishments, he lived his life in humility and service to the people of Uganda. 

I heard that the late hon.Matovu died of cancer just like our sister, the late hon. Joy Kariisa. We have often times reminded Government of the urgency of elevating our hospitals. Colleagues, our hospitals are on their deathbeds. The cancer unit at Mulago Hospital is overwhelmed with patients. It urgently needs expansion, and we also need to de-centralise this service to referral hospitals all over the country. 

Honourable members, the cancer disease is at its highest occurrence. Year in, year out, Government promises to renovate and equip referral hospitals but to date, our patients still die of malaria, a simple curable disease. What would it take Government to revamp the health sector? What do we gain by ruling over a peasant and sick population? 

We, in the Opposition, shall continue to talk and engage Government until something is done for fellow Ugandans. This country is for all of us and we all need to live happily. Who among us wants to live in a slum?If we want to live well, why do we let others livea miserable life? Why is it difficult for this government to make the right priorities? Why should we prioritize corruption? Why shouldn’t we, Ugandans, enjoy our God-given resources and why are the majority of Ugandans suffering? I will always remind you that all of us here are sure of one plot of land which is six feet, three by three feet and four feet. That is all we can own after death. 

I request Government to pay special attention to the social services sector so that we have an educated society, a healthy population and our people who fall sick are treated well in hospitals. I know Gregory has died and we shall miss him, the family will miss him and friends and relatives will miss him, but this is important. This is a wakeup call to our population as far as health services are concerned. Gregory, my OB, may your soul rest in eternal peace.  

3.19
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise to second the motion that has been moved by the RtHon. Prime Minister and ably seconded by my brother, the Leader of the Opposition.  

On behalf of my colleagues, Independent Members of Parliament, and on my own behalf and that of the people of Kibanda County, I wish to extend my sincere condolences to the family; to His Excellency the President, who is the Chairman of NRM, and to the members; to you, Mr Speaker, and to the House; to the people of Bukanga County and to all Ugandans. Yet again another big blow, in an unprecedented way,hits this House. For the time I have been in this House, I think that I have not experienced a situation where we have had back-to-back losses of Members of Parliament like we have experienced in these past two months. So, it is really sad and it is a big blow to all of us.

I would like to confess that I did not know the late hon. Gregory Matovu very well or for a long time because when he came in this House, we all know that he was on and off. He was not so involved in the business of this House because he was indisposed on and off. However, for the short time that I got to knowhim –I remember the first time that I met him was when I was looking out for him because he had replaced one of my very good colleagues, the former MP, Nathan Byanyima. So I met him and I said, “Gregory, you have evicted my friend from his three-term unchallenged position; you are not a very good man.” He replied,“No, I am your new friend now, so take comfort in that.” That is how polished and fine he was.He was a gentleman in his softspokenness.  

I was pleased that Gregory was a staunch believer in the Lord.No doubt, we are all terminal, so we can always take comfort that he was a believer and that he has gone to a better place. 

In the short stint that he had in this House, he would pass for one of those colleagues on the other side who have been constantly referred to as “rebel MPs”. I would disagree that he would pass for that; I would say that he was clearheaded because even those that have been referred to as “rebels” have always tried to make a point. So, I salute him for that. 

That corner, up there, was famous for a voice of reason that would always come from Bukanga County. I would like to thank the people of Bukanga County for giving us, even if for this very short time, a very fine and polished gentleman who was clearheaded politically and he had an ideology that he was rallying behind. No doubt, like the Prime Minister has ably pointed out, hisdesire was to ensure that growth and development take root in Bukanga County under his watch, even for this short time.

Mr Speaker, I have always thought about this term “referral hospital”. I have always thought that it means referring somebody to something - that I am referring you from one facility to another facility. I think it is self-indictment when we see that consistently, we refer our friends when they fall sick to either hospitals outside the country or we refer them to private hospitals. We need to begin thinking about this term “referral hospitals” that Government is supposed to refer to.  

Again, often times many of us are accused of taking times such as these ones to take a swipe at Government. Today, I would like to dwell on the three points, and I am picking them from the text of the Prime Minister’s speech in justifying his motion.

One, the Prime Minister said, and rightly so, that the late hon. Matovu was an accomplished diplomat. That is true. Usually in this House, we always want to talk about what we should do in terms of remembering so and so - how do we pay tribute to so and so upon his demise? I want to challenge Government that why don’t you think about the point that he always ably made, like the Prime Minister has said, on matters of diplomacy. Why don’t you take up and make sense of what he had been saying in that regard?

Two, the Prime Minister identified Bukanga County as one of the water stressed areas. This is very true. I have been there twice, before Gregory was even MP. Why don’t you do something about that? I would like to hear that tomorrow the next MP, by God’s grace, will come and report that Bukanga or Isingiro is no longer water stressed. Those are the kinds of things that we want to see but not just come and talk and then we leave behind all the ideas that a colleague has been expounding on the Floor of this House.  

Three, what are we going to do about the scholarships that have been talked about? Over 100 people have benefitted from his hard work in Indian universities; what is going to become of those people? Can we hear something positive going forward,so that tomorrow we will hear testimonies about the goodness of such an individual? I think that is a better way of remembering our colleagues. 

As I wind up in secondment of this motion, it is just one of those moments again that death is a common factor and a common bottom line. We come and run the risk of saying the same things, making the same statements and yet the constant factor of death remains with us.May I pray,colleagues,that we will emulate the good deeds of the late hon. Matovu, which he exhibited in a very short time when he was with us here. May I pray that the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and may his soul rest in eternal peace. I second the motion and thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I now propose the question for the debate to the motion. The motion is that Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives and friends upon the loss of hon. Gregory Matovu; and
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and the contributions made by the late hon. Gregory Matovu for the people of Bukanga and the country at large. 

That is the motion for your debate, honourable members. This House will rise at 5 O’clock and that means we have a fairly short time. Should we agree on the time for debate to be five minutes or three minutes? Let us use three minutes each but I will give exception to the Members coming from Isingiro. They specifically requested for more time because they had planned their speeches for five minutes. So, I will use the first 15 minutes to allow the Members from Isingiro to speak and then I will go back to three minutes. 

3.39
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I support the motion to pay tribute to our late colleague, hon. Gregory Matovu, MP Bukanga County. On Monday morning at 7 O’clock, we had a roll call and one of us was missing and we found him in Nakasero Hospital; he had passed on. It is very important that people’s actions and the way they live are eulogised. 

I knew hon. Matovu for a long time through his late cousin, the honourable Col. Guma, who worked with me during the early days of 1981 under the clandestine time. He referred me to hon. Gregory Matovu and because of the nature of thework we were doing, at first I was very uncomfortable but later on, I discovered that the late Gregory Matovuwas a very good person. As a member of NRM, he stood twice and lost but he abided by party discipline and never stood against his colleagues. The last election was a very highly contested one and he won, and it was also good that his colleague, hon. Byanyima, did not contest.  

It is also important to note that if you traced the late hon. Gregory Matovu’s speeches here in the plenary, they were very limited but that does not mean that he was not working. He used to do a lot of networking.Hon. Gregory Matovu had a way of doing his things. You would find him in the corridors with ministers.He would visit ministries.

He was a very good member of Isingiro Parliamentary Group. We worked together to tackle the issue of water.We want to thank Members of Parliament for passing the millennium project, which is going to address part of this problem of water scarcity in Isingiro.  

I want to take exception and look at our statistics. I know we have so many killer diseases, one of them being malaria, but you know the cure for malaria is really to go the DDT way.All those countries that have got rid of malaria used DDT but when it came here, we had a problem.We need to overcome it.

Experience is not what happens to man but what man does is what happens to him. Cancer is a nuisance and it is not only in Uganda but the world over. In fact, we never used to suffer from cancers the way we are suffering now. I want to say that we need to look at precautionary measures. Some of the cancers, I think, can be prevented. It is important that we, Members of Parliament, show exception and do regular check-ups. 

On the issue of sending people abroad, I want to say that the Banyaruguru have a saying or a proverb that, “Omworoaffa mu kasheshe, omutungiaffanigoro.” It literally means that the one who has dies in the evening while the one who doesnot have dies when there is dew very early in the morning.

On behalf of so many voices from Isingiro who are not here, I want to say we thank you, Mr Speaker, for your contribution towards the healthcare of our colleague. He has not died because Parliament neglected him but it is because it is fate.  We want to thank His Excellency the President for his personal interest in caring for hon. Gregory Matovu. We want to thank our colleagues, the Members of Parliament, the Commission, and all across the board - the Opposition and NRM.There are many things that draw us together and death is one of them. I want to say that hon. Gregory Matovu got all the care that he deserved from this House, from the entire government and Members. 

I want to thank his relatives and particularly his brother. Hon. Gregory Matovu has died because we do not have a cure for cancer but I think we can prevent it. The other day when we were debating – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes are over, please. Okay, one minute.

LT COL (Rtd) RWAMIRAMA: The other day, when we were debating about putting taxes on tobacco, I saw that some of our colleagues were dragging their feet. We must say “no” to tobacco. (Applause)From this experience we know that not only those who smoke are affected but even those who do not smoke get secondary effects. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time. I thank all Members for supporting Isingiro Parliamentary Group. May the Almighty God rest hon. Gregory Matovu’s soul in perfect peace.  I thank you very much.

3.45
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late hon. Gregory Matovu, Member of Parliament for Bukanga County and therefore Isingiro District. 

The Members that have spoken before me have raised a number of issues about hon. Gregory Matovu. I want to use this opportunity to demonstrate to you exactly what it was when we talk about Gregory Matovu being able to network or lobby. Hon. Gregory Matovu was here for a short time, less than two years, and out of those two years, it was only for about one year that he was a bit active; the rest of the time he was in and out. In that short time, however, hon. Matovu was able – maybe because of his background - to go to each and every ministry in this country to see whether he could get something for the people of Bukanga. I will give examples. 

If you do some research around Parliament, at the Police post, you will find not less than 20 percent of people from our area in the Police because of Greg – (Interjections) –If you go to the Army, still hon. Greg Matovulobbied for some boys to join the Army. Greg lobbied for people to go for courses up to senior 6 in all higher institutions. By the time we would get to know, he would tell us, “I have fixed this one and that one.” 

He found us here but we were theones now running after him saying, “Greg, help us locate this and the other thing.” His lobbying skills were especially seen when he fell sick and went to India. Even while in bed and sick, he still lobbied for those scholarships you heard of. He was on treatment in India when he procured those scholarships. For some of us, when we go for treatment, we only think of ourselves but this guy thought about the poor students who live in Bukanga. I was so touched. When he was in India, he was not only sleeping on those Indian beds but he even managed to get medical supplies for our health centres. We would expect to see him come back weak and helpless, but he would come back with supplies. So, his lobbying skills were above average. 

People have talked about hon. Greg Matovuhaving a clear ideology. Let me give you examples. When we were here passing the Bill on oil, you remember it was a very hectic time then. During that period, he was admitted atNakasero Hospital. Towards the end of the debates on that Bill, we were supposed to come for roll call. I saw Greg enter with a cannula; he entered here with a cannula to make sure that NRM does not lose out on the oil Bill. I could not believe it. 

Another time we were in Kyankwanzi and he had been admitted in Nakasero, we tried to persuade him not to come, but he said, “No, Grace, I must come and at least hear the President give his opening remarks.” This was somebody bedridden.Some of us sometimes simply dodge those things but this guy was sick and he insisted and came to Kyankwanzi. Later, we discouraged him from staying at Kyankwanzi; he only attended for the first day and came back. So, that is the extent to which hon. Greg Matovu would go in fighting for his party. 

Hon. Greg Matovuhad a passion for service to the people, especially the people of Bukanga. People have talked about water and electricity; yes, he lobbied for all that. However, what was most shocking to me was that every time I went to Nakasero Hospital to see him, he would say, “Grace, I left when they had done wiring between these sub-counties, have they put up the transformers?” 

Some time, the President visited us on this programme of the veterans, Gregory was still admitted and he said, “Grace, can you tell hon. Muloni to commission the project of rural electrification on the day the President visits us?” This is somebody who was down –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you one more minute.

MS BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a project we have been pushing for on supply of water for Isingiro District, as commented by the Prime Minister. When I went to visit him on another occasion, he said, “Grace, may I look at the proposal from the Ministry of Water so that I can give you my input?” Sometimes I would dodge going to hospital because instead of him thinking about himself, the moment he saw me he would think about the people of Bukanga. 

We have lost a gallant son.We have lost a special person.We have lost a person who loved NRM. I pray that for his love for his people, Government will help us to maintain the various projects that he pressed for. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.45
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I have known hon. Gregory Matovu for the last 25 years. I knew hon. Matovu while he was serving in the public service of Uganda, I knew hon. Matovu while he was participating in the politics of this country, and I knew hon. Matovu as a farmer back home in the village. It is a tragedy for Isingiro.

Those of you who were here in the Eighth Parliament with me remember that we lost a Member of Parliament from Isingiro almost about this time of the year, hon. Kyaka. You may not believe me, but hon. Kyaka and hon. Gregory Matovu came from the same village and LC I. So, to me this is a tragedy. We, the people of Isingiro, mourn yet another famous Ugandan. 

On Sunday, I was in Kampala. I do not normally stay in Kampala over the weekend but this time round, I had I few things to catch up with, so I stayed in Kampala. So I found time to go and check on him in Nakasero Hospital. I had about one and a half hours with him and most of the time he was only looking at me, trying to talk to me but the words could not come out. He was in such pain. I think cancer is such a terrible disease; the honourable member was in a lot of pain, almost crying, grappling for breath because he was being supported by machines. I left because I could not stand looking at my colleague and friend in such pain. 

When hon. Matovu came to Parliament, I was the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I was, therefore, privileged to have an office to myself. He did not have an office, so I went to the Chief Whip and told him that I would like to share my office with my colleague. There were reasons given, that I was the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I would have to meet many dignitaries in my office, but I insisted that my colleague would not stay in the corridors while I enjoyed the luxury of a big office. So, I have been sharing my office since that time with hon. Matovu. 

During that time, I learnt a lot from hon. Matovu. Hon. Matovu was not a selfish man. For all those things they have talked about him, he shared with us. For the first time, I also partook of scholarships for students in my constituency who joined his students, who were very many of course. To me, that was very kind. For many Members of Parliament, if they get something good they can never release it; they cannot release that kind of information. He was a very open and unselfish man.

Hon. Gregory Matovuwas a lobbyist of all time. I have not known a team leader and team player like Matovu. He helped us - hon. Bright Rwamirama, Grace and I - to the extent of almost reaching the President. He was the one leading us, you may not believe this. However, later on we were told we could do something in a different way, which he succeeded in doing, but he made sure he took the letter to the Secretary to the Cabinet who presented the same as a demand to the Cabinet. Indeed, we achieved a little of what we had wanted. I want to remember him for that. 

He was struggling to ensure that the people of Isingiro get water. Together, we struggled and wrote letters. He led the struggle, and I think hon. Matovu will not rest in peace until Isingiro gets water. I want to assure you of this, because this was one of his targets. 

Finally, I will always remember him as a very committed NRM cadre and a very inspirational young man. He never harboured any grudge with anybody. He was a very religious man who wore a rosary on his neck. Every time you checked on him, he had a rosary in his vehicle, a rosary in our office and even a crucifix. He was extremely religious.

He had an aura of confidence and his face always looked happy. He made me very happy.He always laughed whenever I was with him. I want to say my heart goes out to his family and especially his children, the last being about two years old. May God really grant them fortitude to be very strong at this very trying moment.

I want to thank the Speaker and the President for the immeasurable support they offered to try to save the life of Matovu. In summary, Matovu’s life was that of kindness regarding other people’s troubles while he had courage regarding his own. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.50
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences on behalf of the people of Rubaga South and the Conservative Party, which I lead.

Hon. Matovu was a personal friend.During the little time we had of interaction, he proved to me that he was a great admirer of the powers of literature. I would like to borrow two stanzas from a great poet, John Milton, using part of his great poem, Paradise Lost:

“When the Son of heaven eternal king summons you, do not lament. Be prepared for the redemption. The angels will bring in the flowers and singing will come across to remove the crooked path in search of paradise. The judges are not in heaven.They move and follow you wherever you are. The disabled you have aided are the determinants of your fate. The sacrifice you have made will lead you to heaven in the hands of the angels.”

Mr Speaker, that aside, hon. Matovu and I shared a number of issues related to political science where he was an authority. He majored in political science and was a great friend of Prof. Ali Mazrui, who was my mentor. There was a challenge -a loving challenge - between the two of us; he one time asked, “What do you admire most in political science?” I saidI admiredEdmund Burke while hon. Matovu said he admired Prof. Mazrui. 

Prof. Mazrui was admired by hon. Matovu for only one thing - his definition of the African intellectual. Hon. Matovu reminded me that Prof. Mazrui once said that an African intellectual is a person who is fascinated by ideas and has acquired some of the skill to handle those ideas effectively.

I said that I admire Edmund Burke, who was a prominent career politician because of his definition of a Member of Parliament. When he was an MP for Bristol in UK, he said that a Member of Parliament is a representative of the people; he is not a delegate. He said that a Member of Parliament must discuss and sieve whatever he is communicating on behalf of his people in the House, in the same way I am trying to do right now. (Laughter)

I would like to pay tribute to hon. Matovu. In conclusion, I knew the late Matovu as a man of ideas, a man of conviction, a man of patronage and a man of joy. Rest in eternal peace, hon. Matovu.

3.54
MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion by the Prime Minister to honour one of our own, and I will speak a few words about him. 

I only met him in Parliament and we shared one fundamental thing in life, which was our clan. We used to joke that we knew who was older than whom because in our system, Lubega is older than Matovu but he kept reminding me that because he was born earlier, he was my elder brother.I did ask him how he ended up in Isingiro when he was called Matovu. He told me he would answer that question when I turned 50. Unfortunately, he has not been able to answer the question. I can only say that above everything that has been said, he was a good man. 

His death reminds us of the challenges we have as a government. One, in the space of one month, we have lost two Members of Parliament in a private health facility and in the hands of people we have employed before. All this confirms that as a government, we have the human resources, which we have not put to use. The second challenge is that private individuals in this country can pool resources and put up a good health facility, which as a government we have exhibited an inability to put in place. 

The late hon. Matovucared about others, and this has been said by many. I will only cite one example. His people in Isingiro are facing eviction by Government from land which was donated to refugees, and he told me that one of his stress factors was the eviction of his people by Government.In addition to what my colleagues have said regarding rewarding him by extending water and electrification to his people, I think the only condolence message this government can send to his people is to stop evictinghis people. 

It hurts, of course, when we lose decent men, even when we cannot provide for thembut above all when we can put in place some measures to help them. Mr Speaker, may I wish my brother eternal peace.

3.59
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

Honourable members, you know how painful it is when we sit here to pay tribute to one of us who should have been around to debate other issues of national importance. It is so painful. So, we send our condolences to the family, to the people of Bukanga and most especially the family that will miss him so dearly since he has been the provider. 

Mr Speaker, I did mention sometime back that as a commissioner, one of the first challenges I faced in life was to sit and budget. When drawing up the budget as a Commission, we had to estimate how many people were likely to die. It was so painful but it is a decision that you must make and a process that you must go through. If we did not, even this here would not have been impossible without the facilitation. It is so challenging.

I want to thank Government and the Commission for the support they have given within the resources and the means that are availed to us to look after the welfare of the Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I also want to appreciate Gregory. Gregory was a very good friend of mine but he also knew that he had removed one of my greatest friends from the Parliament of Uganda, hon. Nathan Byanyima. Every time we met, we had very close interactions and he said, “I am available to carry on that support you would have extended to the people of Bukanga through Nathan.” 

It is unfortunate that he died prematurely, before he could take us to Bukanga to go and celebrate his victory and also give him the support that he desired from us. However, we know that the same support will be available to the people of Isingiro through the other colleagues who are around and even through the subsequent by-election that is likely to come by. We shall miss him. He was a very sociable character.

Mr Speaker, from the eulogies that have been given on this Floor, I want to call on Government to regularise systems so that we can reduce the pressure on Members of Parliament. (Applause) If there is going to be recruitment in the Police and the Army, let the recruitment be clear so that everybody knows - (Applause) - so that the pressure is not for an individual Member of Parliament. It could bethat Gregory could have lived longer if such pressures did not push him down. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok one minute, commissioner.

MR DOMBO: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, hon. Bright Rwamirama has come up to lament about malaria; I call on Government to take a decision on what you want us to support you on. If we must spray to eradicate malaria, so be it. Let it come on the Floor of Parliament so that we make a decision. Lamenting will kill many people like Gregory has died. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.03
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second and support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Gregory Matovu, a man I knew from the last Parliament when he was designated by the Minister of Education to lead a team of youth and student leaders to Rwanda. I can only describe the traits in the late Gregory Matovu in three words: One, humility; two, calmness; three, cool-headedness. That is a summary of my description of him.

Mr Speaker, right from the time I joined this Parliament in 2006, 14 Members of Parliament have passed on. In the Eighth Parliament, eight members passed on. In this Parliament, so far six have passed on, including him. However, out of the 14, since 2006 approximately six Members of Parliament passed on due to cancer-related ailments. This is a clear indication that cancer is with us, - Parliament is a summary of Uganda - if out of 14 five or six have passed on due to cancer. 

I want to assure this House that there are three predominant types of cancers in this country: prostate cancer, cervical cancer and breast cancer. However, two types are currently slowly but surely taking shape; one of them is cancer of the liver, which is the end result of hepatitis B, and the second one is cancer of the throat, what led to the final demise of our colleague. 

I strongly believe, Mr Speaker, that this is a wakeup call to all of us. It is a wakeup call for action. We need to create a lot of awareness about cancer as a Parliament, as a government, as a nation and as a people. Are we aware that cancer is killing Ugandans more than HIV/AIDS and malaria combined? Are we aware? If we are not aware, let us go and do some little bit of homework. Mr Speaker, these are undisputed statistics. (Member timed out_)

4.06
MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (NRM, Ruhindi County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I met the late Gregory Matovu as a junior foreign service officer when I was leaving diplomacy. I noted one thing that has been said about him as he lies here, that is, his humility. 

Humility is a cardinal composite virtue of leadership, and leadership is a result of being propelled by a critical mass of followers. When you have followers, it is imperative that you have got to watch your back and see what your followers are doing. Followers are your strength and strength is as a result of humility. Boulders are not moved by shouting at them but by a gentle nudge that eventually tips the equilibrium of balance and the boulder moves.Good food is not cooked by white flames; it is simmering embers that produce good food. That is the virtue of humility attributed to the late Matovu. 

He was humble and he knew his station in life. That is why he was able to achieve. Humility is what achieves greater heights whereas pride comes before you fall. Matovu was humble. He knew his station in life and fulfilled it. Gregory, wish you well wherever you are. 

4.08
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues in supporting the motion. I want to say that we will miss Gregory because for the short time he was here, we interacted with him and he was so loving and caring; he would really talk to you and give you some good guidance. 

He always wished people well. We spend a lot of time in the corridors here talking about how we can take important projects to our constituencies. In one way or the other, you would really see that he did not have any bias or any bad intentions in seeing to it that a Member gets something for their people. It is unfortunate that he has gone sofast.

Mr Speaker, the Matovu lying here this afternoon had a good plan for his constituency. I remember one time he told me that he would have to do as much possible to make sure that all the orphans in his district at least get connected to people who could help them maybe with school fees or take care of them from their homes with their grandmothers. He wanted to ensure that at least they also made steps and reached somewhere. 

The people of Isingiro and of Bukanga have indeed really lost a great person. However, just like the Bible tells us, we make plans but God is the last planner. So, this is the time God has decided. There is nothing to do but the people of Bukanga have lost a great man and I pray that he receives eternal peace. Thank you. 

4.11
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Sheema and on my behalf, I wish to convey my deep-felt sympathies to the family, especially where Matovu married from and from where those beautiful children you are seeing there also partly come from. We are sorry about this death. For the period we spent here in Parliament, every time hon. Matovu would meet me, he would say, “My in-law, how are my people in Sheema? I still know them.” So, it is sad that he has passed on.

Hon. Matovu loved politics and loved Parliament. Well, they said he tried twice and he failed, but I think he wanted to serve his people through Parliament and that is why he persistently tried until he made it. I am sure as he lies here, as his brother said in church, he must have died a happy man because his goal was to be in Parliament and serve the people of Bukanga. We want to appreciate that. 

Indeed, as the Bible says, there is a time for everything. Hon. Matovu was meant to serve within this period and perhaps that is why we are saying all these things about him. Perhaps, God wanted him to serve for this short period and do everything that he has done within this period. Sometimes we do not want to question God’s mandate but as believers, we believe that where he has taken him, he will continue to actually pray for the people of Bukanga and Isingiro at large, especially in the pursuance of the projects that he was advocating for. 

I remember when he was on the Committee on Natural Resources, he used to say, “Rosemary, Sheema is not water-stressed; leave us, the people of Bukanga, the people of Isingiro, who are more water-stressed than Sheema”. I would tell him that, “You know, you married in Sheema and some parts of Sheema are more water-stressed…” We would crack those jokes but he was passionate about water in Isingiro and rural electrification. So, like Members have said, I want to call upon Government to actually think about the water issue in Isingiro.

He was selfless. I remember when we would go to see him in the hospital, and that is when the late hon. Joy Kariisa was also there, he would say, “No, I am okay; go and see hon. Joy Kariisa.” That means that actually, this guy was not selfish. He had a lot of empathy for others; he was for the people, not only the people of Bukanga but for the people of Uganda. (Member timed out_)

4.14
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago District, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to the bereaved family and to this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, all that has been echoed here about the late hon. Gregory Matovu is very true, but I want to re-echo in particular the point brought in by hon. Grace Isingoma, the Woman MP of Isingiro, about Gregory’s passion for work. Hon. Gregory Matovu loved his job to the extent that you would not easily realise that he was sick. It was so difficult to notice that he was in great pain with throat cancer because whenever you would see him come to the House, he had a smile on his face. 

He would talk and socialise with every Member of Parliament. He did not wear a gloomy face despite the fact thathe was in great pain. So, Mr Speaker, I want to pay tribute to hon. Gregory Matovu because he was really very good in terms of what he wanted to do as a Member of Parliament. 

I want to give an example about what Gregory did when I organised my function in February. He was very sick then. As you know, Members of Parliament are always very busy; it is very difficult for MPs to read all their mail and reply and read all the literature that goes into their pigeonholes. However, hon. Gregory Matovu was a professional Member of Parliament, to the extent that when I organised my function in February, despite the fact that he was very ill, he was among the only two MPs who would not attend the function but replied in writing that they would not be able to. That is why I stood up and insisted that I wanted to catch your eye, Mr Speaker, so that I am able to mention the fact that hon. Matovu’s passion for work was exceptional. I want to pay tribute to him for that. 

The people of Bukanga have always sent us very loving Members of Parliament. I remember very well in the Eighth Parliament, we had hon. Nathan Byanyima; he was an exceptionally good Member of Parliament just like hon. Gregory Matovu was. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

4.17
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Terego County and on my behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Bukanga. 

I got to know the late Gregory Matovu when he was working in the Office of the President, particularly when he used to be assigned the responsibility of getting sectoral reports from sector ministries to contribute towards the write-up of the State of the Nation Address. At the time, I did not know him much; I only knew him as a senior officer from the Office of the President. 

However, when we met in the Ninth Parliament, I got to know and understand Gregory more and I discovered that he was an ex-seminarian. Therefore, it is not for nothing when today we talk about the two virtues – the virtue of humility and the virtue of selflessness - that we saw in the late Gregory Matovu. It is not just for the sake of it; it is all about his religious upbringing and the type of schools that he went to. 

Of course, there are many ex-seminarians here; we have hon. Otafiire, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Fox Odoi and myself. If you compared us, I do not think we would be able to fit in the shoes of hon. Gregory Matovu as far as humility is concerned. This is something for which we really have to give credit where it is due; when you see a seminarian, you see a person who has been brought up along those virtues and practising what he was taught, unlike those others I have mentioned. Even the Father there, I do not know whether he is really that humble a man. (Laughter)
Mr Speaker, when we are in this Parliament, we always reach a stage where we have got to account; we begin accounting for our actions now. We have so far covered two years and three months – we are not even half-way through - but we have lost six of our colleagues. I think this is the largest number of Members of Parliament that we have lost, especially during the time I have been in this Parliament. In the Seventh Parliament and Eighth Parliament, I do not think we reached this level of losing up to six Members of Parliament before we even clock mid-term. 

Why do I talk about responsibility? At the end of the day, when you finish five years here, how many Members of Parliament will you be able to meet in the street and be able to say hi to because you have not made enemies here? Let me tell you, if you are not careful, this can be an institution where you create enemies; the way you conduct yourself and the way you deliberate on the Floor here will determine whether you will make friends or enemies. You need to see the way I interact with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister –(Laughter) (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, use one more minute.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for being considerate. You know, from the way I interact with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are times when people think that when we accost each other with words here across the aisle we are enemies. At the end of the day, however, even if he calls me “the man from the other Republic” and I tell him “you man from Burundi”, we hug each other. (Laughter) That is the way you should account for your actions on the Floor of this House. Since we have come here for a purpose, let us not make enemies. 

The late hon. Matovu, during these two years and three months, made friends. I only got to know that he was sick when we met in Dubai as he was on his way to India for medical check-up last November. That was the time I got to know that my fellow ex-seminarian was indeed in pain. Never at any one time did he physically show that he was suffering from such an incurable disease; he hid all the pain that he went through. The Lord gives and He takes; may the soul of the late Gregory rest in eternal peace.

4.22
MR BIGIRWA JULIUS JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buhaguzi County and on my own behalf, I wish to extend my sincere condolences to the family, relatives and friends, including the entire district of Isingiro, for the loss of our dear colleague, hon. Gregory Matovu. 

Many Members have already talked about the attributes of hon. Matovu. I first met hon. Matovu when he came to visit me in my office as RDC, Isingiro. He had come to look for support – he was a networking man. He had come to look for that security network and he told me that he was going to contest in the constituency of Bukanga – of course the former MP was also my friend. He was only shocked to hear that the man he was seeking to network with was also going to contest, and then we started battling with the issue of how we were going to resign since it was a requirement. 

We battled with that thought and we asked, “Suppose we did not go through, what would happen?” We would lose our jobs. However, this man called Gregory Matovu really encouraged me, saying “Junjura, let us go into this race; we shall win” and here I am today. I have been working very closely with him and with all other MPs from Isingiro because we were colleagues when I was still there. 

I feel really very sorry for the people of Bukanga because I know how they loved my colleague, Gregory Matovu. He really worked very hard for all the services that one would think about and he also lobbied for many students to go abroad for studies and for some to join security agencies abroad. It is very unfortunate that he has left me at a time when I was networking with him to get connected to the people he used to network with. I am still wondering who I should network with.

Mr Speaker, cancer is a very big problem in this country. As we are here mourning the death of our colleague, many of you may have noticed that one of us has been missing, that is, hon. James Rwembembera; he is suffering from the same disease. You may think that he does not want to attend parliamentary sessions but I can report to this this House that hon. Rwembembera is also suffering from the same condition. So, as Government and Parliament, we need to do a lot to see how we can handle this challenge – (Member timed out_)

4.26
MR JOHN NASASIRA (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.I bring condolences from myself and my family to the family of the late Matovu. I also bring condolences from the people of Kazo and indeed Kiruhura District to the people of Bukanga and Isingiro District in the greater Mbabaraarea for such a loss. Let me also, on behalf of the Ministry of ICT, pass on condolences to the Committee of ICT. 

I have known hon. Matovu for 20 or so years, especially during the time he was a civil servant. He always consulted and many times he would come consulting me regarding his plan to stand as an MP. Several times he decided not to stand and I was also trying to discourage him at that time since hon. Nathan Byanyima was doing a good job. However, when he decided and tried – I think twice without success – he never quit. Eventually, he succeeded in winning the elections and came to this Parliament.

Many people have described hon. Matovu in many ways but I can describe him in one sentence -hon. Matovu was a smooth operator in whatever he did, whether he was lobbying for his constituency or campaigning for anything. Definitely, he was a very strong NRM MP. I have never heard or seen anything to show that he was rebellious.

Mr Speaker, I have heard for some time now, whenever we experience such sad moments as this, sometimes maybe because of emotion, and I hope not because of politics, people tend to arouse emotions about the stage of our development in many areas in our country. One of them is about our health facilities. 

Definitely, hon. Matovu died in a good hospital – (Interjection) – I am coming to that; I wish you were patient. He died in a good private hospital. We never had good private hospitals when we were in NRC some 20 years ago. He died with medical insurance – private or not private.Members of Parliament get their insurance and they make up their minds which hospital they want to go to. So,as much as we have a long way to go in improving our health services, there has been a big improvement in our health services. If one died during our NRC days, they would not have had such facilities; they would not have had the insurance that we have now. More importantly, – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. He would not have had such facilities. During NRC, for those seven years, we lost 42 Members of Parliament; you remember the scourge of AIDS. So, as we mourn our colleague, let us appreciate the far we have come and continue to work harder for our country to make our services even better. Even those who go abroadgo to private hospitals. Some people tend to think that they go to government hospitals; they go to private hospitals. So when you are developing the health sector, you should develop both private and public facilities. 

I am defiantly happy that hon. Matovu died in a good hospital with good insurance, and as you know, most of us never survive cancer. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.31
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to join  my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Gregory Matovu. 

I first got to know Gregory some 34 years ago at Makerere University and he had not changed. I later got to know him closely after I learnt that he was a relative of the late comrade, Col. Frank Guma. 

I interacted with him very closely for two reasons: One, because there are so many people from Mpororo, Rugumbura and Rukungiri who migrated to Bukangaarea like they did in most of Ankole. I even got closer to him because my friend, hon. Nathan Byanyima, came from the same area and I had an interest in knowing more about people who came from the same constituency with hon. Nathan Byanyima. In fact, we worked very closely to make sure that my friend,Matovu, comes to Parliament. He sought my counsel and I taught him many tactics and I was happy that he came to Parliament – (Laughter) – Mr Speaker, you will add me some time because of the interruptions. 

I knew him as a good representative of the people of Bukanga because he was principled. I am glad that they talked about his religious background and that is why he was always telling the truth. He could not be manipulated like his predecessor was on this Floor of Parliament – (Interjections) –Yes, we must put records straight; hon. Nathan Byanyima is now my close friend because he came and apologised to me many times. He was used; he stood up here and told lies that I owned thousands of properties in all the major capitals of the world. You remember the famous censure?(Laughter) He lied but later on, together with other Members of Parliament, they returned to me and apologised.– (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to conclude and say that in spite of his strong religious background, he was a unifying factor. He wasnot sectarian, and that is very important. It is good to have people from the seminary who do not use that background wrongly in politics, like some people do. 

I pay tribute to hon. Gregory Matovu for being principled. My heart, the hearts of my family and the people of Rujumbura and Rukungiri stand with the family and the people of Bukanga at this time of loss.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we reduce the time, because a lot of things have already been said. So let us come down to two minutes. Please, keep your remarks very brief so that we do not ask for extra time. 

4.35
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like thank my honourable colleagues for sitting here and joining the family during this trying time. Good people do not last long and our friend, hon. Matovu, is an example of a good person. However, I think God also needs them before they go astray. One Member from Isingiro uttered a proverb which says that those who have die in the evening and those who do not have die in the morning. Hon. Matovu had but he died in the morning. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have lost a friend. He was a cool guy, very friendly and so good. To his family, we ask the Almighty God to give you courage and strength to go through this trying moment. I know you missa friend indeed. May the good Lord rest his soul in eternal peace.

4.37
MR FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that the good Lord keeps the bereaved, and remember that death is always that thief that keeps on plucking the unripe fruits. For the people of Bukanga, we feel with you and the whole of Isingiro as a district. In the Eighth Parliament, we lost Kyaka Vicky and this time we have lost Gregory prematurely. 

I address the country; each time a Member of Parliament dies, you hear from the media that “now that one of them has died, they are going to blame the abysmal services in the health sector”. Honestly, to this country, Uganda, I want to say that Parliament has spoken; if it is a question of speaking and doing what we can afford, we have tried our best. What remains is for the President, the fountain of honour, and the party in power and the Executive to make priorities for this country and carryon from where the first leaders left. 

Secondly, when the Leader of the Opposition seconded the motion, I heard hon. AyenaKrispus talking about Busoga College Mwiri. Mr Speaker, this is the Uganda we desire; if only we could rewind the clock to the good old days when a Ugandan from West Nile went to King’s College Budo, Namagunga, Bukedi College Kachonga, Kigezi High, Ntare, Teso College Aloet - mention all of them –and they would closely identify and do anything to defend the integrity of that school and region. That is the Uganda we all desire- (Member timed out_)

4.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Personally, I am very saddened because when I joined the Parliament, I was put on the Committee on Natural Resources and there I met Gregory. The late Gregory was a very selfless man with a big heart, a real Ugandan patriot. He would spare time to share with me what we could do together for the good of our people, especially regarding the scholarship scheme. He had asked me to provide him with the names of people from Fort Portal who he could include for scholarships to India. 

This is something, which is unusual, especially now when everyone is thinking about their small confines. Gregory would go beyond borders. He had a personal and friendly mentoring approach. When we went to Norway together, we really got to know each other and I felt that what I learnt from Gregory added value to me as a person and I will try to promote those values as much as I can.

It is sad that he has left very young children; he has left a two-year old. I hope that efforts will be made by friends of Gregory to put up a scholarship scheme for this young boy so that we can get another Gregory living. May the soul of my friend,Matovu, rest in eternal peace.

4.39
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, RtHon. Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

I was not shocked about his death because I regularly visited him from the time he was bedridden. In the first place, hon. Gregory Matovu was my neighbour; Kooki and Bukangaare neighbours and I cross through Bukanga when trying to reach some parts of my constituency due to a river impediment.

Whenever I would go to Gregory’s home, he would ask four questions: He would ask, “How are you honourable?” “How is Parliament?”“How is Speaker Kadaga?” Recently, he would ask, “How is the rebel MPs’ issue?” I used to visit him once or twice every week. 

Hon. Gregory Matovuhad a strong heart and passion for the people of Bukanga. Even when he was ill, he would report and say, “I have mobilised 100 wheelchairs for my PWDs in Bukanga”. Hon. Gregory Matovu was a very simple man and he liked the NRM party. Most of the time, he would oppose the sensational statements that some MPs made to incite the public –(Member timed out_)

4.42
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I join my colleagues to bring condolences from my people in Igara West to the family and to the people of Bukanga and Isingiro District upon the untimely death of our colleague, hon. Gregory Matovu. 

Mr Speaker, we will miss him very much in our community of the Old Boys (OBs) of the great Kitabi Seminary.For the record, it was not Kitebi. He did not go to Kitebibut he went to Kitabi Seminary and the association is Kitabi Seminary Old Boys’ Association.

We knew him as friendly, God-fearing, a gentleman and very smart. Gregory’s taste in smart suits was beyond question. He was very generous and he contributed a lot in terms of building projects of the church.

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the honourable Member of Parliament for Kazo when he says we need good private hospitals. Yes, it is true that we certainly need them, but how many ordinary Ugandans are able to afford the costs at Kampala International Hospital or Nakasero Hospital?How many are ready and able to go to India for a medical check-up?

Mr Speaker, Parliament is the institution that helps direct the future of our country. On a day like this, we have no alternative but to take note of the state of affairs in the country and take a serious decision that Government should improve services in the public hospitals we have. In this particular case, we are referring to the Mulago Cancer Institute and where possible, government should also help to establish regional cancer centres.This would be one good way of sending off our colleague because then, if this happened to any one of us we would not have to travel to India but we would go to Mulago and get the services. Hon. GregoryMatovu, may God rest your soul in eternal peace.

4.44
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to our beloved colleague, hon. Matovu, who was one of the first MPs I got to know among the new MPs. How did I get to know him? I was looking for the person who had displaced hon. Byanyima who had been my friend for a very long time. When I met hon. Matovu, I said, “why did you displace my friend, hon. Nathan Byanyima; he was my great friend?” Hon. Matovu was very humorous and said, “I am not only going to be your friend but your husband if you like.” So, you can see that sense of humour. I was amused and each time I would meet him, he would call me his wife. 

He used to be a very busy person. As you were talking, you would find he had disappeared. That means he would not waste time talking but was very busy with his parliamentary and constituency work.He was also a very eloquent man. You may hear some stammering from the new MPs but when he talked, hon. Matovu would articulate issues as if he had been here for two terms. 

Mr Speaker, cancer is a deadly disease and it is killing all of us. The only way to save our lives is to have early screening so that we can treat it; one can get cured if it is detected after early screening. I remember in March, the Minister of State for Health launched early screening and treatment of cancer in Sheema; however, what is happening now? It is only NGOs who are doing the screening –(Member timed out_)

4.49
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My condolences go to the people of Bukanga upon the death of hon. GregoryMatovu. 

My constituency borders Isingiro. I got to know hon. Gregory Matovuthrough his sister who happens to be a senior nursing officer in Mbarara Hospital who had worked for so long.I used to see him coming to see her. 

Because we do not have time, now let me just go medical and talk about carcinoma or cancer of the oesophagus.Maybe our colleagues here and you, Mr Speaker, will learn more about carcinomas because of the death of this great man of Bukanga.Carcinoma of the oesophagus has got its causes and one of them is smoking. I want to tell you, Mr Speaker, that other cancers, even of the gastrointestinal tract, can be attributedto blood group A and you can also talk about some hot foodstuffs. 

Cancer can be prevented and it is very easy when detected early. Mr Speaker, you and me and even the Prime Minister and the Minister of Health may not die of these common things but trust me, we shall die of non-communicable diseases, including cancers, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. My dream before I leave this Parliament is to see how we can make our own hospitals function properly so that tomorrow when we get a problem, we can at least get some help.

I want to thank Government for giving some money to the Cancer Institute. This has happenedbut there is more that must be done. Recently, we lost Dr Ndiku in India. We were spending over US$6,000 per week. All Ugandans that are going to India are almost selling their property. If you know how much money has gone on this wonderful man, Gregory, it is a lot of money. However, we can put this money here in his country and we save ourselves all those expenses. It is embarrassing.

Mr Speaker, we have simple things we can do to diagnose cancer. We have what we call tumour markers; for example, if you want to detect cancer of the liver, there is something called alpha-fetoprotein. Just get somebody’s serum, put it down here and you will get the cancer. You can get prostatic carcinoma by doing a simple prostate-specific antigen (psa). These are simple things we can do to get these cancers. (Laughter) I think-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you still speaking English? (Laughter) 

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the motion and also pay condolences to the family of the late hon. Matovu. 

I knew hon. Matovu as a humble and quiet person but a very effective leader. For all the time we were in Parliament, I did not know he was sick until he walked into my office the very last time to seek for clearance to travel abroad. I recall we spent some time talking about party politics and eventually, we started talking about what exactly his problem was. He told me what he was suffering from and I signed his documents and he travelled to India.

Mr Speaker, like hon. Bitekyerezo has said,cancer is actually treatable if only it can be diagnosed early. Of course, once that happens, then the doctors will be able to manage the situation and prevent it from spreading. 

It is important, therefore, as Members of Parliament, that we should go for regular check-ups.We should not wait when it is late or when you are sick and then you go to find out what you are suffering from. Of course, we also have to watch our diet and be careful with tobacco and also be careful with people who smoke around us because it is very dangerous for those who are passive smokers.

This brings me to the other issue that I wanted to bring to the attention of Members of Parliament; we will all die one day but how we die matters. I have heard members say that hon. Gregory Matovudied in pain. It is very unfortunate that he did die in pain because at least as a country, as a ministry, we have been trying to promote palliative care.Even if you are sick, you should not die in pain. You could be sick but we should not see people die in pain. Palliative care services are available at most of the district hospitals and the regional referral hospitals. We hope that we shall roll this out to all the health facilities in this country.

Mr Speaker, we are doing our best to ensure that we establish a centre of excellence in this country for the treatment of cancer. Already, using Government of Uganda funds, we have put up a six-storey building for the Cancer Institute.We hope that we shall get funding to equip that facility so that we can stop the referrals abroad. (Member timed out_)

4.55
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from my family and from the people of Kashari. 

I got to know hon. Gregory Matovu in 2008 when P7 results had just been released. By then, I was the chairperson of Mbarara District and we had a problem of bright students coming to office looking for assistance. A friend of mine told me that there was a political assistant to the Minister of Education who was giving out scholarships and bursaries. I got his phone number and I called, only to find out that this was Gregory Matovu. He did not deny; he said he had the scholarships but they were not from Government; they were from his personal connections. He connected me to Maryland High School and Katikamu SDA.Since then, so far 26 students have benefittedfrom Mbarara District.The first batch - four girls and two boys - are doing their senior six. 

When we met here, he connected me further to Nkumba University and one boy from my constituency is doing B.Com. So, it is not only Bukanga that has lost; it is Uganda that has lost. We can only pray to God that we get a replacement. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.57
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of UPDF and on my own behalf to support the motion and to add my voice to all those who have prayed for hon. Gregory MatovuAsiimwe. 

Many people have already summarised his values and virtues, but if I was a young man I would describe him as cool. He was cool and smooth like hon. Nasasira has said. He acted calmly. He was very hardworking. I got to know him early because he was associated to our UPDF family through the late Frank Guma.Since that time, we have been working with him. 

I have a habit of paying more attention to those who are new in Parliament, but in his case he was already accustomed to our work.He solved so many problems in his constituency in Bukanga calmly.There were a lot of land disputes which he solved and you would not hear a lot of noise. You would hear about a case and after some time, he would solveit. So, I really want to say that he has played his part.

I would like to comment on these diseases which are known as “modern diseases” -cancer, hypertension, heart problems and obesity. Much has been said about treatment and caring and the Cancer Institute but the real problem is that 70 percent of these diseases come from the plate, from what we eat. 

Socrates said, “Let food be your medicine and medicine be your food.” We have moved from normal organic food of our cultures and our people, which is in plenty in Uganda and very balanced and nutritious, and gone to manufactured foods.Our children are going to die even much more and at a much faster rate than our generation because of that change in nutrition. We should emphasise prevention rather than cure.We have to prevent these diseases, which are multiplying at faster rates in modern societies than here. So, - (Member timed out_)

4.59
MS LINDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to extend heartfelt condolences for our fallen brother to the family.  God is in charge; there is nothing you can achieve without God. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Gregory Matovu was an elder to some of us; he was fond of giving guidance whenever we went wrong. So, I believe that wherever he has gone, God has received him.As a family, it is a pity to grow without a parent; as children, it is a pity to grow without parents. I believe God is with the family. Please, take heart. 

To the Ninth Parliament, it is very sad and shocking that we have frequented this House with such sad moments. It is scaring, terrifying and horrible. Mr Speaker, as you requested when paying tribute to hon. Joy Kariisa, we really need prayers.

The General talked about the food we eat. I also wish to comment on the foods we eat, especially the grains, when poorly dried. I will give an example of groundnuts and grains including millet. We get poison called aflatoxin when they are poorly dried. Aflatoxins cause cancer of the liver. 

Mr Speaker, this is a call to the country and to the farmers out there to watch the food we eat and watch the grains before we take poison. The plastic plates we use and those disposables that we keep in the house all cause cancers and that is the reason why we have high rates of cancers in the country. May the soul –(Member timed out_)

5.01
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion, but I must raise the fact that you have done me a disservice because I had wanted to talk about my fallen friend from a different angle. 

Up to the time he died, I had known hon. Gregory Matovu for 38 years. I met Gregory in 1975 on that hill of Busoga College Mwiri, which moulded so many great leaders of this country; among them, the Leader of the Opposition and NduguRugunda. 

People have talked a lot about the virtues of hon. Greg Matovu. Unfortunately, I must depart a bit and tell you about what annoyed me. When he first received me, we were great friends. I saw a diminutive but very nice and engaging character. When the time for athletics came, I challenged him to a duel; little did I know that this was aterribly fast man. I challenged him to a 100metres race and he beat me flat. That is the only thing I thought he did wrong to me because he discouraged me forever from running again. (Laughter)

A Member said that he was a smooth operator. I worked with Greg from the time we met at Makerere University but more particularly, during the COSASE meetings. Greg’s way of operation can be likened to the courting of sheep. Those of you who rear goats and sheep know that goats make a lot of noise and you see results, but with sheep you never hear them when they are courting but you always see results.(Laughter) That is precisely how hon. Gregory Matovu operated. He moved smoothly and slowly but he was a very persistent and effective person.

Because of Greg and a few that I shared the great Busoga College Mwiri with I want to encourage this House to look beyond this highly-hyped thing of patriotism school. We never had that kind of patriotism society yet we produced very nationalistic people, one of them now lying here. 

You talk about scholarships; that was out of the personal initiative of hon. Matovu. I must reveal to you that it was not only confined to the Ankole sub-region like other types of scholarships are known to have been. Gregory Matovu also told me about these scholarships and I can assure you some of my own people benefitted from this. This – (Member timed out_)

5.05
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have actually given their messages of condolence and sympathy to the family of the late hon. Gregory Matovu. 

Mr Speaker, you can never appreciate that you have a problem until you experience it. You can never appreciate that actually, you need your father if you still have your father.I attended three burials last month in my constituency and from the various messages of sympathies I listened to in the constituency, people wondered why people who are not scandalous die so quickly and leave the scandalous ones. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we know what happened in Kenya. The Al Shabab are all the time planning to kill people but they live long and the people who are innocent, like my colleague here, leave so quickly. This is why death has become a mystery in the minds of everyone across the globe.

Mr Speaker, hon. Gregory Matovuhad a good working relationship with the Opposition. He was not among the people who abused us.He was not one of the people who have actually been victims of circumstances on the other side.Quoting from the Bible, all of us are taking the direction that hon. Gregory Matovu has taken and it would be pertinent for us to reflecton what we are going to be after death. What are we going to be when we have died – (Member timed out_)

5.08
DR KAMANDA BATARINGAYA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Gregory Matovu. On behalf of the Minister of Education and Sports and on my own behalf and my people of Bwamba County, I do extend my condolences to the family and the people of Bukanga. 

Gregory worked under me, as my personal assistant, in 2009 until he resigned to go and stand for election. He was a good person and dedicated.I actually took over from Lokeris who also worked with him before. 

I got to know him in 1995 through his brother, Col Frank Guma, when I was in CA with Byarugaba and Dr PonsianoMugenyi. After that, he used to visit me in the Ministry of Energy, looking for power for his people. Not only that, when he joined politics, he always consulted me; I am the one who used to see off the students from Bukanga who were getting full scholarships from India and those getting 80 percent of scholarships from India. I remember seeing off three groups, so far totalling between 80 and 100 students. This is the man who has gone.

Now I want to say something about health. I heard my colleague, hon. Bitekyerezo, say something about carcinoma. There is a programme known as Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT) and that is under the International Atomic Agency. The government needs to take advantage of that.It involves early diagnosis of cancers – carcinomas, sarcomas, etc. 

My colleague here died while receiving chemotherapy. He consulted me and said that he wanted to undergo surgery. I told him he should not because his cancer had already reached metastasis; in other words, it had spread. It was no longer localised; it was no longer cancer in situ whereby one has to undergo surgery. Once it has spread to other parts of the body - the liver, the lungs, the bones - there is no way one can do a radical operation to remove those organs. So the only solution therefore was chemotherapy, which he had been receiving when he was in India and even here when he died.

Hon. Opendi talked about the pain. Yes, when you are under palliative care, there is no other thing that can reduce the pain apart from morphine, codeine, pethidine –these are the drugs we give – (Member timed out_)

5.11
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not usually complain if I do not catch the Speaker’s eye, but on this particular occasion I was not going to be happy if I did not get invited to speak. I would like to address the dear family of a dear friend, the late Gregory Matovu. That is the reason I have risen to support this motion.

I met this friend of mine when I was posted as a minister for primary education sometime back. I met a person who was jolly; you would meet him in the morning when he was jolly, you work very hard and in the evening when he greeted you, he was jolly. 

He was a very accomplished person in achieving his assignments and goals and he was time conscious. I remember one time I asked him whether he usually woke up early because for me there is neither day nor night; I travel any time when I have an assignment to accomplish. He said, “Yes”. I then showed him a letter that I was reading concerning Yumbe District. It said that for the last nine years, the children of Yumbe had not been taught on Fridays. He asked, “You mean for all those Fridays those children were not taught? That means that if they miss science and mathematics subjects, the failure rate must be very high.” I told him that I wanted to solve the problem and when I asked somebody,that person said it was impossible but I said that it was possible. 

One evening I asked Matovu to travel with me the following day.I told him that we would meet at the Ministry of Education at 3.00 a.m. or 4.00 a.m. He agreed and indeed I met him at that time and we travelled. When we reached Yumbe, I told them that they must teach on Fridays since the children were losing a lot of time. All of them stood up and chorused, “Allah Akbar!” – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, use one more minute.

MR LOKERIS: They told me that we were inconsiderate, but at the end of the day we solved the matter and they started teaching on Fridays. I attributed that to his time consciousness. 

He used not to speaka lot but he was results oriented. We achieved a lot together with him and sent students to India. After that, I asked him if he was alright but I can see him now lying here. We became so friendly that we used to use my car to go for work. I told him to stop using his car because we were now family friends.May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time has come for us to conclude this debate and therefore take a vote on the motion. I will restate the motion for your consideration. The motion is that Parliament resolves as follows: 

1) 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives and friends upon the loss of the hon. Gregory Matovu;

2) 	That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Gregory Matovu for the people of Bukanga and the country at large. 

That is the motion for our decision; I put the question to that motion

(Question put and agreed to)

The East African Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Gregory Matovu)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the speeches that you have made in honour of our colleague who has now gone to be with the Lord. The speeches you made today have spoken volumes about what we need to do to take care of ourselves first and also try as Parliament to take care of the institutions that treat us and everybody else in this country when we do fall sick. That is what I heard and that is what we should take to the next level, not only in speeches but we should also move this forward so that we can avoid such occurrences, which are now almost routine for this Ninth Parliament. 

We now need to make a wish and pray hard to God that this should be the last because we have had quite enough and we need to pray about this. Those who can intercede, we need intercessors to come and pray with us so that we can avert some of these problems.  Thank you very much for your speeches. This special sitting is adjourned.The normal sitting of Parliament will be tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.23p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 October 2013 at 2.00p.m.)
