PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10761Wednesday, 25 October 2023My feeling is that we are incomplete when we are not all here in terms of both sides. Business can go on, but I still register my discomfort with that. I would like to see our colleagues rejoin us so that we have dialogue on very critical issues that affect the nation. I hope the progress I see us making will lead us to an amicable conclusion of this matter.I have received several petitions, but I changed the approach to most of them because the Executive needs to be given time and some issues need to be solved at that level. The problem I have right now, Government Chief Whip, is that even when I give ministers time to respond to issues, they do not. I do not know whether they would prefer me to send them to the committee right away, but I believe in giving first chances. The only response I have gotten so far is the one from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on a petition that I received. The Ministry of Public Service still has my petition which they have not yet responded to. The same applies to some other ministries, but I will be sharing that with you.There are also other very important issues which concern the public. I have received many calls on the issue of Ponzi schemes; that they are back. For example, there was one called “Capital Chicken” where people have lost over Shs 2 billion. I have received a list and they are blatantly going on without any control. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 10TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable colleagues. I can see that Hon. Oboth has moved; he became a General and he is seated in the section of Generals. Hon. Oboth can only be an Attorney-General not a military General. I think he is already late for that.I welcome you to today’s sitting and I thank you for joining us yesterday in paying tribute to the late Hon. Henry Kyemba. We dedicated around four hours and I appreciate both sides of the House for coming and ensuring that indeed, we give a befitting tribute to our senior leader.Honourable colleagues, all efforts are being deployed and all attention is being given to ensure that we resolve the impasse between the two sides of the House. I have held several meetings with leaders on both sides and the progress might be slow and some might feel that we have not made satisfactory progress. Nonetheless, we are facilitating dialogue between the two sides so that our colleagues can come back to the House.10762STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS [The Deputy Speaker]Therefore, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I will refer that to you because I think you are the best to handle this in terms of regulation. I will first refer it to you so that you look at it and guide the nation on several measures such as how we can avoid these Ponzi schemes and what is being done; whether we need to strengthen the regulations or not. People cannot just come from nowhere, collect Shs 2 billion and disappear, as if we do not have mechanisms of tracing them. I will be sharing that with you.In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation composed of lecturers and students pursuing Bachelor of Arts in International Relations and Diplomacy and Bachelor of Public Administration and Management from Cavendish University Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You can stand up for recognition. I think they even have Miss Cavendish here; I have seen someone putting on a crown. We wish you all the best. Thank you. We shall be recognising more people in the public gallery because I can see some students and pupils there. I will announce them as I receive the notification. Let us go to issues of national importance.MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on Rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure. On 13 July, 2023, we posed a question to the environment minister and the presiding officer asked the minister, in conjunction with the agriculture minister, to come to Pader District and handle the issue of Aswa Ranch. Aswa Ranch was given to Uganda Prisons Service to do farming, but there are two companies: Banuti Ranchers Ltd and one other company operating in Aswa Ranch and the issue of boundaries has come up. The Rt Hon. Speaker then directed the ministers to get in touch with the area Members of Parliament to go to Aswa Ranch and find out what the problem is. It is now coming to four months, but the ministers have not reached out to us. Our people want to know the fate of Aswa Ranch. Isn’t it procedurally right that since the minister is here, he tells this august House why we have not been called upon to handle the issue of Aswa Ranch?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, was it communicated to you?2.39THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Mr Speaker, I am not quite sure that I received that one, but nonetheless, I am aware about the issues of Aswa Ranch. My colleague, Hon. Bright Rwamirama, has visited the area, not once or twice, engaged the leaders and tried to resolve the issue of boundaries. However, if there is need for any other follow-up activity, I am available. I would also like to let you know that we are now aggressively protecting all Government ranches from encroachment. This is because these will remain as the only buffers for the country to enable animals feed and food security interventions should be taken on. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is a good commitment that he is ready to follow up. Hon. Komakech, please link up with the honourable minister to ensure that this matter is concluded. Hon. Bataringaya, on what point are you rising?MR BATARINGAYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue concerns Katonga Bridge because the rains have come back. Since March 2023, there has been slow progress in the work that is being done. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Proceed, honourable member. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10763THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023MR BATARINGAYA:  That the Minister of Works and Transport, who is here, updates us, because the rains came and subsided at some point, but now they have come back in full swing. This bridge may collapse and go with –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I see you are trying to be as creative as possible to bypass the process we use to bring matters of national importance. However, honourable minister, since someone has become very creative, also be creative in your response to his matter.2.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru):  Mr Speaker, I thank the colleague for the concern. Katonga Bridge indeed collapsed at the time we needed it most. We did two things: the first phase was to do some emergency repairs to enable the communities that were supposed to use the bridge to use it.We also procured a contractor who is on site. It is true that the speed may not be to our expectation, but I suggest that we send a team of technical people to make an assessment so that they advise us if there is anything we can do to catalyse the process.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Commissioner, procedure?MR SILWANY:  Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 78(4) on a procedural matter. As the honourable minister responds to issues of Katonga Bridge, I expected him to bring on board several other areas. For example, as we talk, Kayunga Bridge is almost collapsing and big vehicles have been blocked from using the bridge. If that bridge goes down, we are going to be completely stuck.Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to direct the Minister of Works and Transport to come up with a compressive report that will cover these critical areas in the whole country?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, point of procedure means there is something that is not going on in the right way in terms of how the House business is being conducted. These are not procedural matters.MS NAKUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is an additional procedure. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, in this House, we have raised issues of bridges that were swept away in many parts of the country and the Minister of Works and Transport has given the same commitment every time. We are here as witnesses because almost everyone has raised an issue of a bridge going down or a road which has not been worked on for a year or two. At one time, the Speaker sent me with the minister to go and see a bridge, but to date, the bridge is still in the same condition. The procedural matter is, do we trust this commitment?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleague, I was telling the House that the issue raised by Hon. Silwany is not even a point of procedure and then you built on it. They have told you the foundation is wrong, but you insist on adding another level. (Laughter)Putting that aside, honourable colleagues, if you can remember, we told the Ministry of Works and Transport to go and prepare a testament on the preparedness of the ministry to handle emergencies in these rainy seasons. Was it two weeks ago? Therefore, honourable minister, I will give you until next week to bring a statement so that we cover the whole country. Otherwise, I am receiving very many issues to do with that. We need to cover the whole country at once so that we see how best you can be supported.MR ECWERU:  I will be very happy to do that, Mr Speaker, but just for the record, I went with Hon. Nakut of Napak and other colleagues. We were not only two. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils 10764STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSand teachers of St John Nursery and Primary School from Wakiso District, represented by Hon. Medard Sseggona and Hon. Betty Naluyima. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House, please join me in welcoming them. Hon. Menya?2.47MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Sunday, 22 October 2023, ABCD Primary School in Pader District suffered a very heavy rainstorm, which ended up collapsing many classroom blocks and breaking the legs of three pupils who were rushed to Lacor Hospital for medical support. Mr Speaker, as we speak, schooling is ongoing, but our children do not have classrooms; they are under trees.My prayer is that the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness liaises with the Minister of Health to give adequate medical support to these pupils who have been rushed to Lacor in very critical condition.Secondly, the ministry should immediately provide ABCD Primary School with iron sheets to ensure that the school is reinstated. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?2.49THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, honourable colleagues.MS NAKADAMA:  This is bad and sorry to our children for going through such injuries. They have to be treated. I will call the Ministry of Health to see how we can help them and then the Ministry of Relief and Disaster.If we could get a report from the school management to see how we can come to their rescue and rehabilitate the building - Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whenever you are talking about that ministry, you should add on “preparedness”. You know disaster alone is – Hon. Tom Aza -2.50MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about ferry operations across River Nile in Laropi Subcounty, Moyo District.On Sunday, 22 October 2023 at around 7.50 p.m., hundreds of passengers using the Moyo-Adjumani route via River Nile were left stranded after a fuel tanker failed to disembark from Laropi ferry at Laropi Landing Site in Moyo District. This is because the ferry uses only one engine. If you remember, a month ago, the ferry engines were serviced, but as I speak, there is only one engine that is working. The passengers were advised to use the longer route via Obongi as a temporary alternative. Others have opted to use local boats, which are also risky. Mr Speaker, our prayers are:(i) Can the ministry replace or service the three remaining engines which got spoilt? (ii) Honourable minister, can you please fast-track the bridge construction process across River Nile at Laropi in Moyo District? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aza. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport?2.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, the ferry at Laropi had been serviced and to the best of my knowledge, [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10765THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023we thought it was functioning normally. It is unfortunate that the marine units handling it could have had a collapsed engine, but did not communicate to the headquarters. I beg the House to allow me to inform the department responsible for supervision so that it is rectified.As for the bridge across River Nile, we are at very advanced stages of working on that bridge and once it is concluded, we shall relocate that ferry elsewhere. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.53MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you,  Mr Speaker. Government has a policy on education whereby every subcounty should have a government-aided secondary school. Article 21 of the Constitution of Uganda says that all citizens are equal. In Bukimbiri County, we have seven subcounties, but four of these do not have government-aided schools. That is a violation of both the Constitution and the right to education. My prayer is for Government to inform us on how they are going to solve this problem. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?2.54THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we are all aware that we have been getting new districts and subcounties. We have districts that have just been created and we have to include them in our budget so that they are also allocated government-aided schools and sometimes, seed secondary schools. I will liaise with the Ministry of Education and Sports to see their programme on those districts or subcounties that are still new and are supposed to get government-aided schools. I know it is a policy and every subcounty is supposed to have a school – (Hon. Wakooli rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wakooli, you rarely speak. MR WAKOOLI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important House and we must base on facts. The Prime Minister has risen on the Floor to answer to what the honourable colleague has just put across, but she has run away from the facts by saying that some districts were created yesterday. I come from Manafwa District and it was created in 2005. In Butiru Constituency, I have two subcounties without a primary or secondary school. In addition, there are about seven subcounties without health centres II or III yet it is a Government policy that every subcounty must have a health centre III and every constituency must have a health centre I V.Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come here and run away from the question put across by the Member by simply saying that some of the districts were created yesterday? You need to be factual and tell the country that as a Government, you have policies, but perhaps, you do not have money to implement then rather than saying, “Districts were created yesterday.” (Applause) Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have concluded very well because these policy positions need to be financed. The pace might not be that quick, but when we are appropriating, we know that we have subcounties without electricity, water, health centres and schools and we keep doing it each financial year. The Committee on Education and Sports, please take this up. When you are addressing issues to do with the sector, follow up on the matter. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students from the African Leadership University, Kigali, Rwanda. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  Thank you.10766STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS2.57MR KENNETH KIIZA (Independent, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the 50-kilometre section of the Masindi-Biiso road, which has taken more than four years to be completed. Currently, there is a section at kilometre 14 to kilometre 23 which goes through Kabango Town Council. It is very impossible and has affected business between Masindi and Buliisa. On the same road, 10 per cent of the section has not been acquired in terms of right of way and this is going to extend the construction period of the road. This delay might also cause us losses as a Government in terms of expenses incurred. Currently, the work is at near standstill as workers on that road have almost laid down their tools. My prayer is that Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with its agency; Uganda National Roads Authority, undertake to expedite the completion of that road and urgently attend to that section that goes through Kabango Town Council, which has caused business to come to a standstill. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?2.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have just been with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and my attention was drawn to the number of roads where work is ongoing. Again, the speed may not be to the expectation of the Members. I directed UNRA to give me a summary of all those roads, but unfortunately, this one was not captured. I am happy that it has now been raised here. It should be included on the list so that UNRA briefs us about the scope and progress of work and the challenges they are encountering so that we can see how to address them. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery we have Hon. Lilly Adong, former Woman Member of Parliament in the Ninth and Tenth Parliaments, where she represented Nwoya District. (Applause)  Hon. Adong has just completed her Law Development Centre clerkship at Parliament. Honourable colleagues, when you do not make it to the next Parliament, once you are well prepared, you move on strategically. She has just completed her clerkship and I would like to congratulate her.Honourable members, we have 34 matters that you intend to raise, but the moment we reach 3.00 p.m., we will move to the Order Paper. Every Thursday we shall be invoking Rule 26(4) of our Rules of Procedure where we give you two hours to address your matters. BILLSFIRST READINGTHE ANIMAL FEEDS BILL, 2023 3.01THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Animal Feeds Bill, 2023”, be read for the first time.In accordance with the Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table a Certificate of Financial Implications for The Animal Feeds Bill, 2023. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The seconders are the Government Chief Whip, Prof. Mushemeza, Hon. Museveni, Hon. Silwany and Hon. Kuteesa. Thank you. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for consideration and report back within 45 days THE ANIMAL  FEEDS BILL, 202310767THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023in accordance with Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSI) STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE WORLD FOOD DAY – 16TH OCTOBER 3.02THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, Uganda joined the rest of the world to commemorate the 43rd World Food Day on 16 October 2023. This year’s event was celebrated at the National Coffee Research Institute in Kituuza, Mukono under the theme, “Water is Life, Water is Food, Leave No One Behind.”As you may be aware, every 16th day of October, the global community joins together to celebrate the World Food Day calling on everyone; Government, academia, civil society, private sector and individuals from various sectors of society to rally against hunger and build sustainable food security. The event raises awareness and action for those who suffer from hunger and the need to ensure food and nutrition security for all. The World Food Day also coincides with the founding of the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations which is one of our key partners. This year’s event and theme recognised that water is essential for life on earth. Water makes up over 50 per cent of our bodies and covers about 7l per cent of the earth’s surface. However, only about 2.5 per cent of the water is fresh and suitable for drinking, agriculture and most industrial use. While fresh water remains a critical driving force for people, economies, nature and a foundation of our food, like any other resource, it is not infinite. With the increasing population and human activity as well as climate change, water resources are increasingly under stress. It is no wonder that over 2.4 billion of the global population is living in water-stressed areas. It is for this reason that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is promoting Climate Smart Sustainable Agriculture by placing emphasis on optimal use of water resources. You are aware that water is integral to our production processes and this is also mirrored in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ effort to increase on-farm water access to as many water stressed areas as possible so that our people are not solely dependent on rain-fed agriculture. The national celebrations, as earlier highlighted, were held on 16 October 2023 at the National Coffee Research Institute at Kituuza, Mukono. The main event was preceded by a number of activities including the coffee night, which recognised the importance of coffee to Uganda and aimed at promoting a coffee drinking culture among Ugandans. Before we look to external markets for our coffee, we need to boost a sustainable domestic market. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) was joined by a number of key stakeholders including the European Union, the Food and Agricultural Organisation, World Food Programme, Members of Parliament led by the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture and MAAIF agencies, especially the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) who were the hosts and Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). A number of exhibitions were organised showcasing research and value-added products like coffee, cocoa, rice, millet, sweet potatoes as well as simple machinery. I commissioned, on behalf of the Vice President, a multi-purpose coffee and cocoa laboratory funded by the Government of Uganda at a cost of Shs 5 billion at Kituuza to provide permanent solutions to pests and diseases as well as other constraints affecting production and productivity of the two crops. 10768STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSThe major highlight of the day On the same day, we witnessed the release of new crop varieties successfully developed by our NARO scientists. I call this a major highlight because it is usually a great breakthrough for researchers. Just like it is only joy and happiness for a mother who delivers a healthy bouncing baby after nine months of pregnancy, so it is for a researcher who spends countless hours in the laboratory, in the fields and in trials incubating, grafting and testing a new crop variety. When such a variety is eventually tested and passes all the protocols as set by the National Variety Release Committee which eventually gives it a permit for release, it becomes a great scientific milestone. This is always a great scientific breakthrough for researchers, farmers and the entire country. In line with this, NARO’s focus is on producing climate smart and resilient early maturing crop seed varieties. It is these varieties that will sustain our food systems. The newly released varieties are: a) Two maize varieties that is, NAROMAIZE 63 PV A, an orange maize breed rich in vitamin A and NAROMAIZE 64STR with inherent characteristics for Striga resistance.b) Two sweet potato varieties that is NAROSPOT 6 and NAROSPOT 7. These have orange flesh, are rich in vitamin A and suitable for food and confectionary industries for bread and cake making and will reduce wheat usage and can do import substitution.c) A new rice variety was developed under code KF20039 which is aromatic and adaptable in lowland areas. d) Lablab pasture variety was released as NARO Lablab 1 with a high protein content and is expected to reduce on the ratio and/or replace soybean that has been depended on as a main ingredient for livestock feed yet it is very expensive and has high competition for use as food for humans. Mr Speaker, allow me to inform you that our agricultural research scientists under NARO are doing great innovations. They have developed products and prototypes that, if funded and fully commercialised, will solve bottlenecks of different enterprises and their value chain stages. The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has visited some of the NARO stations and has been impressed with the phenomenal innovations. I take this opportunity to invite the leadership of Parliament and all Members to plan with us to visit these NARO stations so that you can see, believe and support us in making a strong case for funding NARO. From policymakers to researchers, multipliers, off-takers, distributors, retailers and farmers who produce the various foods we consume, we each have a role to play in ensuring not only adequate, but safe food for all. Together we can build sustainable food, feed and nutrition security. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I will allow a 30-minute debate for this. 3.10PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South , Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minis -ter for his statement. I have observed that when we are discussing issues of rights, the tendency is to concentrate on civil and political rights and ignore socio-economic rights, yet they are very important. The minister’s statement this afternoon touches on socio-economic rights and the issue of food security, particularly water, attracts me. Water is life. [Mr Tumwebaze]10769THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, in Sheema South, we are now engaged in producing liquid organic manure as an alternative or supplement to manures such as NPK that are on the market. I invite the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) scientists, through the minister, to visit us in Sheema South and study our experiment, which we think is working, and is going to enable PDM because if you look around, most of the soils in Uganda are tired. I welcome the idea of new varieties of seeds, but these seeds are not going to work if we do not address the issue of soil fertility. We can address this without importing manure and instead making our own liquid organic manure. Therefore, I invite the scientists from MAAIF to come and study our situation. Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to address this important matter of food security and socio-economic rights. 3.12MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement. In the Financial Year 2020/2023 budget, there was money – (Break in recording.)  As Kamuli District, we received Shs 6 billion. However, because there was a mandatory contribution of 25 per cent, half of the money came back to the Centre. Our appeal is that the 25 per cent is high. We should reduce it because irrigating our crops is very important, yet our people cannot afford it. Secondly, honourable minister, as you talk about water, in most of our schools, the population is high and they share boreholes with the communities. This is becoming a bit of a problem. We could put tanks in these schools, harvest water and save a lot of money and time. This would also solve the burden of students going out of the school premises to fetch water. I thank you, Mr Speaker.3.13MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. I would like to begin by discussing the issue of water and I wish the minister for water was in the House. MPs are exhausted with repairing boreholes in the constituencies. What is the ministry doing to ensure that these boreholes are maintained? What plans do we have for the construction of new boreholes? If we are going the piped-water way, when are we covering these areas that we have not yet reached? Otherwise, we are using money from our pockets to repair boreholes. Maybe there should be a budget that we can allocate within the ministry to assist. Secondly, on the issue of seeds, I am very happy and proud about the interventions by the researchers. Indeed, we should embrace developing seeds. However, honourable minister, we should also not forget the fact that some of our local seeds were very important and we should not destroy them. They were more resistant and our local people were used to them. Therefore, as we look at doing research to bring in new seeds, let us not kill the old ones that we had. Lastly, honourable minister, let us address the issue of storage to handle the challenge of aflatoxins. Our farmers cannot qualify, even in the East African market, because of how we store our products. If they spend time in the gardens and they cannot sell what they have, we will not be addressing the challenges that they have. Can the ministry also look at planning for the future? We can introduce a project to set up stores in all the subcounties so that we can address some of these challenges. I thank you.3.15MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement on World Food Day. In a country where acute malnutrition and food insecurity is standing at 18 per cent, particularly in Northern and eastern Uganda, I expected that the minister would bring out clearly the ways through which we 10770STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSare going to ensure food security. Where are the food silos? There is a lot of food produced in one season and it is all eaten at once or sold at a give-away price and in a few months, people are plugged back into acute malnutrition and hunger. Secondly, the quality of agricultural inputs is an issue. We have a farming community and each day, they are buying inputs to improve their production. However, most times, these agricultural inputs, particularly the fertilisers, are not genuine. How is this matter being addressed in the sector of agriculture? Finally, Mr Speaker, we have a programme of the PDM that is anchored on agriculture. In a few months to come, there is going to be overproduction. What is the marketing strategy? The - (Member timed out.)3.17MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke) : Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister. As we celebrate World Food Day, honourable minister, I wish you would have a chance to go to some of the districts, villages or communities. As we talk, you know that Uganda is blessed. We are a country that God loves so much.In Otuke, when they were buying maize seeds, a kilo was at Shs 40,000. However, as they harvest now, they are selling maize at Shs 600 a kilo. I want to repeat: a kilo of maize seeds was at Shs 40,000, but now that the harvesting season has begun, the farmers are selling maize at Shs 600 a kilo. Where are we heading? In December, you will find the entire country facing food shortage. I would also like to appeal to the ministry for water that there is a big challenge. In some of the communities in this country, there are people who have never seen clean water in their villages. There are people who have been drinking water from local swamps, together with animals. We really need to work on this, honourable minister. We talk about the promotion of agriculture. In Uganda, we do best in coffee farming. Even in Parliament here, if you want to drink coffee, getting it is like getting a blood donation. It is hard to get coffee for drinking yet we are promoting coffee. It is true –(Member timed out.)3.20MR HERBERT TAYEBWA (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. My interest is on the varieties of maize that our good researchers have come up with and I thank them.Mr Speaker, we have been getting different types of maize, especially from Kenya and these are being traded by very few seed dealers. Since we are making more different varieties that are disease resistant, my appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) is to encourage dealers to multiply these seeds so that they can be sold to farmers at a reasonable price.Apparently, the seeds are being sold between Shs 10,000 and Shs 20,000 per kilo. Farmers were interested because maize prices were high, but they are now going down. I am very sure most of them will not be able to afford if the prices remain high. Therefore, could the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries increase the number of companies involved in seed multiplication at a reasonable cost so that farmers can access them? Thank you. 3.21MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for his statement. I would like to talk specifically about Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs).As we talk about food, in our country today you find that everything to do with food is genetically modified; almost 80 per cent. When you look at the seeds we are giving to our farmers – (Hon. Esenu rose_)[Mr Magolo]10771THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is a point of order.MR ESENU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this point of order. My honourable colleague who has been holding the Floor is trying to mislead the House and Ugandans by saying that most of the crops and plants that we are growing right now are GMO products. He even claims that it is about 80 per cent. The fact is that Uganda has not yet signed the GMO protocols. Our researchers are trying their best to improve our local seeds and plant products through the breeding processes of existing genomes in our system. Therefore, is it in order for my honourable colleague to stand on the Floor of this House and mislead the country with unfounded facts, which are hearsay and have no basis at all? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you and he is a commissioner. (Laughter)  Honourable colleagues, we need to be cautious when debating issues here. This is because the Hansard  is a credible source of information. People believe that what we say here is credible and we are legislators so it must be backed up by evidence. Honourable colleagues, statistics of Bugiri do not apply here. I request that while stating facts, especially those to do with figures, state the source. This will make it easy. Let us be cautious. MR SILWANY:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Minister Frank Tumwebaze has just guided me that there is a difference between GMO and improved seeds. I was actually talking about hybrid seeds. The honourable minister has guided me very well. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I request that next time you seek guidance before speaking. MR SILWANY:  I was specifically talking about the seeds. When you look at the maize seeds that we are giving to our farmers, they cannot be reused. This means that farmers have to buy seeds every season. When Members of Parliament used to give out maize seeds, we would do so almost every season because the seeds that the farmers grow cannot be replanted.I would like to know: What strategy is the ministry going to use so that the seeds we get can be reused? Mr Speaker, it is not sustainable for farmers to buy seeds every time they are planting. Our farmers are in pain because of this process of purchasing. They have to go to the shop to buy seeds and once the crop is grown, they cannot do anything – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Jinja Central School from Jinja District. They are represented in Parliament by Dr Batuwa Timothy and Hon. Katali Loy. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)3.26MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for his statement. I would like to bring to the attention of the ministry that the quality of seeds that were supplied to Karamoja, mostly in Nabilatuk District, were not of good quality. Sorghum that was planted in the month of April is still in the gardens and has not matured. I would like to invite the minister to go with me to Nabilatuk so that he proves this. My prayer is that the ministry should always test the seeds that they receive from suppliers. Mr Speaker, what the people of Nabilatuk District are getting is a mix of good and poor quality seeds. If the ministry wants to prove this, I can go with them and we take photographs. Thank you very much. 3.27MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the articulate 10772STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSstatement from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries appropriately themed, “Water is life. Water is food. Leave no one behind”. My worry, Mr Speaker, is that my constituency of Nyabushozi County, which has persistently been water strained, is going to be left behind. Three generations ago, about 20 communal dams were constructed in Nyabushozi and these are Rwabigyemano, Rugongi, Kazo, Kyakabunga-Kiziramere and Kanyanya. They are communal water granaries and have been a source of the production that is seen now, but they have been silted. I would like to know from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries the plan and programme for such communal water granaries to be desilted, cleaned and fenced so they can be a source of water for production, irrigation and production of crops. I submit, Mr Speaker.3.28MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the statement he has made in regard to World Food Day. How I wish for a day in our country when we shall have no more hungry people on the streets.When this statement was made, I reflected on my daily journey driving along the streets of Kampala. Mr Speaker, I witnessed children; my relatives from Karamoja, begging on the streets for food. They even ask for leftovers of biscuits and water that they see in vehicles.I wish that one day a responsible Government will recognise – (Interruptions) – I am talking about world governments – that as we celebrate World Food Day; “Let us donate food for such category of children”. How I wish a day comes when families that are well endowed with resources stop pouring food, but instead donate to such children.How I wish a day comes when we promote giving packets of milk – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, how I wish you could conclude. (Laughter)  Thank you. Colleagues, we have many statements; you will contribute to other statements.3.31MS JACINTA ATUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his report. My main concern goes towards the effect of climate change. We all know that before we think of agriculture, we have to talk about climate change. As you know, climate change is one of the challenges that we are facing globally. It affects countries that are less resilient such as Uganda. Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to state clearly the comprehensive strategies they have developed in order to ensure the resilience of our agriculture as the backbone in the face of changing climate patterns.We have to consider working on ways to fight the issues of climate change. We have to train or create awareness for our farmers as the Minister had already said on issues of smart agriculture. However, what does he mean by smart agriculture, our farmers do not know this? I beg the Minister to include clearly in his report the developments they have put in place in order to combat climate – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I want to take this opportunity to recognise the presence of Her Excellency the Vice President who is in the House. (Applause)  She was here with us yesterday; the whole day. Even tomorrow she is going to be with us. She has not consulted with the Speaker about tomorrow and so-Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have teachers and prefects of Sir Apollo Kaggwa Boarding Primary School, Old Kampala, in Kampala Central. They are [Mr Kajwengye]10773THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023represented by Hon. Mohammed Nsereko and Hon. Shamim Malende. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. You can stand up for recognition.  (Applause)Very smart, future leaders. 3.34MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement.  I also want to add my voice to that of my colleagues Hon. Lilian and Hon. Silwany on the protection of our indigenous seeds.Sometimes some of these research seeds that come to our market, and there is a way they come with their jealous habits. For example, there are some banana species that were introduced in Ankole, wherever they went, they would chase away all our indigenous banana plants. In addition to that, when it comes to maize seeds, sometimes they are tasteless- I am sorry I do not want to earn myself a point of order - but compared to the indigenous seeds, the maize that we get from our research teams are not as sweet as our indigenous seeds.I request that as we support the researchers, we need to find a way of improving our soils so that we support our indigenous crops because usually the seeds are recycled and we do not get pressure from the farmers to bring them seeds during the planting season. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.3.35 MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this time to thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for that wonderful report on what happened on the World Food Day celebrations. The issue that I want to tackle is the issue of food security. We are aware that that concept is different in this country. Food security in Kampala, in Central Uganda and Western Uganda is not like what we have in northern Uganda, in Karamoja and in eastern Uganda. The Ministry has the daunting task of helping areas of this country which do not have any perennial crops to supplement their annual incomes. Secondly, areas with circles of floods and droughts- and finally the challenges of insecurity in Karamoja and the surrounding areas, which affect productivity and the marketing of these products, coupled with the question of providing value addition to these crops. I want to ask the Ministry, for a place like Kapelebyong and such districts to come and we sit down and find out how best we can help a farmer in Kapelebyong, who has to work three times in a year; first season, second season, in-between the second and third season to work and produce food when he has no money, no capital and has no market. For us, it is a huge and daunting task. I want to request him to work with the Minister and our districts to find a way forward to sort out this matter. Thank you. 3.37MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the Statement. We have had a lot of challenges, particularly food insecurity brought by drought. Many times, we sit here talking about Government approving supplementary funds to feed some of our citizens and this has always been caused by drought. We proposed to Government to construct dams to sort this issue out. From the Minister’s statement, the issue of water is also one of the issues he has talked about. I wish to get an update from the Minister on this particular situation because it has been a recurrent situation.10774STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSThe second issue is about - I was watching the news and also an international conference where they were talking about issues to do with food and also food security vis-à-vis  the quality of food that we should eat. There was an issue raised about a weed controller called “Roundup” and according to them, it is a very dangerous weed controller that causes cancer, liver failure and among others. I would like to get an update from the Minister on whether we do have such in the country because if it is there then it is risky. The third issue is an issue to do with the quality of our products, particularly food items.  We have had serious issues where one day they said maize supplied to South Sudan was stopped at the border because the quality was questionable. The same also applies to Kenya. We have never had any report from Government to explain whether these were mere claims or facts – (Member timed out.)3.39MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to appreciate the Minister’s statement. My major concern is the water policy of this country. Honourable members, if we do not have a comprehensive water policy to supply the country, we are going to be in lack of water forever. This would help us to have accountability from Government as we account for the schools that there is a policy where each subcounty has a secondary school; it should be the same with the comprehensive water supply in the country.Secondly, water for agriculture is very important. We are talking about coffee, and improving our crops, but there is no water for agricultural production. Honourable members felt a bit comfortable when it was raised among the seven pillars of the Parish Development Model. Unfortunately, it has been put aside and it is only the financial pillar that is being pushed forward. We are giving people money yet we are not empowering them to invest the money. When drought comes, we will not see the money we invested in our people because there is no water for production.We are improving the seeds and the repercussions or the effects of these improved seeds have already been discussed by several Members; they cannot re-germinate. What assurance do you give this country on the supply of these seeds? This is because, in the long run, there will be food insecurity instead. Do we have a budget that will ensure a steady supply of these seeds to the country? In Uganda, that is the biggest insecurity we have had for a long time – not having to be supplied with food or seeds.Lastly – (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not switch on the microphone and then say “Kindly.” Conclude.MS KYINYAMATAMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have talked about silos several times and that we should buy these seeds in the peak season (harvesting season) and supply them back off-season. However, this has not been done and yet we pass supplementary budgets to buy food very expensively from the neighbouring countries.As we improve these seeds, let us take into consideration the different regional climatic conditions; what works in Karamoja may not work in Rakai or somewhere else. Mr Speaker, we requested for dams in the country. Members of Parliament are pumping money into their constituencies to dig dams for water supply and domestic use. The water issue in this country needs a comprehensive policy. Thank you3.42MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. When we were still young, there were days that people [Mr Onzima]10775THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023used to remember and one of them was the World Food Day. Prior to that day, there would be a field day and visit where all pupils and students from the area, where the function would be held, would go to learn and acquire knowledge about food that would help them.As much as we talk about water being life, food and the World Food Day celebrations, there is a problem that will arise next year. We have talked about the lack of food this year, but we have experienced - especially in the boarding schools – beans and grains were not easy to get. I implore the minister to take a keen interest in the following things; first of all, food moves and if food cannot reach either Kenya or from Kenya to Uganda, that is another challenge. He should consider strengthening the regional cooperation in that line.In addition, there are problems of extension workers in the country. In the last budget that was passed here – wherever you go to any district, there are complaints that there is no funding for the extension workers to go and train the farmers to get to know – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude, but next time, the Government Chief Whip has advised that you start with the conclusion so that you do not miss a big point. (Laughter)MR AMOS OKOT:  Thank you. Our farmers need capacity building in education. Agricultural extension is another way of helping them to adopt to the climatic changes that are affecting us. There is also the promotion of renewable energy. Of course, all those are key issues that help us so that in a way we promote food. If we have food, then our health can be guaranteed. Thank you. I – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. H.E. the Vice President.3.45THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his informative statement. I have three concerns to notify him about, but they are just reminders to the minister. First, he stated very clearly that his scientists through the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) have developed prototypes to support the agricultural value chain. I support and thank him for that. However, I bring to his attention that we have waited so long for the anti-tick vaccine. If the minister wishes, he may find time and update the House on the progress of its development. because we have budgeted for that specific item for many subsequent financial years.  (Applause) Honourable colleagues, you may note that this is a very important development that we are looking forward to because three-quarters of our country depend on livestock.Secondly, I would also like to remind the minister to accelerate efforts on regulating and controlling acaricides. I say this in relation to the food that we eat because we eat meat and drink milk from the cows and there are – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Switch on your microphone, Your Excellency.MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO:  In conclusion, honourable minister, ensure that when we drink milk and eat meat, it should not have been contaminated by acaricides. We would like to get a clear picture that the meat and milk we consume are not contaminated by counterfeit acaricides.Thirdly, I would like to re-echo the issue of post-harvest handling which we have spoken about in this House more often than not, though the energy with which we speak has not translated realistically to the ground. 10776STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSHonourable minister, I know we sit on the same Cabinet, but it was important that I raise these issues to you. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Madam Vice-President. Of course, you are a Member of Parliament in your own right, so issues of your people – honourable minister, allow me add one point that is closely related to what Members had raised concerning the quality of acaricides, pesticides, and all that. It was brought to my attention in one of the engagements that we had with the European Union under the Africa Caribbean Pacific – European Union (ACP-EU) Joint Parliamentary Assembly that there are pesticides that are banned in the European Union, but are allowed to be exported to third world countries like Uganda. They are manufactured in the European Union. They know that they are bad and cause cancer and all kinds of diseases. However, they allow the pesticides to be manufactured on condition that they are not sold in the European Union. They are just for export. We raised it at the EU level in the Joint Parliamentary Assembly, and it was a point of concern even for Members of the European Parliament, however, this continues. In many countries, like Kenya, efforts are being put in place to ensure that such pesticides do not enter their country. If it is not good or feasible for your people, it should not be good for others. It should also be considered dangerous for others, so you should not be manufacturing it. I wanted to bring that to your attention, honourable minister and see how best you can look at it. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of councillors from Bungokho County North, Mbale District, represented by Dr John Faith Magolo and Hon. Miriam Mukhaye. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. Honourable colleagues, one day, Hon. John Faith invited me, and we spent a lot of time around Bungokho and we buried for Hon. Wandwasi. I said to him, “Why don’t you take me to meet your people.” He kept dilly-dallying, took me around for a drink, and we met people until it got a bit dark. At around 7.00 p.m., he took me to Mt Wanale to see the people and all of a sudden, kadodi  started. (Laughter)  Then someone told me, “If you are not steady, Imbalu  is in the offing.” (Laughter)  I want to see if there are some faces of people here who wanted to do Imbalu  on me, but I have not seen any. They welcomed me very well. I thank you – I survived in my own way. (Laughter)  Honourable minister?MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, Her Excellency, the Vice President, and honourable members. Thank you so much for your comments. I will try and summarise them. Let me start with the comments of the Vice President. Thank you, Madam Vice President, for your support to the sector. With your guidance, I will bring a comprehensive statement to the House on the anti-tick vaccine. We had agreed with the committee to deliberately say little about it for some security reasons which the committee is aware of. However, if you deem it fit, I will give a report maybe after two weeks such that - Madam Speaker, I will brief you. NARO is being faced with challenges. (Interjections)  Just listen –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I told you that this House is led by a Speaker. Honourable minister, they are disturbing you because you referred to me as Madam Speaker. (Laughter) MR TUMWEBAZE: Oh! My apologies.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay. However, honourable minister, whenever you feel comfortable, especially if there are security concerns. [Maj (Rtd) Alupo]10777THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes. We were advised by the scientists not to update at every stage, because some saboteurs may interfere. The good news is that the final trials of the vaccine have been conclusively done, and the vaccine stands at 88 per cent efficacy. (Applause)  This is much higher than the only vaccine on the market, from Cuba, which was commercialised at 50 per cent. (Applause)  Her Excellency the Vice-President, is proud of her government’s achievement, that is why she wants us to say it, but we will bring the statement. On the comment of the Vice President again, it is really an issue of extension services –  (Interjection)- yes, when you inject an animal with antibiotics, veterinary advise instructs you not to milk that animal or slaughter it until the withdrawal period is observed of 14 days. Therefore, it is a question of our extension services and ourselves popularising this message, and I take heed of the advice. Mr Speaker, the Cabinet approved the idea of forming a Food and Agriculture Authority which will be dedicated to all issues of food safety. This authority will beef up the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and National Drug Authority to make sure that we are secure. Let me quickly run through the Members’ concerns. I will ask the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) to contact Prof. Mushemeza to ensure that your liquid organic manure, first of all, is tested and approved before you use it, and to ensure that what you are doing is okay. I thank you for the innovation.Hon. Muzaale, the money for irrigation, which requires co-funding from the beneficiaries is under a program called Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT). This is a basket fund in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is the controlling agency. They send this money directly to the district. The Ministry of Agriculture offers technical supervision. Yes, the policy requires 25 per cent as a contribution of the beneficiaries for purposes of ownership. If you feel that is not forthcoming, we could review the policy and discuss it with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We could give it out as a public good, but the idea was that when somebody contributes something, there is more ownership than the usual free goodies. Boreholes, my colleague, the Minister of Water and Environment, will talk to you about the plans for water for human consumption. However, I know that they are doing a great job there. The same applies to my sister, Hon. Lillian Aber. I also contribute to repairing boreholes, so I would benefit when that comes. On the question of local seeds, what we may call open-pollinated varieties, - when you hear those words “open-pollinated,” it means our local seeds or landraces. The scientists briefed me - and I can bring another statement on this, Mr Speaker – that the reason they were forced to improve our local seeds to make them hybrids, was to improve productivity. It was to ensure that we adhere to and mitigate climate change. Unfortunately, hybrids cannot be replanted. We still have open varieties and landraces, like beans, but the scientists do not encourage them because of low productivity and resilience to climate change. This is the thing – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can I request ICT to stop interrupting the Minister? Let the Minister conclude.MR TUMWEBAZE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. NARO is making a great effort. When I was reading my statement, somebody interrupted your attention. I invite the leadership of Parliament to visit NARO because it is the source and the foundation of our food system. Listen to them, see what they are doing, and let them explain to you in detail how they are improving our food systems, while at the same time ensuring biosafety considerations. 10778STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSHowever, if you study the budget of NARO – I am not lamenting – they have not got enough support. I thank Her Excellency, the Vice President because she has understood this and has been our champion to this end. That is why we have been able to get some money with her effort and your effort as Parliament for the anti-tick vaccine. We need to support NARO to produce more foundation seeds. This leads me to the question of Hon. Tayebwa. The seed multipliers do not produce seed, but they multiply seeds. For our safety, NARO is the only source of foundation breeder seed. Therefore, if NARO’s capacity to multiply is not strengthened, then they will be struggling for the little on the market. It will give room for counterfeits. People who are bad and fraudsters will buy grain and sell it as seed when it cannot germinate. We will be able to import more seeds from other countries and I do not have to mention them. The solution lies in supporting our scientists. I would like to thank His Excellency the President because he improved their pay. Quite a number of them are now stable, but they will give us a solution. The more foundation seeds they produce, the more input dealers will multiply and the cost of seed will go down. Hon. Magolo, silos and quality of input is the same story. Our authorities; the National Agricultural Research Organisation and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards will intensify, but honourable colleagues, silos are necessary. I would like to inform you that we have some idle white elephant stores in the countryside. This morning, I got a report from the External Security Organisation complaining that many stores under the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) and NAADs, are idle in the districts. I appeal to you to be vigilant in your constituencies. If there is a store; small, medium or big stores that was built for group X and that group is not utilising it, inform us and we will relocate it to those who are able to use it. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can you give us a list of those stores because you might find that some Members of Parliament do not know about them?MR TUMWEBAZE: I will give you a comprehensive report. When we build these stores, we hand over them to the local governments and the farmer groups because they are the ones who give us the farmer groups. However, we found out that some of the farmer groups are not serious. People select loose groups –(Interruption)MS KABASHARIRA: Is there a difference between a silo and a store? [Members: “Yes.”]  If you are talking about those stores where you keep things and they get rotten, they might not be of help because they are just for collecting food, but not storing the food for security. I thank you.MR TUMWEBAZE: No, you were seeking clarification. Let me clarify for you. Any facility built to store food whether small, medium or big, will offer some minimum protection to the crop. There are silos that are big with dryers. Some private sector people have invested in that and they normally come in at the tertiary and secondary processing levels. That is where the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives comes in. However, for proper storage and post-harvest handling, you even start on-farm, you go to the aggregation centre with those mini stores and they are well done with dryers. I do not blame anybody, but my own staff and the district staff for leaving them idle. This is why we should work together –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have limited time. Please, just allow only one clarification and we stop there.MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Regarding the stores, they are okay. I actually have two in my constituency. These stores were built, but they were not equipped. You are talking about dryers – do you remember when we invited [Mr Tumwebaze]10779THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023you to the Committee on National Economy and that was one of the issues raised? They were constructed, but not fully equipped. MR TUMWEBAZE: I agree. We are doing a baseline such that before we start on new ones, we functionalise the existing stores. Mr Speaker, as I wind up, Hon. Acon wants me to visit villages and communities. Member from Kapelebyong, we will coordinate together. Hon. Herbert Tayebwa wants more seeds. Yes, I made a case for this. Hon. Silwany, I would like to assure you that our seeds are safe. Genetically improved seeds are different from genetically modified seeds. Therefore, our researchers are improving our local seeds; the parent line is our indigenous seed. They improve it by doing hybrid breeding and they get a high-yielding variety. Hon. Kajwengye, we can desilt the dams in Nyabushozi like we have been doing in some areas in Karamoja, but as you know, most of the areas, especially in southwestern Uganda, land is individually owned. You have fenced all your dams, so, we will have to discuss with you your priority; is it more community dams or individual dams? The reason why those community dams keep silting is because they are only used by people who graze animals along the road, but most people have their own dams. Therefore, we will come with the excavators and if you think we should – we are not only desilting those dams, it is reconstruction because they were almost spoiled. We will agree with you and your leadership on the best intervention. Hon. Simon Opolot wishes to see a situation where people do not throw away food. However, I would like to tell you, honourable, that I wish to see more land opened up. Let us make a call to our people to work. A total of 35 per cent of arable land is the only one we are using. The big chunk is still not utilised. That is why I need your support to give more tractors to open more land. Hon. Atuto asked about the strategies for agriculture. Our emphasis is from research to increased production, to marketing and value addition, working together with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and our embassies abroad that look for markets. Hon. Bashiisha, your comment is noted, as I have explained. Hon. Esenu, I can work with you and we visit Kapelebyong. Hon. Onzima, the quality of our products is going to continuously be improved through improving on-farm agronomical practices and post-harvest handling. Hon. Kyinyamatama, Rakai is water stressed and we have agreed to put an excavator in your area and Gomba for the farmers to dig dams.Finally, Mr Speaker, once again I invite you and the leadership of Parliament, to visit us at Nakyesasa and many other stations to see what NARO is doing and to seek your support. I thank you. (Applause)4.07MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure. I have listened to the minister giving a report about agriculture, but the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has three sectors; crop, livestock and fisheries.However, I have observed that the minister has put much emphasis on livestock and crop, leaving a sector that is very important as far as our economy is concerned. What strategies does the minister have because fish alone is food? We can talk about fish farming and how do we help our people to improve fish production in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the statement was tailored to the theme of the day and I only brought out the highlight which was research breakthrough. However, I would like to assure you that I may come back here or my colleague, the Minister of State for Fisheries to present a statement on aquaculture 10780STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSdevelopment initiatives as well as how we are trying to conserve wild capture fisheries. Thank you. (Member rose_)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, I would like to guide you that you seek clarification when the Member is holding the Floor. For now, we do not have any Member on the Floor. In addition, clarification is not allowed by the presiding officer, but by the Member holding the Floor. That is how the rules work. Thank you, honourable minister. Your statement was comprehensive. The clarity you always make – we miss you. Bring more statements because you are holding a very important sector. (Applause)In case you have any statements please always alert us; we want those statements, and we do not want to first push you. Madam Vice-President, sometime back, I had discussed with the Government Chief Whip and the President and we had agreed that the moment you finish Cabinet information papers, you should extract statements for Parliament so that they are brought on board.We would be addressing most questions and it would be a good way. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip; we now have many statements which are pending, which we are going to give priority.I encourage you, your Her Excellency, the Vice-President – I know many statements come there; kindly get them for Parliament so that as Cabinet is informed, Parliament is informed as well. You can always guarantee our support on most of these issues.Honourable minister, next week I am visiting the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) so please arrange- chairperson, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Committee on Budget and; Committee on Natural Resources I have a few experts in the agricultural sector like Hon. Amos Okot – I can see everyone wants to be an expert now. I will conclude on the Members, but let us liaise next week. I will lead this team and visit you at NARO. Thank you.MR AOGON:  Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure under rule 130 speak to the second reading of Bills. On Tuesday, 23 May 2023, you did refer “The National Legal Aid Bill” to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to date, the committee has returned work to the House. You gave them 30 days. I beg to know from you whether we are proceeding well without this particular Bill being brought to the House. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silas, when you have such procedural matters, come at the beginning of the sitting because we are now in between the business. I know that it is a credible issue, but those should come after my communication. So that it is part of the reaction, for our Hansard  to look organised. However, if the chairperson or any member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is around, kindly update me. Yes, the Vice-Chairperson is here.4.12MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague Hon. Silas knows the position; we invited him before the committee and we agreed to have a meeting with him, the leaders of the committee and the Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. If there is a need for a meeting – please I was not there – but I am inviting you for a meeting on Tuesday.MR MUTEMBULI:  Much obliged.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Zijjan – I am seeing some tension between the mover and the committee; so, let us meet in my office and settle the matter – [Mr Tumwebaze]10781THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023MR ZIJJAN:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 42. I had whispered into the ear of the minister pertaining to the statement he presented. When we were talking about food security, I know that we mean both quantity and quality.I whispered to the minister that there is viral information going on alleging that Makerere University has found poisonous matter in the rice on the market and in the water. I thought that since we are talking about food security, we would also touch on the matter enough to draw his attention, but I have seen that the House is taking leave of the matter and it agitates me that it is skipped. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, points of procedure are provided for very clearly under rule 78 and rule 42 applies when you are in either a debate or before and you want to ask a minister any question because at any time, we are going to have issues of that kind. I want us to use Rule 42 consciously. The minister’s statement is under rule 52 for which we allow a debate or not. However, you have raised a very critical issue. So, honourable minister, take note and please get the time to address the concern raised by Hon. Zijjan Livingstone. Thank you.MR KIBALYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your intervention, since this information is circulating in the public and for the interest of protection of the industry, the minister should be on Hansard  saying, “It is not verified or true”, — for the information of the public.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we do not control what the media writes. The report in the media is alluding to a research paper from Makerere University. Prof. Mushemeza, our teacher may know better, because he is our teacher. A research paper depends on the sample space you have handled and the credibility of where the paper has been published.We took serious exception to it; we have raised our concerns to the newspaper and we will discuss it with Makerere. It is an alarmist report, but all our food is safe, and imported rice is checked by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). Therefore, we should not be held at ransom by media houses wanting to increase sales. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister if you feel that you want to clarify more, we can give you a chance.4.23THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the rising prices of fuel in Uganda. Once again, I come to clarify to the House, as previously submitted by my ministry, on the impact of rising global prices of petroleum products in the country.Mr Speaker, you are aware that Uganda operates a liberalised downstream petroleum market where pump prices are determined by the forces of demand and supply as guided by the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 and the Petroleum Supply (General) Regulations, 2009.For the last one month, prices have not changed and the country has remained well-supplied, meaning that we did not have scarcity of the products.My ministry will continue to monitor the sub-sector to ensure that Uganda’s market gets a continuous supply of petroleum products throughout all the supply routes at competitive prices.To further benefit from having a stable supply and improvement in pump prices, my ministry is the Supporting Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC), a government company, to supply all oil marketing companies in Uganda and it is planned that effective January 2024 Uganda’s oil marketing companies will be directly supplied by Uganda National Oil company, which will improve the security of 10782STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSsupply and result in very competitive pump prices. Honourable colleagues are aware of the system that we go through – the open tender system in Kenya, where at times Kenya chooses to allocate products destined to Uganda to their own local companies. We want to come out of this.I will bring an amendment to the Petroleum Supply Act to support UNOC in this endeavour, next week.Mr Speaker, Uganda’s pump prices, compared to Tanzania’s and Kenya’s, are as indicated in the table below. Retail pump prices comparison as of 25 October 2023 This is the regional comparison of fuel pump prices (per litre) of petrol and diesel. That table has figures. For example, in Tanzania, petrol is at TSh 3,281. In Mombasa (coast), it is at Ksh 214.30; in Nairobi (central), it is Ksh 217.36; in Eldoret (western), it is Ksh 217.12; and in Mandera (northern), it is at Ksh 231.36. In Uganda (Kampala), petrol is at Shs 5,400.For diesel, it is Tsh 3,448 in Tanzania. In Kenya, it is Ksh 202.41 in Mombasa; Ksh 205.47 in Nairobi; Ksh 205.65 in Eldoret; and Ksh 219.47 in Mandera. In Uganda, diesel is at Shs 5,000.I have indicated the exchange rate and changed it to the figures below.For premium, it is Shs at 4,922 in Tanzania. In Kenya, it is at Shs 5,743 in Mombasa; Shs 5,825 in Nairobi; Shs 5,819 in Eldoret; and Shs 6,200 in Mandera.So, you can compare: in Uganda, it is Shs 5,400; in Tanzania, it is at Shs 4,922; and in Mombasa, it is at Shs 5,743. I have also indicated the prices for diesel. In Tanzania, it is at Shs 5,172 while in Uganda, it remains at Shs 5,000.These are the comparisons I have indicated on the prices, as they stand. Mr Speaker, I encourage you to watch the prices as they are determined globally, but Uganda suffers more because of the Kenyan system. Government is not going to look on and lament, yet we have powers to amend our law so that we empower UNOC to do the direct importation so that we do not suffer the many layers that the Kenyan government puts in place.I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable member, you have a chance to debate; why do you need clarification? (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, we have two statements that are closely related. So, in the interest of time and having a debate in which we are not repeating ourselves, let us have the next statement and then we have one debate. II) STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF OIL AND GAS PROJECTS IN THE COUNTRY4.23THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the status of oil and gas projects in the country.Mr Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to update the House on the current status of the country’s oil and gas (petroleum) projects.As mentioned in my previous statements, Uganda’s Albertine Graben is a mature oil and gas province that has nine production licences issued to Total Energies EP Uganda BV ., China North Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC) (U) Ltd and Uganda National Company Ltd (UNOC).[Ms Nankabirwa]10783THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is leading the formulation of a comprehensive National Petroleum Policy following the review of the National Oil and Gas Policy, 2008 and Energy Policy, 2002 to address the entire petroleum value chain and emerging issues. The new policy will create a conducive environment for faster and efficient exploration, development, production and commercialisation of discovered resources and utilisation of petroleum products in the country while acknowledging the energy transition initiatives. We plan to conclude the policy before the end of this financial year.ExplorationIn an effort to increase our resource base, we issued exploration licences to Armour Energy Ltd over the Kanyawataba area, Oranto Petroleum Ltd over the Ngassa Shallow and Deep in 2017 and, more recently (2023), we issued exploration licence to UNOC over the Kasurubani Block and DGR Global over the Turaco Block. My ministry is also increasing efforts to explore more petroleum areas in new basins such as the Kadam-Moroto basin where oil seeps have been identified on the surface as well as Kyoga and Hoima basins. We still have potential in those areas.Development and productionMr Speaker, the drilling of development and production wells was launched on 24 January 2023 at the Kingfisher field by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, witnessed by H.E. the Vice-President, among others. Development and production drilling for the Tilenga project also commenced in June 2023. A total of 11 wells have been drilled, eight in the Tilenga and three in the Kingfisher area. These wells are being drilled using three rigs in the Tilenga project and one rig in the Kingfisher project. At peak production, all fields mentioned above will produce 230,000 barrels of oil per day for five years. The Tilenga project will produce 190,000 barrels of oil per day at peak, while the Kingfisher field will produce 40,000 barrels of oil per day at peak. In total, the above production will require a total of 457 wells and 35 well pads.Mr Speaker, out of the 457 wells, 426 will be for Tilenga, while 31 will be for Kingfisher.Construction of the central processing facilities both at Kingfisher and Tilenga is ongoing, and on schedule to be ready by 2025. The central processing facilities do the primary processing before crude oil is subjected either to the refinery or for export through the East African Crude Oil Pipeline.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am sorry for the interruption. I have an issue; there is very critical information you always have, but leave out in the statement. You bring it to us off-cuff. I have been listening and watching you read your statement - yet this is very critical. I am not questioning the information you are giving. However, once this statement is uploaded, we always refer to it, even after here.I will now need to go and dig through the Hansard  to get this information, yet if you had captured all of it in the statement, it would be very easy. Please, give us those details in the statement, honourable minister.MS NANKABIRWA: Most obliged. I will try to make sure I do not make further clarification as I read. I will clarify during debate. Thank you. I was talking about the central processing facilities. I have informed the House that the Tilenga’s 190,000 barrels of crude oil capacity-central processing facility, which is under construction is currently 33 per cent complete, while the Kingfisher’s 40,000 barrels’ everyday capacity - Central Processing Facility - which is under construction is currently 12 per cent complete. The laying of interconnecting pipelines of the Kingfisher feeder pipelines to the export hub has already commenced. 10784STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSIt is expected that 80 kilotonnes and 20 kilotonnes per year of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) will be produced from the Tilenga and Kingfisher projects, respectively. This will enable the country to reduce deforestation and hence, save us from any climate change impact. (Applause)Refinery projectMr Speaker, Government is taking forward the development of the 60,000 barrels per day oil refinery in Kabaale, Hoima District. I will be announcing the winning bidder for the refinery project soon after the Project Framework Agreement with Albertine Graben Energy Consortium expires in June 2023. The next one is to announce the winning bidder.Regarding the refined products pipeline project that traverses six districts, over a distance of 213 kilometres from Hoima to Mpigi, the land acquisition process is currently ongoing and is at 74 per cent. (Applause)  East African Crude Oil Pipeline Mr Speaker, in January 2023, Government issued a permit to the East African Crude Oil Pipeline company to construct the pipeline. The progress for a detailed design for the EACOP pipeline and attendant facilities being undertaken by Worley in London and Dar es Salaam stands at 66 per cent. Construction of the thermal insulation Plant in Tanzania is at 95 per cent, together with the installation of equipment for two coating trains is ongoing. In Uganda, civil works commenced in August and this will be followed by works at the other camps.The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for affected persons within the 10 districts where the East African Crude Oil Pipeline crosses is ongoing. Approximately 94 per cent of the affected persons have consented and signed documents, while 88 per cent of the affected persons who opted for cash payment have been cleared and paid. The ministry, companies and key stakeholders are attending to grievances associated with the land acquisition process.In conclusion, Government and its partners are working tirelessly and I am happy to report that we are on track to have the first oil by the end of 2025. I thank you, honourable colleagues, for your continued support. I would like to invite the Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues to come on the ground and see what I have presented in this document. You will always be welcome. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I checked the schedule in my office today - they are proposing that I visit you around December. In the month of December, check and we work together so that we can visit and see what is going on, on the ground.Honourable colleagues, the statements are clear – Listen to me. Of course, politicians can never fail to debate. (Laughter)  I know. Even when someone does not want to speak, he or she starts by saying, “You know, I did not want to speak, but…”  (Laughter)  “I have nothing to say, but…” I know once we give you a chance, it always happens.Honourable colleagues, for such statements, it is my discretion whether they should be debated or not. However, I will pick around 10 Members so that we have it concluded. I am starting from the right side because last time, I started from the left. I will pick Hon. Oseku, Hon. Moses Aleper, Hon. Ochai, Hon. Nakut, Hon. Goli Ogwal, the chairperson of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, and Hon. Wakooli for now. 4.37MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the minister for the statement. As it has been said, statements of this nature bring all of us, Members of Parliament, on board so that we are able to build hope among the citizenry of this country about progress and economic development.[Ms Nankabirwa]10785THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023I have listened to the statement - Honourable minister, regarding the issue of funding the EACOP, sometime back, we were told that funders were being discouraged from giving us that money. Could you give us insight into how we are progressing towards achieving that? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.39MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwi County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the honourable minister for the statement. I would like to implore all the ministries that in situations that arise like this particular one, they should be more proactive and not be prompted to make these statements. This is a situation which requires that type of management of institutions of this similar nature. From what I see in the statement, this is the normal narrative. “We are about to explore, we are about to do this” and that sort of thing; there is nothing that can give us hope. You just need to re-engineer the way you manage some of the things. That is the reason you need to learn from the comments that we make whenever you make these statements. If you get this statement and compare it with the one you made last time, it is just the same narrative. Let us see how we can make things a bit better for this country. Otherwise, it will just be mere position-holding, coming to present your face, coming to read a statement, appearing in the press, and it goes on; it becomes business as usual. This is what is actually boring the country. Thank you. (Member rose_) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not have anyone on the Floor, honourable minister. Thank you. (Laughter) 4.41MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, I have two questions that require clarification. One is in relation to the first report. It is sad to note that Uganda is at the mercy of Kenyan importers. What is making it difficult for the Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC) to become an importer? Secondly, from the second report, the required 457 wells versus the accomplished 11 wells, yet the minister gives us the assurance that by 2025, there will be oil. In my view, that speed - 11 well out of 457 - why not tell the truth to the country?  Please, clarify; maybe I did not get you right. Finally, Mr Speaker, we have witnessed a number of events; launching this, breaking this, then Final Investment Decision (FID); all those things. It gives hope to the country, but is it reliable; is it true? I would implore the minister to reduce those events given that we are not likely to get the oil by 2025 with the numbers you have given. Thank you. 4.42MR GOLI OGWAL  (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable minister for your presentation. The first one is on the oil company; can you clarify whether we will not create a monopoly in terms of UNOC? Are we going to avoid that since you are saying you want to front that and so on?Secondly, I tend to agree with what Hon. Aleper said. I think the issue of price is macroeconomic and possibly, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development may not fully explain the challenges of price related even to oil because there are many other factors; exchange rate and so on. It may require the Government element, which is in charge of macroeconomic stability to 10786STATEMENTS BY MINISTERScome and help in explaining this with a better solution. Thirdly, due to the high price, where the minister has control is production, so that we may benefit from the high price as a country. Is there a way we can have the first oil, faster than what you have planned so that we get this high price? Lastly, regarding the benefits, you have launched FID - as my colleague here mentioned. Can we clearly get and follow up the benefits we will have from oil, especially in other sectors, and we have it mainstreamed in the planning so that the other sectors can benefit or at least, plan to benefit like agriculture? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Hon. Moses Ogwal, Government does not work in silos. I cannot call a Minister of Energy and Mineral Development here, then tomorrow we call one for finance because it is a microeconomic issue. It will be difficult - I am very sure that this is a matter which must be discussed at Cabinet level and then you have the input of all ministers. For us, the ministers in charge of the sectors, per our rules, that is where we go. It will be up to the minister to know that “I can be supported by so-and-so as my colleagues, to come up with a very strong statement that is more convincing and acceptable.” Therefore, we can debate the statement the way it is, without discounting the efforts of the minister. I had said that we need another minister. Thank you. I have already picked the colleagues to speak. This side, I am done. 4.45MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. Mine is a humble request, but before I place the request to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, may I take this opportunity first of all to thank her for the clear statement she has made, particularly, on the rising price of oil. Mr Speaker, to macroeconomists, the information given to us is adequate. However, I would request the minister to kindly consider - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you one of them? I know Hon. Ochai very well. MR OCHAI:  May I, kindly, request the honourable minister to consider publishing for us high frequency data on retail fuel pump prices, so that, maybe on a weekly basis, we can consume and get ourselves updated. I thank you. 4.46MR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking the honourable minister for her clear statement. For the benefit of this House, as the chairperson who oversees the sector, I would like the minister to clarify the fact that she is planning that UNOC will be buying oil products for this country as opposed to our reliance on our neighbour, Kenya. The reason we have been relying on our neighbour is that we, as a country, cannot buy directly from the oil producers because the budgets require large volumes that we cannot order for. I am wondering how this is now going to be done so that we can directly buy from the oil producers. Secondly, I would also like the minister to clarify in respect to when we shall be getting the first oil. I know according to the roadmap that was previously set, we expected to get the first oil by May 2025. However, today, in the minister’s statement, she said the end of 2025. This now rings in my mind that the road map is beginning to shift, which means that something is happening that we need to be clarified on - whether we shall be able to get the first oil by 2025. [Mr Ogwal]10787THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023Finally, the refined products pipeline –Refining the petroleum products in Hoima and transporting those refined products to Mpigi and again re-transporting them using trucks back to the western part of the country seems not to be a well-thought-out plan. Therefore, I wonder whether this could still be modified so that some refined products are left to go to the western part of the country, other than being transported to Mpigi and then taken back. I thank you. 4.49MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I extend my appreciation to the honourable minister for the statement. Originally, some two years back - the year Ugandans were given information on the production of oil was 2023. I plead with the minister to be consistent in these messages because the population is not going to believe us if we are to say that we are going to have oil in 2023, but we are talking about 2025. I also request the minister to accept the statement. In the report, we would have a statement saying, “The oil prices are fluctuating.” They are not stable because we are not at the rate that was true of oil in the last six months. The second one is a point of clarification. The honourable minister has told us about the agreement expiring in June 2023 and yet, we are in October. Which agreement is this? Is it still running? Is it another one? Also, for work that commenced in August - which year? We have talked about different launchings happening in the sector. Which one is this of August? Is it of the oil and the rest since there are many? As Ugandans, we would understand which one started in August last year, August the other year, and August 2023, so that we can keenly follow up the commitment of the minister to have oil produced in Uganda by 2025. Thank you. 4.51MR GODFREY WAKOOLI (NRM, Butiru County, Manafwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also join Members to thank the minister for the statement. The minister said that for the last month, the fuel prices have not changed, which I feel is not true. Fuel prices pose a serious astronomical effect because as you all know, the prices of fuel affect everything. We have been talking about food insecurity. We are talking about getting our people out of poverty, but if we do not address the issue of fuel prices in this country, we are headed for a serious conundrum. The minister has also talked about refineries, but as we wait - a few months ago, I watched President William Ruto of Kenya trying to arrest two situations in his country; the escalating fuel prices and climate change issues. What was he telling his people? He said, “We need to also look at the path of harnessing solar energy.” They have set up a huge solar plant in Isiolo. We have enough sunshine in this country and we know that it can be a one-off investment, much as it is costly. Instead of only relying on electricity, which does not even reach our people, and gasoline, our people can also use solar energy. (Applause)  He also launched a motorbike, which does not use fuel. It is going to be electric, but the electricity is going to be generated by solar energy. If you do this as a country - I operate a few boda bodas  - I want to tell you about the issue the President has been preaching - of getting our people out of poverty. If a boda boda  person who uses Shs 10,000 a day moves to using a solar-powered motorcycle, he is going to save a lot and also kick poverty out of his home. Mr Speaker, instead of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development only talking about the oil, which was told to our people a long time ago and now, we are shifting goalposts, why can’t she also talk about solar energy in this country, which is everywhere? I beg to submit. 10788STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I took the Member’s statement to be on e-mobility. Otherwise, we will end up going into the electricity sector. It is on e-mobility and your plans are to support e-mobility.4.54MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I think we are not only discussing the statement by the minister, but also discussing the policy on fuel. First of all, we need to look at the tax that we impose on fuel. For each litre, we impose close to Shs 1,700 and this escalates the price of fuel.Secondly, we need to discuss how we are going to transition from engine-powered vehicles to electric-powered vehicles, and how Government is planning for the country to save money. Instead of complaining about the price of fuel, we should use fuel-free vehicles. These vehicles are already in progress. Honourable members, you have sent me to the Pan-African Parliament and I have been going to other countries. Some countries are now importing and allowing citizens to access electric vehicles. For instance, you buy that vehicle, charge it once a week and use it freely for the whole week. That will save us money and we will not be crying over the fuel prices anymore. The third point is on allowing Government to start engaging in business; UNOC should be allowed to engage in business. That is a source of corruption. I am saying the potential - because we know how Government has been operating. We need to analyse that critically. We have also already had people who have invested a lot of money in fuel reserves and tanks. When you go to the shores of Lake Victoria, there is a plant that can import close to 70 million litres in Mahathi Infra Uganda Limited. Are you going to deal with them or are you going to chase them away and use Government? Therefore, we need to know how we are going to relate with Government and the private sector. I think once we do that, it will be okay. Can you explain how you are going to relate to the private sector? 4.57MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho Central County, Mbale ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the well-articulated statement. I want to build on from where Hon. Okot-Ogong has stopped. The statement from the minister sheds light and hope for this country. My biggest concern is the synchrony between the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Most of the dealers or the operators of fuel are non-Ugandans; they are the big foreign companies. How are we preparing our locals to take advantage of the oil? My thinking is that, at that time Ugandans may be unable to have the necessary infrastructure to take advantage of the oil opportunities. The same resource would be of benefit to non-Ugandans and other foreign entities. Honourable minister, my request is; that we need an engagement with the Ministry of Trade and the indigenous Ugandans in that trade to be able to build the capacity from all levels. There is employment for all levels, but if we do not do it, Ugandans will not benefit from this resource. I implore you, honourable minister, that we stick to the deadline you have put of 2025. With technological development, people are drifting away from the use of fossils; so if they begin using solar energy, our product market may have challenges.We need to develop the product as soon as possible so that we can benefit from it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Aogon?5.00MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister. In my opinion, you have done well, but we need to help you do better. 10789THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to support.MR AOGON:  We need to help her. It is the same thing, Mr Speaker; we need to support her – (Interjection)-  yes, because right now, you stand for the ministry.Mr Speaker, I am on the issue of fuel prices. Yesterday, I was in Lamwo, very far away and I thought I was in the middle of South Sudan. I thought about a Member of Parliament fueling a car from here to Lamwo to check on the voters four times a month considering the entire cost; this is so disturbing. I thank the minister for one thing - you are the first minister to bring a statement here without blaming COVID-19 for any of the troubles. (Laughter)  When the prices of fuel first soared in this country, everybody was blaming COVID-19. After COVID-19 went down, the prices equally went down.When Russia came up, they said “Russia and Ukraine”. Those two have continued to fight. Where is the connection? Why did the price go up again? Now, Israel has come up and Gaza is burning; you are not blaming them, but trying to look for other reasons.Therefore, Mr Speaker, I call upon you to institute a select committee to look into this special matter of fuel prices. There, we shall be able to summon all the stakeholders- include me on the team to go up to Mombasa. (Laughter) We shall check where the pipe has a problem and handle this problem properly. (Interruption)PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  I am compelled, Mr Speaker. Hon. Aogon, to begin soliciting support, which is bordering on corruption, that he should be included on a team to be instituted. Is he in order? Is the honourable member, a chairperson of the Independents, with experience in Parliament and traversed various parts of the country including Lamwo; is he in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Silas, since you visited Lamwo, you do not need to go to Mombasa. They are very close; so you are not in order. Leave out issues of Mombasa.MR AOGON:  Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I was just alluding - you know, I am a certified public accountant in Uganda. I wanted to add on my expertise. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, you are questioning my ruling. (Laughter)MR AOGON : I do not want to question your ruling, Sir. I am so passionate about the airport in Kabaale- I think it is called Kabalega. This time round, you did not talk about it. What is the percentage? Are we at 99.9 per cent? There is this other issue of the PAPs. In your statement, you said that those that have not been compensated are going to be handled. Their grievances will be handled by the ministry and the oil companies.Mr Speaker, I think it would be better for us to get a special or independent tribunal to handle this issue of the grievances because this is a massive industry. It is not a small thing. You cannot be the one they are complaining about, and the same person handling the grievance. How do we handle it, Mr Speaker? That is a very serious issue and it needs support from your seat. The dates have continuously shifted, but as solutions are invented, challenges also shift. I stand with you this time around, but can you stand by it up to the end of 2025? We are going to collect your statements and bring them here. When you bring yours, we shall open the first, second and the last, to see whether you are not repeating yourself. Those two issues have become twins; the one of middle-income status and the one of oil - they move in a similar pattern. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Aogon has touched on the issue of Kabalega Airport. I 10790STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSheard some people asking if it was related. Yes, it is because, when we were passing the loan for Kabaale Airport at that time-, I am told now it is Kabalega. When we were passing the loan for the oil roads in Bunyoro, we were told they were to facilitate the oil and gas sector. We believe that Government works in tandem; it is integrated; therefore, we need to know whether we facilitated the production of the oil and gas sector if we are ahead. That is an angle from which you can approach it. Thank you. Hon. Omara? 5.06MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First, I appreciate the minister for the two reports she has presented eloquently. I want to start with the fuel prices. Some time back, the Committee on Trade was directed to do an investigation on fuel prices and the report was presented here in the House. We noted that there were only two companies that control 75 per cent of the fuel imported into the country. That is TotalEnergies and Vivo Energy; they control most of the imports. We tried to investigate, and most of the time, we said we did not have reserves and our reserves in Jinja were empty. To fill those reserves will require $40 million, and even then, it will not take us a week when in a crisis. That option was not possible. The minister has come up with something, which I personally would support because we realise that the fuel prices even if there is no COVID-19, no Ukraine-Russian crisis, the prices continue to go up and remain the same; meaning there is an element of greed among those who import fuel. Therefore, Government is taking action to begin the importation of fuel and create a level of competitiveness. In the words of my fellow economist, the macroeconomic indices, it would help us to bring in competition and the prices would even drop. The moment they hear that the Government of Uganda is going to take action to import fuel, for them to sell, they will drop the prices. That is the only way we can help the country. (Applause)  Mr Speaker, some people had alluded to the idea that we should provide subsidies. The last time I checked, this country only has $4.8 billion in terms of foreign currency reserves. We will use that money for the purposes of maintaining monetary policy, that is, managing inflation and the exchange rate. Therefore, that money can no longer be used carelessly just for the purposes of subsidy.I would like to support the recommendation by the minister of making sure that the Government of Uganda, through the UNOC, gets involved in importing oil. The only issue I put to you is that this would require a substantial amount of money. You are going to bring a policy or a law for us to consider and I think you need to consider the budget framework of how much it would cost the country to import, but it is a good idea. The second issue is in regard to the oil itself; the exploration, excavation and the enablement that we have put in place. I think that we have spent a substantial amount of money and it is over $4 billion in the process of trying to put up the airports, the roads, invest some money with the UNOC and our responsibility to EACOP. Mr Speaker, from the numbers that we have - I always give numbers. If all the fuel is being pumped out and taking into consideration that we will pay off the investors with what we call cost oil based on some calculations which I will not go into, this country will only be able to have on average $2 billion every year - in effect, Shs 7.5 trillion. Given the situation, which we are in now in terms of relying so much on debt, borrowing every financial year, this money will come in handy to help us in our budget support. What worries me is that from the statistics the minister has given us, we are only at 33 per [The Deputy Speaker]10791THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023cent of the Central Processing Unit in terms of preparedness. We only have this financial year 2024 and by 2025, the CPU is the most essential component of processing raw fuel before we put it through EACOP into Tanga for export. Now, if we are only at 33 per cent, even if the extraction were to happen today or tomorrow, we would not be able to process this oil and pass it through. The support that we need to give the minister is that we need to find out what it would take for us to fast-track the CPU and make sure that by 2025, we can clean up this oil and take it to Tanga. As a person with the finance background, I really need to have our $2 billion by 2025 so that we can support our budget. (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, that is not how we work. Thank you. Please, take your seat. You have already done a good job. I need others to supplement on the good job you have done.Honourable minister, Hon. Omara has raised a very critical point of support to UNOC, although you said that you are going to bring a law. If this requires us amending the Petroleum Supply Act and you are saying that by January 2024, UNOC will have that duty, we have only two months.I am looking at how feasible it is for you to bring a law, which takes 45 days in a committee and we debate it here. We have been sending Bills to the President and we know how long he takes to assent to them. I am saying this because of time. If you are to do it, bring the Bill because we are about to go into another phase. We have only October and part of December. I urge you to bring it if you have it. Honourable colleagues, I do not want us to violate the rule on anticipation, but I urge the minister since he wants this done, to bring the Bill quickly and we do justice.5.13MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. My interest is on the pipeline. I happen to come from Mubende, where the pipeline passes, going to Tanzania and even my constituency.However, my concern is on the compensation. EACOP land was earmarked in 2018, that is when they started and made valuations. Since then, most people have not been paid. Some were only paid this year.My concern is that they are compensating people below the market price of land in the area. They are putting an uplift of 30 per cent, but after five years, the land appreciation is higher than that.At first, they told people that after they have put the pipelines, people will continue using their landt, but recently, they told us that we are not supposed to use that land. That is why people were very reluctant with the prices they were offering.Now, they are saying that even if you refuse, it is compulsory; they must take the land because it is a Government programme. Mr Speaker, people are cheated and I call upon Parliament to get interested in the matter so that people are compensated properly. In addition, there is an unanswered question –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, the minister is your colleague; so, not all issues should come to the Floor. First handle with the minister; once he fails, you can then bring a petition here.MR MUSEVENI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the advice. Another issue is that at the time of trenching, how will the public be protected? They trench in order to lay the pipelines, which will pass through the communities, farms and the cattle corridors.10792STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSIf they pass through someone’s farm, how are we going to protect the animals in those farms? Those are unanswered questions, Mr Speaker, and I need clarification. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, these are issues of public engagement. Not everyone watches TV and the Member of Parliament will not reach everyone. This will require you to talk to the communities and sensitise them about the solutions. 5.17 MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable minister for the report. On the issue of oil prices, I am very glad that we are now thinking outside the box by charging our own UNOC to do the importation of the oil. Under the open tender system, which has been used in Kenya, the private companies have always been putting a mark-up price and fairly a good amount of money beyond Shs 200 and Shs 300, which has been increasing the price. However, the information in the public domain is that it is the intention of Government to use this mark-up price not to bring the prices down, but to generate more revenue for Government until UNOC is stable enough to fund its operations. I seek clarification on that matter.Secondly, honourable minister, now that we are looking at one supplier of oil, which as Mr Speaker guided, is work in progress; one of the advantages that the Kenyans have enjoyed is that they are given a grace period of about 180 days before they make payments and this does not put a very big burden on the foreign exchange locally. It is a process to go through those negotiations. We did not anticipate this in the budget and a lot of money is required to facilitate the UNOC to this purchase. I find it unrealistic to achieve this in January, 2024 though it is highly desired by everyone around. May the honourable minister clarify on that issue. In the report regarding oil and gas, you guided among other issues that the thermal insulation plant in Tanzania is at 95 per cent completion and we are supposed to feed them. However, our pace - yet the Tanzanians, if I may borrow the local dialect; are “weeping more than the bereaved?” which is in the positive manner. They are running so fast and we are holding them back after making such an investment. Are we not being very unrealistic business wise? When those who are supporting us in this endeavour - because we are the key beneficiaries - have moved faster in everything; from the time of their legislation- (Member timed out.)   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. - Please, I have already picked the Members to speak. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho - I usually call him Jonam because his second name is a botanical name and very difficult. (Laughter)5.20 MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank you, further for reading my mind as far as the issue of the law is concerned because it was one of the reasons I stood up. I thank the minister for the statement - but in this House, similar statements have been made every time pump prices go up. The kind of statistics brought are always the same and I am almost reaching a point where I ask whether we need such a statement, when we know that it is going to be the same all the time. Secondly, we know, as my colleague, Hon. Okot-Ogong, has stated, that we have taxes on the oil and some of it we know for sure is supposed to go to the Uganda Road Fund. We also know that it has ever come to this House, that the bit of the money for the Uganda Road Fund is not respected. It first goes into the Consolidated Fund where it is allocated to any other; that bit, which is supposed to go to the Uganda Road Fund does not go the way it is. If this money is not going to the Uganda Road Fund, can’t it be part of the relief for persons who go to buy fuel? [Mr Museveni]10793THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023I am giving as an example, if for every litre, we are supposed to tax Shs 1,000, which is supposed to go to the Uganda Road Fund and we know that it is not going there; can’t we say that for this period that the price is high, this Shs 1,000 which does not go to the Uganda Road Fund, we will not have it to lower the pump price for the buyer? That is what I think. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Geofrey Okello?5.23MR GEOFREY OKELLO (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the twin statements that we can compare. When the matter of oil prices came here in a report presented by the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, one of the issues that were identified was the gap in the transportation of fuel from Kenya to Uganda. And that Uganda was relying on a more expensive means of transporting oil products with fuel tanks on the roads. It was identified as a problem that was making impact.In the same report, it was identified that the railway transport would reduce this cost and it would even reduce further if a combination of rail and water was applied. In the two reports, if you compare the first and second one, you find that there is a comprehensive strategy to transport the oil products in our oil industry internally to Tanzania and also to bring it to Kampala. And this is lacking in the first report. May I seek clarification from the minister about what they are going to do in the medium-term to reduce the cost of transporting oil to this country, especially from Kenya.I represent a district with the most oil, Nwoya District. Tilenga Project is largely in Nwoya with the most productive wells and people have all sorts of questions. One of them is expectations that I would like the minister to clarify: Are we getting cheaper oil of our own than the one we are importing or what? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Geofrey Okello, you have referred to the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. One of the critical issues was about hoarding, which has a very negative impact on the prices. So, honourable minister, we would also like to know if you have handled the issue of hoarding. Where are these players? They keep the oil waiting, but they want a windfall, yet Ugandans suffer.  5.26MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the two statements. I would like to speak about three issues. Firstly, whereas we are meant to believe that Uganda operates a liberalised downstream petroleum market and that the forces of demand and supply determine our pump prices, I opine that it is actually not true. These companies operate what we would term as an oligopolistic market structure, where we have elements of collusion and price fixing - either by the biggest companies or collectively together as companies. This means that we are at the mercy of these companies.I would like to commend the honourable minister because in your statement you came up with a clear action and price stabilisation strategy that he is going to engage UNOC to participate in the purchase of oil products for us to stabilise the prices once in a while. My fears are like those of my colleagues. We pray that you come up with actionable timelines so that we can have that. Some of us believe that we should have had it yesterday. Without the engagement of Government, fuel prices in Uganda will always skyrocket and be out of control. You have our total support; we are looking forward to that.10794STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSNow, let me speak to the refinery project. Ugandans are yearning for the time when we will extract our oil and utilise it. You mentioned that we are waiting for the announcement of the bid winner after the expiry of the current contract. You also said that the current contract expired on 23 June 2023. My clarification is: When are you announcing the bid winner? Finally, my other issue is that whereas the pump prices mentioned are Shs 5,000 for diesel and Shs 5,400 for petrol, in the outskirts, especially for us who come from the hard-to-reach areas, the local population buys fuel at prices ranging from Shs 6,000 to Shs 8,000. How are you going to protect consumers in such areas? I thank you.5.29MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same spirit, I thank the minister for the wonderful report she has represented to this august House. Mr Speaker, I am a proud Ugandan. When I travelled to Saudi Arabia, the Arabs there told me one particular thing that made me love Uganda more. They said that Uganda is a rich country and that, in 1959, Uganda used to feed them - the Arabs. Mr Speaker, in that same spirit of the wealth that Uganda has, I would like to read to you a list of aircraft that we have in Uganda. Uganda Airlines has a fleet of six aircraft. UPDF has about 12 – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, what is the source of your information? MR KOMAKECH: The source is Wikipedia - but also this is public knowledge. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. You have now started listing classified information. You can submit without making Hon. Gen. Elwelu uncomfortable. (Laughter)MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, there are Ugandans who own private jets. The minister spoke ably about fuel prices, but forgot to mention jet oil prices. Currently, UPDF uses taxpayers’ money to purchase fuel for our jets. I am interested in knowing how much money, as a country, we spend on that. Are they not cheating the country in terms of the fuel prices for jets? I request, Mr Speaker, that if it pleases you, in the near future, the minister presents a statement on the prices of jet fuel to this House. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The General wants to clarify something; so, let us take advantage of it.5.32GEN. PETER ELWELU (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to talk about fuel prices. Whenever I watch the news, I see that the kings of the world mobilising for war, not peace, and this is not about to end. It is going to continue for some time, maybe up to when we end up burning this world. (Laughter) I want you to listen seriously because it is a serious matter. As national leaders, we must watch these events with a serious understanding. Mr Speaker, the prices of fuel may not come down very soon. In fact, time may come when we have the money, but cannot buy fuel because it will not be there. The moment the Persian Gulf – and other areas – are on fire, I do not think you will be able to see the fuel you are talking about. (Interjections)  Where will your Hoima go? First of all, the money you are using to try and get fuel out of Hoima is not your money; it is borrowed money. If the owner says, “We also have problems,” what are you going to say? I would like us to start thinking about – if for example, you do not know how to ride a bicycle, start learning how to ride a bicycle. [Mr Tusiime]10795THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023(Laughter)  This is not business as usual; this is a very different world. We are not in the 20th century –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, General, always look at me with kind eyes. (Laughter)GEN. ELWELU: I know. (Laughter)  We are in the 21st century and things are very different. As national leaders, we need to look at these things globally and be honest to ourselves, and our country. Otherwise, we are going to hang some of these colleagues of ours – the ministers – for no good reason. Some of these things are beyond their control. So, I wanted to give that clarification; things are not good and they are not about to improve. This world is about to burn. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the General has concluded as a General. (Laughter) He had to conclude in tongues so that we can go and think about it. What he has told us is really – if you watch global events – you notice that he has given a word of caution. As leaders, we have to see far. So, honourable minister, we shall wait for a signal to see far and we shall support you on where you are taking us. Hon. ‘Panadol’ why are you uncomfortable? In this House, we do not do this when we want to speak; you stand up. When you do this, it might be an abuse to the – (Laughter) – so, please, when you want to speak, you stand up.5.37MR JOHN NINKUSIIMA (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to stand up –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On standing up, you do not need my permission. (Laughter)MR NINKUSIIMA: Thank you. Madam Minister, thank you for the statement. However, when a consumer listens to your statement, they can easily think that the kind of life we are living in East Africa is almost the same because you compared petrol prices in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Yet, you did not compare the prices of other essential commodities – (Interjections)  - yes, it is important because fuel prices affect the prices of other commodities. It is important to compare both so that when we find a difference; we shall come up with a solution to enable our local people survive. As I speak now, we have Ugandans who cannot afford even a piece of soap. They can spend six months without washing clothes and dishes because they do not have money. We have such people in Uganda who are still suffering. They cannot afford the price of soap, sugar and other things. So, if we compare the prices of fuel with the prices of essential commodities, then we can see whether we are living a similar kind of life. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe macroeconomists like Hon. Max, I think the issue would be the contribution of escalating fuel prices to inflation. - No, honourable colleagues, let us continue. 5.39MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join honourable colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement presented. I support the creation of a monopoly for the Uganda National Oil Company. However, reading the statement, I want the minister to relate the two. This is because at first, the minister said Uganda is operating a liberalised economy, then later, she said we are creating a monopoly. Perhaps, she needs to explain to us further how the two work.Secondly, the minister is requesting for an amendment on the Petroleum Supply Act - I remember the last time we invited her to regulate the fuel prices, but she said that she had no power under the law.  So, can we now take advantage of this amendment to create a provision in the Petroleum Supply Act that will mandate either the minister or the authority, in certain circumstances - for instance, where there is hoarding, so that the minister can regulate the fuel prices.  10796STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSOtherwise, last time, she said she had no powers under the law. So, now that you intend to amend this particular Act, can’t we have that as part of the amendment, so that in future, if we experience such a thing as hoarding, the minister can intervene to regulate prices? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.41MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the minister for the two statements presented. I will reduce my submission to a statement on the oil and gas sector. Yesterday, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Youth Affairs held a successful Youth Business Summit that was presided over by the President. It was very clear, from that business forum, that the greatest contemporary challenge to young Ugandans now is unemployment, yet over the years, the oil and gas sector has been positioned as the sector that will save Ugandans from this disease of unemployment.Mr Speaker, I understand that we have a raft of plans for local content development and capacity building in the oil and gas sector to ensure Ugandans benefit. It is also very clear that local content in the oil and gas sector is fundamentally about building a sustainable future for our nation. My question to the minister is: Since we are talking about the status of the oil and gas sector, what is the status of the local content development and capacity building of Ugandans not only for lower-cadre jobs, but also the senior-cadre jobs in the oil and gas sector? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, try to summarise the issues because they are many. MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker . First of all, I would like to thank honourable colleagues, for their submissions. You have improved my statement. The first statement was on the rising prices of fuel in Uganda. Mr Speaker, I concentrated on the causes of the rising prices and what the Government is doing. The Government realised it does not have a law that will empower the minister or a government company to mitigate the problem. In summary, I am saying that the Bill I am bringing will amend the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003, which the Cabinet passed last Monday. Mr Speaker, I also raised a concern about timelines; that we shall be going for recess yet we have given a deadline of January 2024 to the Kenyan Government – because the President sent me to go and talk to H.E, Dr William Ruto about this new policy directive. We want UNOC to be able to nominate because beginning January, we will not be going through the Kenyan system of Government-to-Government (G2G), where they have committed us to take the products at whatever cost; we want to run away from that.Further, I plead that all the questions that have been raised regarding that amendment Bill, which I am bringing, be reserved and wait until the Bill is before Parliament for processing through first, second and third readings. So, I beg that I am saved from that because we do not have time -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the rules don’t even allow that.  Rule 80 does not allow us, honourable minister. MS NANKABIRWA: That leaves me with the second statement where Members are concerned about the shifting timeframes. They have said; “You talked about 2023 to see the first oil. Then you talked about May 2025 and now, you are talking about the end of 2025.” Mr Speaker, let us focus on the factors that make us give different timelines; there are anticipated factors. You are all aware of the bad campaign against fossil fuel development that has been going around in the world and we have been [Mr Mutembuli]10797THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023countering - and I am happy to note that the world is now calm and we are moving on with our development upstream, midstream and downstream. There are financing institutions that announced that they are not going to finance anything to do with fossil fuel development – yes, they are there. We had to move around to make sure that first of all, we tell the world that it is unfair and unjust to think that Uganda will move with the rest of the world on energy transition because we are not starting from the same point; we are starting from darkness while they are starting from this light. We do not even have the lights.  Therefore, telling Uganda not to develop petroleum resources is unjust and the world has heard that, and God is the fairest.The world is now suffering from the insecurity of gas - in America and Europe - and they have gone back to using coal - what audacity do you have to tell Uganda not to develop her petroleum resources? Those are the factors that have delayed us from announcing the Final Investment Decision. Therefore, we anticipate that if we get the FID announced for mid-stream, we will be able to fast-track these infrastructures. Then there is a colleague who asked a question about funding - and he was the first person to ask a question - Hon. Oseku; his question was pertinent. I would like to say that funding the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) has faced challenges because of the non-governmental and civil society organisations that have been de-campaigning the development. These are some of the factors that are making us shift the deadlines. However, as I speak now, Mr Speaker, upstream development is going on very well and I wouldn’t like my colleague to fear that because we have 457 wells to drill; only 11 - eight from Tilenga and three from Kingfisher – no, the drilling started this year and the good thing is that those who are in charge of drilling are shareholders with the Government. Those who are in charge of EACOP - we are also shareholders. So, we are in it together. And the financing is based on 60 to 40 - equity and debts; we can’t run away from debts. I promise that if we are to go by the current situation, we are sure that by 2025, the wells will have been reached, and there is no way you can pull out crude oil when there is no storage for it. The central processing facilities are within the developers. For example, Tilenga and Kingfisher have one each. They know that it is important to drill when you are ready. The primary processing will be done. Therefore, this is not about the neighbour helping you because you are the one in it. So, I am not scared, because I know that these developers will make sure that both programmes of central processing and the drilling itself are in tandem.What about the airport? I thank you, colleague, who raised the issue of the airport. It was an omission and it is important that the progress on the airport is brought out. This infrastructure is being developed by the Ministry of Works and Transport, and I have done a follow-up and I know that it is at 95 per cent complete. When you come down on the ground, you will be able to see it.Regarding e-mobility, you are right, Mr Speaker, to always remind us, in the ministry, that as we drill our petroleum, we are abreast with the fact that the world is moving towards e-mobility. We are aware that there are critical minerals, which facilitate e-mobility to make batteries, etc. That is why we have come up with laws to ban the exportation of unprocessed minerals.We have piloted on this; we have electric boda bodas . We also have a filling station in Busega in Kampala where these boda bodas  are filling from. We are planning on how we can help the refugees to also reduce on the boda bodas , which use diesel because refugees are in a 10798STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSqueer situation and diesel is sold in bottles. So, we want to see how the World Bank project can help us to do that.Nevertheless, we are trying to align ourselves with the e-mobility and you see what Kiira Motors has done. Therefore, soon, we will first enhance the policy so that people do not again suffer after the removal of boda bodas , which use fuel yet you are not ready with the e-mobility.I have tried to summarise, but I promise that where I have not given information like on the local content - it is a wide thing to share such information on how many Ugandans have got the jobs and how much we are expecting. I have written down all the questions. I will be able to pluck out where I have not given information so that I continue to interact with my people. I end by thanking you for the support, Mr Speaker, and may God bless you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, when you get ready, I think you need to go back and sit with your e-mobility team and come back to us to discuss it separately. The biggest issue with e-mobility is charging stations - let alone minerals and we should not reduce it to boda bodas.  What about private cars? I have heard Mercedes and Toyota companies saying that they will stop producing oil consumptive vehicles by 2030. I have read a very interesting report – but which means we should never be scared of oil for driving because it is a very small portion of oil. Oil is used to make very many other things and so, that is not a big issue. However, the issue is charging stations. I do not know what we can do about it when the world is about to stop producing vehicles that produce oil and gas. The penalties are very huge whereby car manufacturing companies will be thoroughly investigated by looking at their carbon footprint and most of it is on the vehicles they are producing. So, you need to ask your people on what they are doing about this. If you put up charging stations or if we could guide Ugandans - because in many countries, honourable minister, nearly every shopping mall has charging stations. As people are shopping, the car is charging for free. These are in all public places such as schools, churches etc. Additionally, even people’s homes, charging stations have been put up though people are scared of what the cost of a charging station would be - for how long can it charge? If I reach in Masaka or Mitooma for example, will I need to charge it again? So, you need to look at it deeply for us to address the issue of the low-hanging fruits in terms of e-mobility and then electric cars will start coming here. Honourable minister, I will give you space anytime you feel ready on that. Thank you. Colleagues, the next item we have on the Order Paper - I have discussed with Hon. Wanda Richard and there are some consultations we need to make on it; I am going to hold a meeting comprising the minister and the movers for us to first address a few things which came in today. After that we shall determine how to handle this petition later on.Honourable minister, I have forwarded that petition to you. I need some responses by Monday so that on Tuesday we can hold that critical meeting to address the salient issues before we move forward. Thank you. Let us move to item No.6.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ADOPT THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable commissioner, before you come in, I have received a notification from Hon. Christine that they have finished one report, which is ready.However, I made an announcement the other week. Honourable colleagues, the Constitution is very clear. We must adopt accountability [Ms Nankabirwa] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION10799THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023committee reports and Auditor-General’s reports within six months. We are already behind schedule and yet it is mandatory. We do not have to negotiate and we do not have room for flexibility. We have gone ahead. We sorted COSASE and all pending reports for PAC (Central Government) so that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is able to go and take action. Our partners are asking the finance ministry: “Why aren’t you      taking action on the Auditor-General’s reports?” The finance ministry cannot take action before Parliament adopts the reports, as per the law, and so, we are the ones being blamed. That is why in the 10th Parliament that practice started where we adopt the reports so that the finance ministry is able to go and process the Treasury Memoranda, which are action-taken reports. Now, I do not know about the report, which I have been told is ready because when a report is not yet with the Speaker, it cannot be presented.      Secondly, I do not know the recommendations in the report; it might be recommending that you remove me from my seat. So, I cannot preside over a report I have not read. (Laughter)  I can never. Honourable colleagues, if you have been watching me, you should have noticed that I come to Parliament usually around 11.00 a.m. or midday. The reason being that I stay somewhere to read. When I reach, I do not read - therefore, I cannot preside over the presentation of a document I have not read. I thank you. Hon. Christine, do you want to say something? 5.59MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your observation. I am aware that you gave guidance to all the accountability committees. As a member of one of the committees - and also having looked at the findings from both the committee meetings and the field; we feel it critical to present a few of these recommendations. I beg, on behalf of the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) that you give us just 10 minutes to make a summary of this report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me guide you: When a report is done, you submit it to the Clerk so that we first recognise it as a report that has been submitted by a committee. Then, I get a copy of that report and read through it. If there are issues, I guide you. However, for this one, the Clerk does not know about this report and so, there is no way I can accept a report on the Floor. By the way, committee chairpersons, if you did not know the powers of the Clerk - If the report is not done with the Clerk, that report can never come here; the rules are very clear. The Clerk does not know about it and so, I cannot start bringing items here and we go into a situation. Nonetheless, I am meeting all chairpersons of accountability committees on Tuesday to look through these issues that are done.I also guided that when you are processing the Auditor-General’s reports - I have heard about the field - I do not know what an accountability committee is doing in the field. That is for a sectoral committee because it has done oversight. An accountability committee does not go to the field because they are not auditors. When you receive the Auditor-General’s report, as an accountability committee, you should invite the accounting officer. After inviting the accounting officer, you look at the management letter, the exit meeting report, and you see whether the Auditor-General left out any critical issues. If you want to go and start a new audit - that is why you do not finish your reports; you are getting it wrong. You do not have that expertise and the time. That is why we have the Auditor-General. (Applause)  10800STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSHon. Nangoli has been guiding very well on this. Please, I will meet you and guide you. I have also told the Clerk to Parliament to get the audit book and ensure all Members receive its copies so that we know where we stop when we are handling reports of the Auditor-General. Otherwise, Parliament will never finish its work. It shall be here and there, and maybe even remain in-between. I had promised that I would guide you on how to handle treasury memoranda. Treasury memoranda are the final stage of the auditing cycle, according to the Audit Act. So, the moment it goes back to the Auditor-General, then you have to close the auditing.I think it was in the Ninth or 10th Parliament when Parliament was stuck because the Public Finance Management Act, was saying it goes to Parliament, but only the handling process. That is when Parliament said it should be brought to Parliament and then the Speaker can refer it to the Auditor-General.      When I was reading the law last night, I tried to look - when the law is not clear, you also go to the intention; you start going deep. I said, “Do you mean there is anyone who did law that reports that Auditor-General’s reports should be adopted within six months and then the accountability committee sits idle for another six months?” That is what it would mean. That is what is in the current law. I have, therefore, instructed the Clerk to assess it with our legal team and the Auditor-General, and see if the handling of the treasury memoranda would include returning it to the committee that made recommendations to see whether they were implemented.  Then, from there, after 30 days, it is sent to the Auditor-General to conclude the auditing cycle. Therefore, I will give concrete guidance on Tuesday because many Members are saying, “So for six months, are we going to be idle?” You cannot be idle because you have sectoral committees, but also as a committee, we need to look at your work. I want to consult widely so that we get very clear guidance. If it means amending the rules, we shall look into it. Nonetheless, on Tuesday, I will give full guidance. Thank you. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ADOPT THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 20226.05MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to adopt the recommendations contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ended 30 June 2022. This motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and it reads: “WHEREAS the Auditor-General is required by Article 163(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, and Section 13(1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, to audit and report on public accounts of Uganda and of all the public offices, including courts, Central Government, local government administration, universities, public institutions or any other public corporations or other bodies established by an Act of Parliament; AND WHEREAS the Auditor-General, in accordance with Article 163(4) of the Constitution and Section 19(3) of the National Audit Act, 2008 submitted to Parliament the report of the Financial Year 2021/2022 and the same was presented to Parliament on 19 January 2023; AWARE that Article 163(5) of the Constitution and Section 19(4) of the National Audit Act, 2008 requires Parliament to debate, consider the report of the Auditor-General and take appropriate action within six months after submission of the report; ACKNOWLEDGING the need to consider the reports of the Auditor-General within [The Deputy Speaker] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION10801THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023the prescribed time to ensure the timely preparation of the treasury memoranda and timely implementation of recommendations of Parliament;NOW, THEREFORE, Parliament, in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution and Section 19(4) of the National Audit Act, 2008, resolves to adopt the recommendations of the Auditor-General in respect to the following local government entities:   Entities under the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government)1. Mbale District Local Government;2. Mbale City;3. Namisindwa District Local Government;4. Manafwa District Local Government;5. Bulambuli District Local Government;6. Kibuku District Local Government;7. Tororo District Local Government;8. Sironko District Local Government;9. Budaka District Local Government;10. Busia District Local Government;11. Busia Municipal Council;12. Butaleja District Local Government;13. Kapchorwa District Local Government;14. Kapchorwa Municipal Council;15. Kween District Local Government;16. Tororo Municipal Council;17. Bukwo District Local Government;18. Pallisa District Local Government;19. Bududa District Local Government;20. Soroti District Local Government;21. Soroti City;22. Amolatar District Local Government;23. Kaberamaido District Local Government;24. Kalaki District Local Government;25. Serere District Local Government;26. Amuria District Local Government;27. Dokolo District Local Government;28. Bukedea District Local Government;29. Katakwi District Local Government;30. Kapelebyong District Local Government;31. Otuke District Local Government;32. Kumi Municipal Council;33. Kumi District Local Government;34. Ngora District Local Government;35. Nabilatuk District Local Government;36. Nakapiripirit District Local Government;37. Karenga District Local Government;38. Kotido District Local Government;39. Kotido Municipal Council;40. Amudat District Local Government;41. Kaabong District Local Government;42. Moroto District Local Government;43. Moroto Municipal Council;44. Abim District Local Government;45. Napak District Local Government;46. Kamuli District Local Government;47. Kamuli Municipal Council;48. Iganga District Local Government;49. Iganga Municipal Council;50. Jinja District Local Government;51. Jinja City;52. Northern Division, Jinja City;53. Southern Division, Jinja City;54. Kaliro District Local Government;55. Buyende District Local Government;56. Mayuge District Local Government;57. Bugiri District Local Government;58. Bugiri Municipal Council;59. Namayingo District Local Government;60. Namutumba District Local Government;61. Njeru Municipal Council;62. Lugazi Municipal Council;63. Luuka District Local Government;64. Bugweri District Local Government;65. Buikwe District Local Government;66. Mukono District Local Government;67. Mukono Municipal Council;68. Wakiso District Local Government;69. Nansana Municipal Council;70. Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council;71. Kira Municipal Council;72. Mpigi District Local Government;73. Nakaseke District Local Government;74. Luwero District Local Government;75. Mityana District Local Government;76. Mityana Municipal Council;77. Buvuma District Local Government;78. Entebbe Municipal Council;79. Butambala District Local Government;80. Kayunga District Local Government;81. Nakasongola District Local Government;82. Masaka District Local Government;83. Masaka City;84. Kimaanya-Kabonera City Division;85. Nyendo-Mukungwe City Division;86. Kalungu District Local Government;87. Gomba District Local Government;10802STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS88. Kassanda District Local Government;89. Lyantonde District Local Government;90. Kalangala District Local Government;91. Bukomansimbi District Local Government;92. Ssembabule District Local Government;93. Mubende District Local Government;94. Mubende Municipal Council;95. Rakai District Local Government;96. Lwengo District Local Government; and97. Kyotera District Local Government.”I beg to move, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, if you checked the Order Paper, you would notice that we are talking about the financial year ending “2023”, but it is 2022, for the record to be made clear.Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Aber, Hon. Mushemeza, Hon. Tusiime, Hon. Bahireira, Hon. Sekyanzi, Hon. Komakech, Hon. Okabe, Hon. Kutesa, Lt Col Alanyo, Hon. Zijjan, Hon. Wanda, Hon. Chemutai and Hon. Didi. Hon. Yovan Adriko is here. Welcome back. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, last week, Hon. Silwany presented the same motion. We have adopted two motions of this kind and the arguments are all the same - Hon. Kwizera, is there something you would like to say?6.12MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. This Parliament should promote good governance, where people do what they are supposed to do. So, failure to do something should attract some sanctions. Why would you be a chairperson or leader in a committee, and you do not comply with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure? It is not good to pass reports without some sanctions because we are going to have a culture where people will not do their work and we come and pass these things omnibus. There must be a reason for someone to receive reports and process them in six months, but you do not do the work. Therefore, for us to accept what the Commissioner is saying, he should qualify why we should pass them in an omnibus way. The law requires that these reports be processed in a committee, under Article 90 of the Constitution. Parliament works through the committees; are we not doing a disservice to some of these things?Mr Speaker, in good faith – okay, we are going to beat the law of within six months, but what are the reasons these people have not performed? I will oppose the motion, subject to being given a justification for us to pass these things omnibus because we are acting unconstitutionally. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues – Hon. Bataringaya, let me listen to you.6.14MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Once these accountability reports on the report of the Auditor-General are written - in technical language - some are “adverse”. This means that those entities have performed very poorly, especially in handling money. Therefore, when we pass them here omnibus without scrutinising them, it means we have said, “You misused the money; let us go.” There should be, as my colleague says, reasons to justify why the reports are kept, and we, who are on the accountability committees, will be judged as if we were non-performers. Therefore, we would like justification for this. Let us pass them, but with justification. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the justification is simple. If you want to be judged as non-performers, I can tell you that you are – no, as an accountability committee – because the law is very clear. Article 163(5) of the Constitution says, “Parliament shall…”  - Yes, “shall”. You know that if, as a committee, you fail on your work, we handle it in the plenary. [Mr Silwany] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION10803THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 OCTOBER 2023Otherwise, committees would hold – resolutions of committees are not resolutions of Parliament; they are proposals to the plenary. Resolutions are done by the plenary. - Please, Hon. Kwizera - resolutions are what we adopt here.Secondly, the reason behind that is that the Ministry of Finance is now able to go and take action; the thieves are still enjoying themselves - but once you adopt it here, they will now go and start taking action and report because the Treasury Memorandum is a report of action taken. Hon. Basil Bataringaya saying, “They will conclude that you stole. Therefore, we say that you go”. No! We have now said, “Go take action and report back within six months, as per the law.” Honourable colleagues, the other issue is that I am going to meet the committee chairpersons with the Leader of the Opposition, as agreed in our meeting today. They have to change the style of work; for example, you can do subcommittees. It is not a must that it is the chairperson to chair meetings. It being an accountability committee, someone said, “No, the law says that it is the Opposition alone to chair.”During Hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s time, Hon. Angura chaired more meetings and the work was good because these are clear issues of accountability. So, if we cannot trust each other, then we would be saying, “Since it is chaired by the National Resistance Movement (NRM), he will cover for them.” No, the majority of people who sign these reports are members of the NRM. Otherwise, they would sign reports against the decisions of the other people. Honourable colleagues, we have done two motions of this nature; they are not any different because the issues are the same. I now put the question that a motion for resolution of Parliament to adopt the recommendations contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ended 30 June 2022 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please bring the Treasury Memorandum. Thank you, Commissioner. You have done a great job. I will be giving more guidance on this matter because there are many issues I have seen. We are exposing Parliament to a lot of litigation; for example, holding press conferences when you are still investigating matters and you conclude at press conferences - you are giving very easy grounds for judicial review. After doing all that, you make recommendations, which are very weak. I then compare the recommendations to the torture and harassment you gave some people and I say, “They do not speak to each other.” Next item. PRESENTATION OF ACTION-TAKEN REPORT PURSUANT TO RULE 220 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDUREI) ON THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS OF THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND(NSSF) 6.19THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi)  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The parliamentary resolution had four components and actions. It had areas for the:1.  Inspector-General of Government (IGG);2.  Auditor-General;3.  Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP);4.  Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; and5.  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker, the IGG has released partial findings and requested that they be given time to undertake some of the parliamentary 10804STATEMENTS BY MINISTERSresolutions on lifestyle audit and other related aspects because they only handled two resolutions of Parliament. The Auditor-General has indicated to me that they have not yet concluded any of the resolutions of Parliament and their work is ongoing.The DPP has indicated to me that the matters that were referred to them by Parliament are still under investigation by the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID). The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has written and I am in receipt of their letter, asking NSSF to undertake the implementation of the issues under the ministry. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is coordinating the ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs), but most of the issues that were referred to my ministry were addressed in the IGG’s partial report. Due to the fact that the five actions taken are all incomplete, I request that you give me time to coordinate within a timeframe and undertake that all the MDAs are able to bring the action-taken reports in order to bring a comprehensive report. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister – Please, you are barking at the presiding officer. When you say, “Procedure, procedure, that is barking.” (Laughter) Honourable minister, next time, it would be better for such an update to be written. I was kind enough, but an update of that kind should have been written, so next time, ensure it is written. And of course, we have to handle issues comprehensively, but those to do with the DPP, we cannot direct them; under the Constitution, we do not have that power. Therefore, we will not wait for the issues to do with the DPP. Handle the other three and update the House. That is very critical; let us ensure that we conclude on that. [Ms Amongi]The House is adjourned to Tuesday, next week, at 2 o’clock. (The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 October 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)ACTION-TAKEN REPORT