Tuesday, 11 October 2005

(Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you and I have not been here for sometime.  But before I go to other details, all of us since last night, we heard the sad news of the demise of the former President of this country, the first executive President and the first executive Prime Minister and one of the first people who sat in this hall when it was opened in 1960s. 

I have now received official communication from Uganda People’s Congress where he has been a leader. The letter stated today, and I think I should read it to you though it is addressed to me: “Death announcement: It is with deep regret that Uganda People’s Congress wishes to inform you, and through you the Parliament of Uganda, of the untimely death of Dr Apolo Milton Obote, the President of UPC, former Member of LEGCO, (Legislative Council); former leader of opposition, that is prior to full independence; former Prime Minister; former President of the Republic of Uganda, which occurred in a South African hospital yesterday 10 October, 2005”. 

As you have heard, this is the official communication to me, but as I told you, the late Dr Obote was especially related to parliamentary democracy.  

On your behalf, I want to extend our deep condolences to the widow, immediate members of the family, Members of Uganda People’s Congress and all Ugandans for the loss of Dr Milton Obote, former President of Uganda. 

I know and believe that government will make an official statement on this affair. But as far as we are concerned, what we should do is to observe a minute of silence. Other details or arrangements when announced, I will again communicate to you, honourable members.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for what you have been able to accomplish for the last one and so weeks when I was away. I hope a lot has been done, not only in the plenary here, but also in the committees. 

I went to Italy because the Speaker of that Parliament invited me officially. You very well know that since 2002, this Parliament has received assistance in carrying out our work and the assistance has been managed by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA). This has been mainly with information systems in Parliament. A lot has been achieved and a lot more is being promised.  

We had a very cordial interaction with the Speaker, chairmen of committees, ministers and they were positive about Uganda, about the developments and they have further promised us to train our staff in view of the multi-party system, which we are going to start sometime in the future.  

At this occasion also, I was able to go to the Vatican and joined other Ugandans and I was able to have audience with His Holiness the Pope and briefed him about what is happening here. He thanked the churches for what they are doing here. I briefed him about Northern Uganda and sought his prayer and blessing for Uganda so that the future gets brighter. He promised that he was going to do that, and after that I returned. 

But, honourable members, I am not happy with what I have seen in the House. We have a very tight programme; we have a lot of responsibility not only to ourselves but also to the entire country, especially on this transition for a multi-party system with elections that have to take place sometime in March. It is true I thanked you for the cooperation and maturity in which we handled the constitutional amendments. But as you know, constitutions are not self-evolving; they have to be backed up by other laws. 

Currently, we have a number of laws to process. We would like to process these laws by the end of this month so that the country may know the laws under which we are going to conduct elections. So, I want to appeal to you, honourable members, to diligently handle our work here and be able to finish these bills, which are in the committees. 

I understand from the committee that soon we shall have the reports, which we shall work on basing on the bills. But I think within two weeks, if you can concentrate here - but currently, I do not understand and you are going to be questioned by your electorate. So please, be diligent, come here, and we expeditiously deal with these bills. After that, we shall wait for the elections in 2006. I thank you very much, honourable members.

3.00
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members of the House. I stand here to make a very brief statement about the death of the former President of Uganda, Apolo Milton Obote, who passed away. But a full statement by Government will be made later.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the Government of Uganda, the people of Uganda and the rest of the world received with shock and horror the news of the death of former President Obote. It was untimely in that a vast majority of us did not even know that the former President had been admitted to hospital. It came suddenly and shockingly. 

Sir, Government would like to extend its deepest condolences to Mrs Obote, his children, members of his family, the Lango Community from which former President Obote hailed and our colleagues, Members of Parliament from the Lango sub-region.  

We extend the same condolences to the party, which former President Obote fully participated in establishing and led, the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). We extend condolences to all Ugandans and all peoples of the world who care to receive those condolences.  

Mr Speaker, I am not going to make an elaborate statement, but I would like Members of this House, and the entire Ugandan community to know that the Government of Uganda is very concerned about this very sad event and it is for this reason, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that as we sit here and deliberate, the Government of Uganda, the Cabinet chaired by His Excellency, the President is meeting in order to address the issue of how the late President Obote will be accorded the final rites that are appropriate and deserving to him.  Therefore, it is after this meeting that the House will be briefed in detail. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY (Ms Sarah Kiyingi Kyama): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to present to this House the report of the parliamentary Select Committee on Pornography.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the select committee that you, honourable Speaker, appointed to look into the problem of pornography in this country, finished its report in March this year and we are happy to be given the opportunity to present our findings.

Mr Speaker, in the course of its work, the committee encountered a few dilemmas, which I want to bring out here before I present the actual report. 

First, the committee had a problem in defining the words “pornography” and “obscenity.” However, we were consoled by the fact that we were not alone in this dilemma. The committee learnt that worldwide, there is no agreed legal definition of what pornography is. 

This is more elaborated through the number of court cases mainly in the United States of America that the committee came across, which were decided by one court basing on a given definition, only to be overturned by a higher court ruling using a different definition. 

In fact, in her paper, “Research Thesis on the Limitations of the Law on Sexual Exposure in the Uganda Media,” Lillian Linda refers to one case Jacob Ellis v. Ohio (1964), in which Justice Brennan defined what is obscene or pornographic as “Material, which is utterly without redeeming social value,” while Justice Potter Steward said, “I cannot define pornography, but I know it when I see it.”  

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the committee did not engage in the unpacking of the various legal definitions on record because we considered that as not only diversionary but also an endless discussion. We, therefore, took the decision to use the definition in the Merriam Webster and the Oxford Advanced Learners dictionaries, which we have given in text box 2 of this report.  

Secondly, the committee had the dilemma of whether, in considering the seriousness of the matter we were handling, it would be good to attach evidence in form of newspaper cuttings, photographs and the like which would “make our case” against pornography. 

On the other hand, the evidence in this case is not ordinary evidence; in fact it is dangerous evidence. Therefore, we felt it unwise to flash it around in this House lest we became perpetrators of the problem that we were asked to investigate. Therefore, it was decided that in our report, we would describe as much as possible what we understood the pictures to mean and then indicate where that picture was got from, for verification purposes. Honourable members are advised to exercise caution in this verification exercise.  The committee will take no responsibility for any after-effects of viewing such “dangerous evidence.”

Finally, Mr Speaker, the committee is aware that its report is not exhaustive on this matter. We believe, however, that this report contains enough information to convince this House that pornography is indeed, as some people have called it, “the opium of the 21st Century,” and this country needs to do something about it. The committee is sure that this House, working together with other arms of the state and the entire people of Uganda will rise up to the challenge and we wish honourable members good deliberations.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I go to the report and I have had a few Members in the corridor have come to me and said, “Well, your report is too big.” So, I want to inform honourable members that the size of the report indicates the seriousness of the matter we are handling and I have tried as much as possible to summarize the issues that are contained in it. 

I will go, therefore, to the introduction of the report. Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the decision to appoint the committee on pornography was preceded by a presentation in Parliament by hon. Aanimu Angupale, Member of Parliament Arua District, on 5 May 2003 raising the issue of the Red Pepper tabloid and its danger to the public. 

Then on May 12th some civil society groups carried out a demonstration and presented a petition to the Speaker of parliament demanding an immediate ban on the Red Pepper tabloid and amendment of laws on obscenity to make it stronger. This was then followed by a motion by hon. Mbabazi Kabushenga in December 2003, which requested that Parliament should act to address the problem of Internet pornography. 

Therefore, the committee was appointed on January 21st 2004, and the 10 Members were given the following terms of reference: 

a)	To study the extent of the problem of pornography in the country and its negative consequences on the population.

b)	To study and evaluate the existing laws on the subject.

c)	To study the technology available for communication, management and control of pornography. 

d)	To examine the petition by the religious leaders and civil society handed to the Speaker of Parliament.

e)	To examine the issues of invasion of privacy of the dead by publication of their pictures in the press.

f)	To examine any other matter incidental and related thereto and to report back with recommendations.

This report summarises the findings and discussions of the select committee and draws conclusions and finally makes recommendations. 

Background:

Legal history: 

Ugandan’s law against traffic in obscene publications and related matters first existed as Section 161 of the Penal Code Act (Cap. 106). It was assented to in June 15 1950, before Uganda gained her independence. This means that concern over the issue of obscenity in Uganda dates back to at least the late 1940s during the British Colonial Government era.

During the same period, a move in the western world started by some elements in the academia was made to change traditional values about sexuality.  Pornography was one of the methods use. Anti-pornography laws received great emphasis in Britain and other western countries at that time and were also introduced in the colonies such as Uganda. If you look at text box 1, you will see the definition of pornography. 


Obscenity offences, as text box 1 shows, were at the time classified as misdemeanours i.e minor offences that usually attract lenient penalties.  The penalties were then prescribed as a fine of Shs 2,000 or imprisonment for 2 years. The fine of Shs 2,000, honourable members, may have been deterrent enough at that time because then, it was equivalent to about $400 but today, after almost 60 years, the amount is ridiculously insignificant.

During 1963/4 when many of the Ugandans laws were reviewed, Uganda’s first Parliament (1962-1966) retained the anti-obscenity clauses in the penal code. The first amendment came in 1976 and added clauses providing for trial of offenders within Uganda and destruction of any obscene exhibits involved in the offences.

I want us to move on to page 8.

Increase of obscene materials and behaviour in Uganda:

Before 1995, the problem of obscene publication consisted of a relatively small number of magazines stealthily imported by individuals from overseas and circulated from person to person. Police were on the lookout and apprehended anyone found with such magazine. In the mid 1990s, the era of globalisation, post-war Uganda started opening up more to western culture through among others the policies of liberalisation and privatisation.  Video rental businesses started in Kampala and some of these secretly supplied pornographic filMs  Hardly any action was taken to control the practice.

Around 1996, the first locally printed “soft pornography” magazines such as Check and Secrets appeared on the streets. Although they caused public alarm, they did not attract police restrain probably because of their soft pornographic approach.

Around May 1998, a wave of imported hardcore pornographic magazines such as Escort, Penthouse, Playboy etc started selling around Kampala taxi parks. Police intervened and the vendors were arrested and imprisoned.  

In 2000, another locally printed magazine called Thriller circulated for several months before Police intervened. The publisher later pleaded guilty and asked for pardon and pledged to abandon the business. 

A year later in September 2001, the Red Pepper tabloid started publication with more explicit pornographic content. Although Police intervened immediately and confiscated their computers and other production equipment, they were released on bail only to continue the same business.  

In November 2001, concerned members of the social society opened a criminal case against Red Pepper editor and his staff. This case was in court until around February 2004, when it was withdrawn by the DPP’s office. The public has been anxious to know the reasons for this withdraw and this investigation looked at the matter. Meanwhile, the Red Pepper continued to publish self-evident pornographic material. Other publications including Entango, the Mirror, Extreme etc have since come out with even more hardcore pornographic content.

Along with the above increase in obscene publication, similar developments have occurred in the entertainment industry. In 2001, erotic dancing was introduced by former Capital DJ Roger Mugisha a.k.a Shadow in various nightclubs and Kampala city. Because this illegal activity was not restrained by the Police in its early stages, it has spread all over the country and deteriorated into nude dancing (commonly known as ebimansulo), where young women remove all their clothes and allow male patrons to see and touch their private parts. Newspapers have also reported clubs where people play live sex on stage while other watch and cheer them on.  

There have also been reports that some video halls around the country show obscene filMs Some of the new television stations, especially East African Television, (Channel 5) and some of the DSTV channels broadcast programmes with varying degrees of pornographic and violent content. 

These activities have occurred despite the existence of Section 166 of the Penal Code, which makes such activities illegal. The committee therefore sought to know why, despite of the existing laws, the above activities have continued unabated. And this report, therefore, examined the issue of obscenity and pornography, its nature, background, the challenges involved and what the Parliament of Uganda and other stakeholders need to do to effectively respond to these challenges.

Mr Speaker, we went about our task through various means but we mainly included public hearings and research. The committee invited various stakeholders to appear and share information and views on the subject of pornography and the list is given on page 10 where we are dealing with the methodology, committee findings.

The definition of pornography.

The committee found that while the term obscenity and pornography were used in the current Ugandan laws, they were not specifically defined. The committee found this to be a weakness in the law; there is need for a definition that sets a standard of what is obscene or pornographic in Uganda.

However, the committee found that various dictionaries generally agree on the definition of pornography and obscenity and the online Webster and Oxford dictionary definitions are given in the text box 2, which honourable members can look at.  

Owing to the above definitions from the language experts, the committee observed that the words obscenity and pornography are so close in meaning that they can be used interchangeably. Basing on the above definitions, the committee concluded that pornography or obscenity is any matter that depicts or exhibits sexually explicit or implicit images or behaviour in any forum outside appropriate educational, medical, cultural or social counselling settings. Ugandan law considers pornography or obscenity to have the potential to corrupt public morals.

Mr Speaker, I want to move on to the petition/ the memorandum by civil society on page 13 of the report.  

The petition/memorandum by civil society:

On May 12 2003, a group of civil society organisations in Kampala made a demonstration that culminated in handing over a petition to the Speaker of Parliament. The petition raised concerns of escalating circulation of pornography in the media and entertainment sectors and demanded the following actions:

•	That the Red pepper tabloid and other entertainment businesses and groups dealing in pornography be banned and their licenses be withdrawn.
•	Regulatory bodies like Communications Commission, the Media and the Broadcasting Council should do their job more effectively.

•	The Police and other agencies should be more vigilant in law enforcement. 

•	The laws on pornography be amended to correct the errors that have allowed publications like the Red pepper to continue unabated and other obscene activities to escalate.  

•	The public should be sensitised about the dangers of pornography.  

The petition presented an in-depth study of the problem of pornography and gave concrete evidence to support their demands including evidence on how Ugandan individuals and families have been harmed by pornography and this full petition is attached as appendix number one.

The findings, conclusions and recommendations of this investigation generally addressed the concerns of these petitioners.  

I want to move to page 14, which talks about information and advise from the committee hearings.

The committee heard testimonies from 16 different groups including different government departments and civil society, and these testimonies varied according to the background of those appearing before the committee and I would like to highlight only a few of those just in order to save time.

We heard the organisation called Family Life Network appearing before the committee. It is a Ugandan NGO whose objectives include- this is on page 16 honourable members. Its objectives include among others restoration of family values and morals in society. Family Life Network (FLN) has done extensive research in the country on pornography and has run sensitisation seminars in secondary schools and youth meetings throughout the country.

According to FLN, pornography in Uganda is found in novels, videos, magazines, some newspapers, tabloids, the Internet, some music, FM radio programmes and television. Increasingly, live entertainment that depicts nude dancers dancing erotically as I have mentioned, the ebimansulo, are becoming a common occurrence.

The committee was availed with some audio and video recordings of some of the testimonies of people especially the youth who have confessed their consumption of pornography and its consequent negative effects on them.  

FLN provided the committee with audio and video recordings of some of these testimonies. Going through these testimonies, it became clear to the committee that pornography is already having a serious and harmful impact in Uganda and that some of its negative effects include addiction to the vice, rape, child molestation, abuse and disrespect towards women i.e. seeing them as mere objects of sex, premature sexual curiosity among young people or a desire to experiment with or act out what one has viewed in pornography, deviate sexual behaviour such as addiction to masturbation, homosexuality, lesbianism, bestiality and so on. And then inability to engage in intimate relationships thus sometimes leading to marriage breakdown, fear, guilt, shame and so on.

I will move on to the Red Pepper tabloid: It appears as (e), among the people that came to give evidence. The editor of the Red Pepper tabloid appeared before the committee with some of his staff to explain allegations that they were dealing in pornography. The editor provided a written statement on company headed paper, which he said he had chosen not to sign. 

In the statement, the editor said his paper started to carry out the functions of the press: that is to educate, inform and entertain and had assigned itself the additional role of fighting HIV/AIDS.  The paper mainly targeted the youth. The statement further said that, by publishing obscene photographs they are trying to deter those who engage in such acts and not to condone them.  Hence, as far as they are concerned, those who are calling for the ban just misunderstand them.  

Defining pornography, the editor said he had done in-depth research and established that it referred to, “Publishing material with the intent of arousing the sexual purulent appetite. It is usually acted and pictures posed for, the pictures are then accompanied with words which glorify the acts.” He said that when they present sex related material, they do not present it in a manner that glorifies it.

The committee challenged the editor and his staff with evidence of copies of the Red Pepper that indicated that they were contravening their own definition of pornography. We were in fact abating pornography and consequently the spread of HIV/AIDS. The editor defended himself claiming that the Ugandan law had no definition of what is obscene. Clearly, the Red Pepper and other promoters of pornography in Uganda are aware. They are taking full advantage of the loopholes in the law to continue their assault on the morality of the nation.

We also talked to Uganda Police, which appears as j) in this report. The Uganda Police appeared before the committee to clarify why there were no actions to control illegal circulation of pornography as required by the law, in Section 166 of the Penal Code. The Police said they had taken action several times but were frustrated by the DPP’s office. Obscenity cases are always withdrawn from court. The Police are, therefore, reluctant to take action unless they are sure the DPP’s office will prosecute the cases. 

The Police complained that the DPP’s office withdrew almost all obscenity cases without giving any explanation. The law on obscenity was generally inadequate and the penalties were not deterrent enough. When they arrested people, even if they went to court, they would just be fined Shs 2000 and get released. They go away to do the same thing again.

According to the members of the Media Council, who appeared before the committee, “while the press and journalists statute assigned the Media Council the function of censoring films, videotapes, plays and other media for public viewing, the powers of the Media Council in this area are vague.” This is a quote from a written submission to the committee by the Media Council. Members of the council were of the view that related to the problem is the need to define the values of Uganda. These values should constitute the common good that we should cherish and jealously protect. World globalisation has a positive side, such as providing a wider market for goods and services. It also has a negative side of which pornography is part. 

The Media Council noted that the Uganda Constitution already has provisions defining our common good. For example, the statement of National Objective, paragraph 19 is about protection of the family and paragraph 24 states the objective of protection of our cultural heritage. Therefore, it was further noted that while the Press and Journalists Act, 1995 has provisions, which prohibit publication of pornography, there is no definition given for the term pornography and what action to take to prohibit it. 

The Media Council’s failure to perform even within the existing law was blamed on the fact that since its establishment up to the time of the committee hearing, the council had never received funding from government to implement its functions. Hence, the council was using borrowed premises at Radio Uganda, lacked money to publicise its presence and role. It could not remunerate members of the disciplinary committee, to motivate them to meet regularly to deal with complaints against the media.  

The Media Council made the following recommendations on the way forward. I think I will skip that since there is a general conclusion on recommendations.

I will now move on to the Uganda Communications Commission.  The Uganda Communications Commission appeared before the committee to explain what the commission has done against numerous complaints that the Internet was a major source of pornography in Uganda and other matters related to the role of UCC. 

The committee was informed that the Uganda Communications Commission has among its functions, licensing and regulating of telephone and postal service providers, management and allocation of radio frequencies and setting up a tariff structure. 

Regarding pornography, UCC informed the committee that the main access channels for pornography include telephone lines, Internet, print media and television. Access via telephone and Internet can be either by public facilities such as Internet cafés, and telephone booths or private facilities such as home and office telephones and computers.

The committee was further informed that there are two ways a country connects to the Internet; through telephone providers and Internet Service Providers (ISP) who provide services to private users, public operators and organisations.

The committee heard that Internet pornography is mainly from foreign countries, particularly USA and Europe, which provide most of the Internet content.  Mobile telephones are also now capable of taking and sending photographs. In some countries, they are already transmitting pornography. 

The commission explained that its policy to encourage Internet expansion especially in upcountry areas was because it is a very useful resource. Therefore, in order to make it easier to join the industry, those entering the Internet café businesses are no longer required to apply for licensing and need not pay license fees.

The committee observed that due to this policy, the commission no longer keeps track of the number and location of Internet cafes. The committee was informed that no specific action has ever been taken by the commission to control pornography in the communication services.  

The committee observed that there is need to amend the Uganda Commissions Act, to include clear provisions empowering the commission to take action on pornography. A law should be made requiring filters to be installed at Internet service providers, institutions, organisations and café operators. 

The committee was further informed that filtering software can only control some of the pornography and has the disadvantage of withholding some unintended information. Filtering software also needs to be regularly updated, as the Internet is a rapidly developing technology. 

Regarding the control of obscenity on television, the committee was informed that UCC’s mandate goes as far as issuing of broadcasting frequencies and overseeing the infrastructure standards of operators. Content regulations are the role of the broadcasting council.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we now move on to the impact of pornography: Pornography has had very serious consequences on individuals, groups, families, communities and nations. Information available to the committee during the investigation showed that before 1900, pornography existed only in western countries. However, in the 1930-40s, efforts to commercialise it began. These efforts focused mainly on circumventing the anti-pornographic laws, which were in place at that time.

Mr Speaker, I want to move to where we cited some examples of the effects of pornography. One of them is rape crime, which increased since the late 1960s. According to the US Department of Justice statistics, on average a rape happens every two minutes in the United States. One in four women college students in the US is a victim of rape or attempted rape, according to a national study involving 32 college campuses, which was held in 1988. As a result, many western countries are spending money to manage the problem of rape.  

Numerous rape victim centres known as Sexual Assault Referral Centres have been set up in the US and Britain to counsel and treat victiMs Such centres usually employ full time staff including doctors, paediatricians, nurses, health advisors, counsellors and many others at a cost to the state. US behavioural scientists from even the liberal backgrounds have established a link between pornography and rape.  

The other effect is child sexual abuse rates, which have gone high. Writing about the US in their book on child sexual abuse in America where pornography is widely availed and claimed by some to be constitutionally protected, Speech Bas and Davis write: “One out of three girls and one out of seven boys are sexually abused by the time they reach the age of 18” and Curtis also notes that Incest between an adult and a related child or adolescent is now recognised as the most prevalent form of child sexual abuse and as one with great potential for damage to the child.”

Owing to the above link between pornography and sexual assault, the high rate of child sexual abuse may strongly be linked to prevalence of inciting sexual images sold to the public. Besides, modern pornography openly promotes all kinds of deviate and criminal practices such as rape and incest as we have already mentioned.

The pornographers reap huge profits from their trade but the negative and dangerous consequences of pornography are borne by the rape and abuse victims, the state and civil society who have to raise resources to manage the consequences of this pornography. 

Pornography is a contributing factor also to family breakdown and progressive addiction and capital criminality is another consequence. Clinical research has shown that pornography is highly addictive and may cause a number of addicts to progress to highly criminal behaviour. Dr Cline Victor, a clinical psychologist at the university of Yutan and a specialist in the area of sexual addictions has observed the four-step syndromes common to almost all of his clients, who have been involved with pornography as indicated in text box No. 5.

The problem of serial kidnapping, rape and murder of victims is common in America, Britain, Belgium and other western countries where pornography has been allowed to circulate freely. In one such case in the US, a man who had kidnapped, raped and murdered over 28 women in the 1970s confessed to have been influenced by pornography early in life. 

Shortly before his execution in 1989, Mr Teddy Bandy decided to tell the story behind his criminal behaviour, blaming it largely on the influence of pornography. As you can see, the story is given in text box No. 6.  Part of that says that Teddy Bandy told one counsellor, “As a young boy of 12 or 13, I encountered outside the home in the local grocery and drug stores soft-core pornography. Young boys explored the sideways and by ways of their neighbourhoods and in our neighbourhood, people would dump the garbage. From time to time, we would come across books of a harder and more graphic nature. This also included detectives and magazines.”

I want to emphasise that the most damaging kind of pornography is that involving violence and sexual violence. The combination of those two forces brings about behaviour that is too terrible to describe. He said, “Before we go any further, it is important to me that people believe what I am saying. I am not blaming pornography. I am not saying it caused me to go out and do certain things. I take full responsibility for all the things that I have done. 

That is not the question here. The issue is how this kind of literature contributed and helped mould and shape my violent behaviour. In the beginning, it fuels this kind of thought process. Then, at a certain time, it is instrumental in crystallising it, making it into something that is almost a separate entity inside.” This is somebody who engaged in pornography and what he saw as the effect of that pornography on his life.

The other consequence of pornography is the financial costs to the taxpayer. On Friday, 28 May 2004, the British Government announced plans to use satellite technology and lie detectors to keep track of sexual offenders released from prison.  British Home Secretary, David Blanket, said the new technology would keep an eye on prisoners released on license and offenders given community sentences. Satellite would be used to track known sexual offenders and set off an alarm at the police station whenever such an offender comes within certain distance of schools or other centres housing children and youth. If you look at the text box No. 7, you will get the details.

Experts commenting on the satellite system noted that it would be extremely expensive to install and administer, and its effectiveness in controlling sex crime was doubted. This shows how people with corrupted sexual psyches can pose danger to the nation. Experts interviewed by Sky News reporters noted that such drastic measures were necessary because people with corrupted sexual psyches have no medical remedy and will pose a constant danger to society all their life. This should act as a warning to nations not to allow proven corrupting influences like pornography to circulate in the population, whether some people want it or not.  

From the above evidence, the committee concluded that sex information is different from other types of information and needs to be managed with care.  The committee concluded that sex information of pornographic nature poses a serious and costly mental health risk on those exposed to it.  Individuals whose mental faulty has been substantially corrupted by exposure to pornography pose a lifetime threat to others, including not only vulnerable groups like children and women, but also families, communities and even entire nations.

Evidence shows that pornography is harmful not only to children but also to adults who may be influenced to engage in criminal behaviour or behaviour that may lead to breakdown of families and all exposure to STDs including HIV/AIDS. The costs of managing the problem of sexual perverts at the individual, community and national levels are far beyond what a developing country like Uganda can afford.

Mr Speaker, I move to the problem of pornography in Uganda: As already noted in the introduction, Uganda has over the last 15 years witnessed a steady growth in pornography. The rate of this growth is reaching alarming proportions. For example, within six months from January to June 2004, when we were doing our research investigation, three new mass circulating and locally printed pornographic publications were introduced.  

Compared to what is happening in western countries pornography in Uganda is still a budding problem threatening to explode in full-grown industry. The only restraining factors used to be the provisions of the law against pornography, which worked during the early stages to restrain the then less powerful street vendors of western pornographic magazines. These laws are now incapable of restraining those who are financially capable to challenge the weak legislative provisions in courts of law. The main pornography threat at the moment seems to be through Uganda’s print media, TVs, imported videos, music and private radios. 

Recently launched pornographic papers have become dailies within a short span of three years and video businesses are extending to rural areas.  Those trying to sell pornography in Uganda have adopted tactics that exploit weaknesses in the law.  For instance, pornography in Uganda is disguised as news. The several tabloids that have sprung up in Uganda recently with pornographic content have adopted tact of disguising pornography as news. In this tact, the papers report what they allege to be genuine local stories but spice them with pornographic pictures. Some of these pictures are collected from the local concerts where illegal pornographic dances contravening section 166.1 of the Penal Code Act may have taken place.  

Instead of submitting evidence of such illegal activities to the police so that the event organisers can be held responsible, the newspapers or tabloids flash the pictures on the cover pages to generate higher sales from the nudity. Although only a small number of people may have paid to attend such concerts, the morally corrupting pictures are unjustifiably projected to the entire public by the papers.  

The committee believes that this is abuse of the constitutional principle of freedom of the press.  The Uganda Constitution opens with a statement of National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, which tie enjoyment of rights to observing social responsibility. You can see that in Article one of the Constitution, which I hope was not changed during the amendment.   

Pornography is sold alongside other regular news in Uganda thus making it an inseparable part of the regular media.  For example, a political front-page story in the Red Pepper of July 2004 has a pornographic story alongside. Bukedde of Monday 6 September 2004 has on page 12 of its senga insert, obscene news in pictures and adjacent page 13 is a story about Kabaka Mutebi’s mother celebrating 100 years. Therefore, by all means, if you want to read about Kabaka Mutebi’s mother celebrating 100 years, you will most likely read the obscene senga page.

The above is a dangerous association of news and pornography. In such a case, the public is being instrumentally conditioned to associate news with pornography. With time, this will force most publications to adopt sexually explicit content in order to sell as has already happened since the coming of the Red Pepper tabloid. The law must, therefore, control this practice.

The third method is stage-managed pictures. The petition submitted to Parliament by the civil society raised the issue of stage-managed pictures.  The Red Pepper was accused of staging fake pornographic scenes, which they photograph and publish as true stories of events in our communities. A closer study by the committee shows that evidence exists that many alleged sexual events in the community are actually fake stories that are stage-managed and photographed. 

A case example is the Red Pepper issue of 1-7 March 2002, which features a naked woman bathing on the verandah of a house and the same woman squatting naked on an alleged pit latrine. As it was observed in the petition to the Speaker on 12 May 2003, the woman would have run away after the photographer had flashed. The photographer’s flash went off as she bathed at night. For the same woman to be shown in another photograph on an alleged pit latrine gives evidence of likely collision between the photographer and the woman. Both photographs carefully conceal the woman’s identity.  

Those are the kind of photographs the Red Pepper claims expose immoral behaviour in our communities.  The committee is of the view that the Red Pepper is the source of such pictures and, therefore, a promoter of immoral behaviour. The same evidence is manifest on the back page of the Red Pepper of 19-25 July 2002, the front page of Red Pepper 28 March to 3 April 2003, the front page of the Red Pepper of 14-20 2003 and so many other issues of the same tabloid. The new law should ensure that this practice constitutes a serious offence, which attracts deterrent penalties.

Pornography is also disguised as sex education.  In many of the pornographic tabloids being sold in Uganda today, pornography is disguised as sex education. This usually involves literature illustrated with inciting drawings of people engaged in all kinds of sexual intercourse. There is little doubt that this kind of inflaming literature and pictures is causing many adults, youth and children to engage in or try out some of the things portrayed in ways that are not safe, which may lead to the increase of HIV/AIDS or teenage pregnancy. This information is indiscriminately sent out to the public. This practice needs to be checked by appropriate provisions in the law on how sex related education should be transmitted in the right way that promotes public health and safety.

Another method is circulated soft pornographic pictures. As seen in the statement by behaviour scientists, which we gave on page 33, even pictures of clothed women in provocative poses have the same harmful effect as pictures that are more explicit. During the committee hearings, the publishers of New Vision newspapers told the committee that the pictures used by Bukedde newspaper in their senga column, of scantly dressed women in provocative poses, were not pornographic.  However, that view of the publishers is overruled by the findings of behavioural scientists who warn that even such pictures are not safe. The press must, therefore, stop producing and publishing pictures like the ones in Bukedde of Monday, 9 August 2004 on page 1.

Uganda’s pornographic publications instruct their staff to write inflammatory literature designed to incite readers into sexual activity. The literature also glorifies or makes heroes out of characters who engage in all kinds of sexual immorality or sexual crime including rape, defilement and adultery. 

For example, the Red Pepper runs such literature in columns like Live Snakes, which they illustrate with pornographic cartoons. The columns have variously been called Mr Hyena, Sex Confidential, Vicky’s Sex Diary and many others.  The column continuously changes names but put out the same graphic content. The Mirror runs similar literature in the Pillow Chat columns and other pages. Worse still, the stories in those columns are fiction compositions, which present promiscuous characters.

Therefore, some of the proprietors and their editors seem to have an agenda of shaping and modelling public sexual behaviour by promoting licentiousness. Even when the editors add a few comments on negative consequences of such behaviour, they surely know that the readers are primarily hooked on the graphic literature, pictures and cartoons, which help to sell their papers.

The other method is Internet pornography.  Internet pornography is currently a major problem in many urban areas, schools, institutions of learning and work places. The Internet is an increasingly accessible facility in Uganda. Public access to the Internet is mainly through the Internet cafes widely available in urban areas, but individuals also have access via telephone lines into residences and work places. Rural access centres are also being set up. 

Many schools and institutions have installed or are in the process of installing Internet access. Many organisations have obtained Internet access for their staff.  There is evidence to show that Internet pornography is accessed in schools, institutions, Internet cafes and work places.  It is also being downloaded and reprinted in local pornographic papers. This is one of the most harmful types of pornography. Some of it advocates all kinds of sexual immorality, like homosexuality, incest, bisexuality, rape, child sexual abuse and bestiality.

Another way is deliberate locally generated pornographic pictures. Some local photographers and publications like Entango go around asking unsuspecting and uninformed individuals, especially women or prostitutes to pose for pornographic photographs, which they later publish and sell or show to the public at a fee. Entango publishers have notoriously continued to publish such pictures with impunity in their centre pages. If this practice is not stopped as soon as possible, it may get totally out of control when more people get involved in the trade.

The other method is nude erotic dancing in bars, which is commonly known as ebimansulo. This practice has spread all over the country and has been difficult to eradicate. The Police have on several occasions arrested some of the participants in these shows, but have been frustrated by the inadequacy of the law and the absence of the deterrent punishments.

There is pornography on television. Some television stations are using sexually explicit videos. This practice has become common on East African Television, but also sometimes on WBS Television.  

Video and cinema also have pornography. Imported pornographic videos are a major way the public is exposed to this vice. Private video rentals usually secretly supply pornographic tapes to their customers. Video access has become widespread through the proliferation of makeshift commercial video theatres, which are also mushrooming in rural areas.  

As we consider pornography in Uganda, we want to look at real life stories of the impact of pornography in Uganda. Evidence from agencies working in communities around the country shows that pornography has had serious consequences on many individuals, groups and families. 

The following examples in text box No.9 of the impact of pornography in Uganda were raised in the petition of civil society organisations to Parliament. For the sake of concealing identity, there is a person given as Mary, which is not her real name and she says: “I feel like forcing my brother into sin”. Mary is a secondary school student in Kabale. She wrote to Family Life Network after reading a booklet warning about the dangers of pornography, which was distributed by Family Life Network.  

In her letter, she thanks Family Life Network for exposing the dangers of pornography and confessed that she has been reading pornographic magazines for some time. She adds that whenever she reads pornographic magazines, she feels like forcing her older brother at home to have sex with her and so she needs help on how she can break the habit.

Shamim, also not her real name, her brother raped her after watching pornography. In one of the Family Life Network seminars held at Seeta near Kampala, a female teacher from a girls’ school confessed that Family Life Network warning about the dangers of pornography is indeed true. She said she knew a S.4 girl who returned home and found that her parents were away. Her brother was not feeling well and in bed and asked her to bring the family video-set to his room, after which she went out to do other work. Her brother then loaded pornographic movies and watched for some time. He was so charged that he called his sister to his room. Not knowing what was going on, Shamim went to her brother’s room to answer the call.  Her brother pounced on her and raped her.  She got pregnant out of this act and sat S.4 final exams under the stress of incestuous pregnancy. 

Jessica, a mother commits incest with her son, family breaks apart. Jessica is a mother of four children and used to live in Kampala. Her eldest son is a teenager aged 16. Jessica has been addicted to pornography since she traveled to some western countries where porn magazines were widely available. She usually bought and brought home copies of such magazines, but kept her addiction a secret from her husband. Under the influence of the magazines some of which teach mothers how to have incestuous sex with their own children, Jessica lured her 16 year old son into her bedroom one day and had sex with him. The boy was shocked and confused, as the act seemed to involve a cocktail of feelings of shame on one hand and excitement on the other. The mother continued to treat his son nicely and to lead him into more sex. It turned into a habit. One day her husband returned home unexpectedly and found his wife having sex with her son. A family crisis that followed caused Jessica to run away to London, leaving her husband and children behind. 

Samuel, a student, undresses women in his mind, including his mother. He needs help. Samuel is a senior six student at a school near Kampala. He wrote to Family Life Network recently following a seminar at their school that discussed sexuality.  In the letter, Samuel confesses that he has been reading pornography on the Internet and in magazines for some time and it has brought so much trouble and pain to his life. “Every time I look at a girl or a woman, my mind turns to sex. I literally undress every woman I see in my mind.  The most painful part of this is that recently, I undressed my own mother in my mind.” Samuel’s letter says in part. This young man wrote because he is so stuck in this behaviour pattern that his once excellent academic performance has declined considerably and he knows pornography is responsible. He asked for help from Family Life Network because he had tried many times to change but had failed.

The Red Pepper case: Youth use Red Pepper to obtain sexual satisfaction. In one of the several cases involving the effect of this three-year-old tabloid newspaper, one girl attending a youth conference at Didi’s World told a story of a boy in her neighborhood who recently came to her home wanting to convince her to have sex. In order to lower her defence and put her in the mood for sex, the young man gave her a copy of the Red Pepper tabloid and said he would check on her later in the evening. Fortunately, this girl had recently attended a seminar where she learnt about the dangers of pornography and refused to take the copy of the Red Pepper.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think what you are trying to do is to give us evidence and effect. Don’t you think that evidence is there? Now, what we need is the remedy so that you go to what we should do because I think you have made up a case that this is a real problem. You have given us instances and now how do we cure them since we are set to cure the problem? How do we handle it?

MS KIYINGI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I was reading these things was because I realised there are some people who were not given the copies of the report in time. But I will go on as you have asked. I was reading these just to make people know that there is a danger of pornography in this country and we need to do something about it. Are you of the view that I should go to the conclusions?

THE SPEAKER: It is your report, but I thought you had given sufficient evidence to show that this is a problem. Now that it is a problem, how do we handle it? I think you deal with the recommendations of what Parliament should do to solve the problem.

MS KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Mr Sebuliba rose_)

MR SEBULIBA: I would suggest that the Chairperson starts from Page 79; that is on the impact of pornography in Uganda and then goes on to the recommendations. I think that can also give us an idea so we can have our free time later to go back to where we have missed out. It is page 79, “Impact of pornography in Uganda,” after which you go to the recommendations.

MS KIYINGI: Okay, I am sorry because I was reading from the summarized version but now I have found my real page 79.  

The impact of pornography in Uganda:
The committee came to the following conclusions on the impact of pornography in Uganda:
•	The prevalence rate of HIV in Uganda steadily decreased between the years 1991 to 2001 from 30 per cent to six percent respectively. Since then the rate had, at least by the time of writing this report, stagnated at six per cent for four years. The committee believes that it may not be mere coincidence that this is the same period that pornography has also flourished in this country.

•	The committee has also concluded that pornography in Uganda has had a lot of negative impact. Examples of this are well documented by Family Life Network (FLN), some of which I have read, which has conducted seminars on pornography in several schools in Uganda and beyond. Such effects include:
-	Sex crime increase
-	Sibling incest
-	Parent-to-child sexual abuse
-	Poor school performance
-	Premarital sexual activity
-	Deviant sexual behaviour

•	The addiction effect of pornography from shock to tolerance and to desire has meant that pornography has increased on Ugandan streets and it sells faster. For example, when the Red Pepper was first published in 2001, Ugandans were shocked by its images and those who bought it did so secretly. Today, not only do vendors flash it out to buyers like any other paper, but also people read and discuss it openly, even in this House. 

This is also true of other pornographic papers. It gives the impression that our society has reached the tolerance stage of addiction where pornography is viewed as any other literature. The other effect of this addiction is that the porn industry is growing and unless it is curbed, it is fast getting to the point where, like in western society, it will gain the financial capability to influence policies and politics.

A partial ban on pornography is ill-informed, ineffective and counter-productive:

The policy of regulating pornography so that it is accessible in certain places or sold to so-called “adults only” as it is being suggested by some people, is not only ineffective but it is also based on misunderstanding or deliberate denial of the harm caused by pornography on all people irrespective of age. The effects of pornography extend far beyond its primary consumer to affect innocent children, women, families and the society in general through sexual crimes like rape, defilement and murder.

Weaknesses in the law in Uganda:

Many laws relevant to pornography need to be reviewed to specifically address this problem.  These include, the Press and Journalist Act (1995), the Penal Code Act, the Electronic Media Act and the Uganda Communications Act (1997). Because laws on pornography are scattered in many statutes, their implementation is somewhat problematic. 

Mr Speaker, you may have heard that the committee was also of the view that we need to change the law so that we specifically indicate that freedom of press does not necessary mean freedom to publish pornographic material. That was the amendment that we were trying to bring out in this House during the Constitution amendment and review process. 

Inadequate facilitation of watchdog bodies:

Some of the statutory bodies responsible for the regulation and discipline of media, entertainment and communication companies are not adequately facilitated to carry out their functions. For instance, the Media Council informed the committee, as I have already said, that since their establishment, they had never received government financial facilitation. As a result the council did not know for instance the number or locations of video halls in this country.  

Internet Pornography:

Judging from the discussions the committee had with the Internet Service Providers (ISPs), it was observed that pornography is a highly lucrative commercial enterprise. The Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) has no record of the number of Internet cafes in the country and their locations. Monitoring to ensure compliance would require that such a record be made.  

Dissemination of pornography in Uganda:

During its investigations the committee identified groups and organizations dealing in hardcore and soft-core pornography as follows:

•	Hardcore pornography includes publications such as the Red Pepper, Entango, the Mirror, Extreme et cetera. Some television stations such as the East Africa Television, some DSTV programmes such as the Jerry Springer Show, Ebimansulo shows as those performed by Amanda Angles, Amarula Family Actors and so on are all cases of pornography. The Internet, some video halls and video libraries, supermarkets like Shell Select in Entebbe, Embassy Supermarket on Gaba Road are displaying and selling imported pornographic magazines like Playboy. 
•	Then there is soft-core pornography. Publications such as Bukedde and Orumuri newspapers are in this category.
•	Music such as Mic ya ziggy D; Egaali ekozeeko and the like are all pornographic things. It is just called soft-core, but it is pornography.

I will move on to the recommendations. In view - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, as you can hear from the background the hon. Minister Francis Babu thinks that Playboy is a very good magazine. You can see what we are talking about.

Recommendations:

In view of the findings of this inquiry about pornography globally and in Uganda, the following recommendations were made to guide the course of action of all stakeholders.

Policy recommendations on pornography: 

Uganda should resist ideologies that promote pornography. Owing to the experience of the western society where false ideologies about individual rights have added to deliberate misinformation by interest groups to promote and protect pornography, the governments and the general public in Uganda, Africa and other parts of the world should actively and democratically resist the spread of porn-friendly ideas, which are often disguised as truth. 

Zero–tolerance to pornography: the policy of zero tolerance aims at correcting errors seen in other countries where laws and policies and their enforcement by public and legal institutions reflect double standards that have allowed pornography to thrive alongside anti-obscenity laws. Zero-tolerance means that all public, policy, legal, economic, political constitutional and organizational loopholes that would open a window for pornography must be plugged.

Ban on organizations dealing in pornography: in view of the cited national objectives, which pornography violates (see conclusion No. 2 on page 71) and Article 99 of the Constitution, which charges - well the previous Constitution, I do not know whether it is still the same. The Constitution charges the President to protect the welfare of the citizens. The committee is of the view that the Government should issue a directive banning pornography in all its forms in Uganda. Organizations, publications or any other actors whatsoever that persist in dealing in pornography should have their operating licences withdrawn. 

Prevention policy: the policy of prevention aims at putting in place deterrent measures so that those who would venture to deal in pornography find it extremely expensive and detrimental to their social, economic and political standing. This includes deterrent civil and criminal penalties against individuals and companies convicted of trafficking in pornography. It also involves instituting boarder controls at not only the physical port facilities like airports and board-posts, but also on electronic entry points like the Internet and cable television. Internet service providers should be required by law to install pornography filters. Companies dealing in cable televisions like Multi Choice must be obliged to keep our television channels from broadcasting pornography material. 

This also includes licensing controls in which licensing authorities in relevant sectors like the media and entertainment set a written code of conduct on pornography for licences with penalties that include revoking of licences. Such written codes should indicate the violations that would lead to withdrawal of a licence and allow for the public to raise complaints.

Education and sensitization: the public is largely ignorant of the nature and effects of pornography. The Government should facilitate, financially or otherwise, programmes aimed at educating and sensitizing the public about the nature and dangers and prevention of pornography and rehabilitation of those affected by it. This involves working in collaboration with civil society organizations and other personnel with relevant experience and expertise. Appropriate educational material will also need to be developed for inclusion in the school curriculum. 

HIV/AIDS Control: because pornography influences sexual behaviour, the main channel for HIV infection, HIV/AIDS control programmes should include awareness about pornography and its dangers.  

Rehabilitation of people affected by pornography: pornography is proven to have devastating effects on individuals, families and communities. Those who have been affected by pornography in the past need urgent attention through counselling, treatment, education and other appropriate means.

Eradication of existing pornography: there is need to collect and destroy the pornographic materials that have gone out to the public.  

International collaboration: with the growth of globalization and technologies like the Internet and cable television, pornography is a problem that spans national borders. No single country can act alone to control it. There is need for Uganda to reach out to other nations and share concerns about pornography so as to work out joint (bilateral/multilateral) strategies to address it. 

Constitution amendment: there is need for a constitution amendment to make it clear that the right of free speech, press and expression excludes pornographic content or behaviour.

Enact a law on pornography: there is need for a substantive law on pornography, covering all aspects including the Internet, effective controls, and penalties. 

Implementing agency: there is need for an independent agency set up under the same principles as those of the Uganda AIDS Commission, which should be charged with the implementation and coordination of all the actions proposed in this policy. 

We need to strengthen statutory bodies as we have already mentioned. 

We need also to deal with Internet pornography: all ISPs in Uganda should, therefore, be required by law to install highly effective pornography filters. 

Legislative recommendations on pornography:

Constitution amendment: there is need to introduce a specific law on pornography. We have said that we need to define what “pornography” and “obscenity” are in a manner relevant to the Ugandan context. Prohibit pornography in all its forms and establish a watchdog institution responsible for monitoring and enforcement of regulations. 

Also, monitor the ever-changing technology through which pornography is transmitted and develop appropriate responses to such developments. We need to set tough penalties for those who break the law, we need to redefine the role of the public in the fight against pornography and we need to create opportunities for the sensitization of the public especially the youth on the dangers of pornography.  

We need to learn lessons in drafting law and administration of justice and we need to amend the existing laws. This is all part of the legislative recommendations.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is the end of the report of the Select Committee on Pornography for your consideration and adoption. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members for this report.

MS KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, there are some documents, which I have to lay on the Table, which were part of this report but are not given there. They were documents that needed to be laid on the Table and I will do that with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I want to thank you for this well documented report. It is even something, which can be used by students as a point of reference. We thank you very much with your committee for the report. (Applause)

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the chairperson has laid some documents on the Table. Could we know what documents they are? She should name them.

THE SPEAKER: Let her tell us. Maybe you need time to organize yourself from that, then we can make contributions to your –(Interruption)

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I have listened very carefully and I am not a supporter of pornography but I think that there were a lot of hypotheses in this beautiful report and a lot of assumptions. I want to be very careful that some of the assumptions that have been taken in here have empirical evidence. 

We have to be very careful because while a lot of this has been typed pornography, I want to also state very clearly that a lot of things that have been done, which are extremely dangerous, have been also associated to drugs. Drugs have been taken and then somebody has tied pornography with these unfortunate acts. It is, therefore, very important and I request the committee that while the studies have been carried out by few people here and there, and those who are extreme in terms of pornography, we also have to be very careful.  

There are countries all over the world that have also studied these cases. We are not inventing the wheel. These countries like Canada, the United States, Britain and many others like the Far East, whose cultures are also different from ours - if you take the Yale ceremony in Swaziland, for example, when the king is picking up one of the ladies to become his wife, if somebody was to sit here and define it according to this very right wing report, as far as I am concerned that would be described as pornography. If you looked at some of our tribes in this country that are dressed in a particular way and use this report as a framework, that could also be described as pornography.  Therefore, I suggest very strongly that while we are trying to be holier than thou, we should also try to be very careful that we do not describe our own people as being pornographic. 

A few minutes ago, somebody described Ssenga, the process of our own people, as pornography and I do not want to go on this microphone and say it. If you are not very careful and if you go to the details of Ssenga and her advice to some of our children, that could also be described as pornography. So, if you go on and on and bring some of these things that we do have in our own cultures and if we are not very careful and went by this framework, we could end up describing some of these things as being pornographic. 

I want us to be very careful as much as I do not agree with pornographic pictures on some of our tabloids, but we have to now redefine our own cultures. I was a little bit disappointed when they quoted some people and then they put some of our sick people in society who do certain things as evidence of pornography. How do you describe a person who goes and rapes a goat in this particular case, who has never seen a blue movie, for example? How do you describe a paedophile, a man who commits incest with his daughter in the village, yet has never seen Internet? Are these people really being influenced by pornography, or are they sick? We will need more details on this.  

You cannot therefore go and get all our media and describe them as being pornographic without imperative proof. You have to really come up with - and I am being very sincere because we are talking about an industry. I do agree that some of the pictures that are put in some of these magazines are offensive to us and I would like to, therefore, request that we look at these as individuals but be very careful how we describe some of our cultural norMs

I want also to be very careful with the Internet. Although you can put a filter on the servers, there are people who can get direct Internet. How are you going to do that? Even our bodies do not have the ability to do so. 
 
Secondly, although some of our radios have got extremes, I suggest we be careful in making our laws. If you ban video recordings today, they will go underground and when they go underground they will cost this country more money. 

I want to name countries, and this is not because I am a minister, which have banned drinking, they have banned these magazines, they have banned all these things and you still find these items in those countries costing even more. But the countries that have let them free and put their established norms actually control them even better. I suggest that we do more studies. I find this report too right winged. It is just saying no, and not a flexible report. 

I would like to contend that the worst crimes caused in this country are because of taking drugs and I would like some people to look at it from that point of view much more than saying that because somebody saw the Red Pepper, therefore, they went and did something immoral. A lot of our young people today are on drugs and are doing very atrocious things. There are people who are raping goats and they are in villages. They are not even in town where there is Internet. 

Some of the people who are raping, these paedophile, the juveniles and the small kids are in areas where they do not have these services -(Interjections)- all I am trying to say is that while I thank the committee for this wonderful report, I do not think it is exhaustive. I think there is more to this report and we need to study it a little bit more. While I agree that our Constitution should try and put their limitations on some of the rights that we do have and freedoms in this country, I would like to suggest that we should study it a little bit more because pornography is a very serious matter. 

Somebody was talking about homosexuality here today that the gay movement in the world today is so powerful and that they have even got studies to prove that people are born gay, that they do not develop to become gay. I am just giving you an example that is being studied by doctors.  

Another point is that there are studies now in the international academia that show that addiction to sex is a sickness. It is not brought about by pornography. People are sick; they need to be treated like somebody who has got an addiction to drinking. I would like more studies done before we take this hypothesis that this has occurred because of pornography.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, as we go on, the people who assume these materials are among us should look at ways to improve our morals and attitudes. How do you describe a young lady who puts on a mini skirt, and a transparent blouse and walks through town? Is that pornography or a form of dressing? If we keep on describing these things, we might reach a ridiculous end whereby we might start describing some of the people’s dressing codes as a form of pornography. 

I think we better be careful when we are describing pornography. I am happy that this professor said that, “I do not think we have a good definition of pornography but when I see it, I know what it is”, and I think a woman who is badly dressed in front of a man is also some form of pornography -(Mr Mao rose_)- I would like to take the information.  

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, it would not be good for this House not to invite the honourable minister to talk about these ideological frames he is talking about. He mentioned the phrase “this very right wing report” and I think we cannot allow the honourable minister to gloss over that. I would like him to tell us what he means by that. It is true that there are world views that contend in the world today. We are not trying to set up ourselves as a moral police but I think we are determining what is right and what is wrong. We are determining what is acceptable and what is unacceptable. It does not matter even if there is only one person opposing pornography in this world, pornography would still be wrong. So, to come to this House and say the gay people are so powerful, let them be powerful.  Otherwise we are importing this laissez faire attitude. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that the first time Uganda was seriously debated in the Swedish Parliament was when our President was saying there should be some changes in our visa policy to keep out the homosexuals and then the Swedish Parliament, which had never talked about war, poverty and so on, all of a sudden had a very lively debate. By giving room to pornography we are inviting these elements that are going to make this cultural practice acceptable. Pornography is a culture but should we accept it? 

I would like to invite the honourable minister to clarify these ideological frames because our beliefs can be based on our culture. I think when the missionaries came they found our women moving bare-breasted. It was not considered pornography and it is still not pornography. Some of our dances are sexually very suggestive but it is a dance and we cannot say that is pornography. I think the report has been clear by saying to publish and put it for public consumption and to ravel in it is pornography. We are trying to protect our young people, so I would like to –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: There was a study carried out in certain secondary schools. Mr Speaker, it was discovered that during the holiday times the Red Pepper sells more and then the sales drop when the students go back to their institutions, which shows that it has got a real effect on our young people. This is the information I wanted to give.

MR MAO: Let me end by saying that the honourable minister should be informed that there are moral standards for all societies even in the Stone Age when there was no writing and no Internet. I am sure there are moral standards of what is accepted and what is not accepted and we cannot stand here in Parliament and start saying pornography depends; it cannot depend on anything. There have got to be some absolute definitions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the honourable member for his information. In fact he did a beautiful job for me. He was describing our own dances; he loves them when he watches them because there are erotic according to this definition. They are pornographic. In fact the very dancing in the Arab world is pornographic and if you continue like that, this is exactly what I was saying, what are the limits? When I said right away - I said you do not have to be so hard, you have got to be able to define this pornography so that certain things can also be described. You cannot sit there and just think that anything that is sexually arousing is pornographic.

Therefore, as I finish –(Interjection)- I have been asked a question and I want to answer it – (Interruption)

MS KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I am saying this under such restraint and may God help me because I do not know whether the honourable minister read this report. But even if he had not, the reason I stood here and read as much as I did was because I felt that it is important that some people follow the logic of this report. Even the bit I remember that I read - pornography in one of the sections that I read on page 48, I said, “Pornography can be disguised as sex education.”  

In the last line of that sub-section I said, “This practice needs to be checked by appropriate provisions in the law on how sex-related education should be transmitted in the right fora and in ways that promote public health, safety and cultural dances.” There is nowhere in this report that we have said that the definition of pornography should include cultural things and we have said we should look at things in relation to the culture and in relation to all the aspects that have to be considered.  

So is the honourable minister in order and I am glad – anyway I will leave that one out but is he in order to give the impression to this House and to this nation that the committee is suggesting that anything that has something to do with sex should be considered as pornography whereas this report has no such thing and is a clear report as some members have said?

THE SPEAKER: I think really what you can see is the interpretation. We are going to have different interpretations of this report. That was his personal interpretation, there is no way I can rule him out of order for having interpreted the way he has, but just listen to him and then see whether it is a fair interpretation or not.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact the person who brought the dance was the honourable member who gave me information and talked about our local dances and what happens when we dance them. Actually he was very graphic when he described the sexual sort of impulse you get when you watch some of our dances. So I thought I would bring it and say, yes, whilst I agree and let me say this: I am trying to be fair, I do not support a lot of things that the report has talked about but we have to be careful. Because if we make laws that are going to impact on our own cultures tomorrow, our own things, for example, my brother comes from Gulu –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, don’t you think culture can be modified?

CAPT. BABU: Yes, it can be modified but it can be modified naturally and not by law. It is something that you cultivate with time like the Dingi-Dingi dance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, by law even the Constitution itself outlaws certain culture. There are cultures, which were there and when the Constitution was made but it says these are no longer acceptable or repugnant, I think you can –(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: But how about if those cultures are good why should we get rid of them?

THE SPEAKER: If they are good of course you do not but –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to inform the minister that culture is dynamic and that therefore if some cultures are deemed to be repugnant to natural justice then we can no longer accept them. I will give you an example: when you look at the issue of female genital mutilation this one issue, which is cultural and which currently clearly is against human rights because it tortures these young people or some old ones who may chose to undertake it. Some die in the process.  

There are also other cultures like wife inheritance in instances where the brothers of their deceased husbands inherit women by force. When we have HIV/AIDS we definitely have to look at this as well as a women’s freedom of consent to marry. So, I would like to inform the honourable minister that much as he in his view may think that some cultures need to be retained –(Interjection)– may I please continue talking and be protected? I think it is unparliamentary for the minister to act as he is acting, I thought he would maybe act more ethically since we are talking about moral issues. 

In conclusion, I would like to say that we cannot hold on to those cultures, which are definitely against moral turpitude and therefore whatever he is saying would not really go down on record as being valid. I thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, one thing I do not like is to be intimidated when I am making my points especially by my honourable lady –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Order!

THE SPEAKER: No, there is no question of intimidation; it is the way of putting points at home. I think you should accept that people have different ways of expressing themselves.  

MS NAMAGGWA: I would like to appreciate the report, which was given by the chairperson for the select committee. I think it was a very good report, a very good paper for government to use in terms of improving what is happening in Uganda. I see there are very few ministers if at all any full minister, around. In fact there is no full minister here. There are only two ministers of state who are around and none is a Minister for Information. So I would like to request procedurally the minister who has been agitating against the report to take this as a paper for the Cabinet to use so that they can come up with a good policy.

I do not know how to say it, it is you wasting our time and can’t he accept this report and take it to government for study so that our children can be guided? Because we cannot talk about foreign culture, which is going to influence us like bringing up the example in Swaziland, the dance in Swaziland, should we adopt that? I would like the few ministers who are here not even to debate this report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do not worry about ministers. They are Members of Parliament making their contributions but what you should appreciate honourable member is that this Order Paper is to present a report; the motion would be to present the report and adopt when there is such a motion or subject on the Order Paper, we could reject the report. Therefore, any member is entitled to make his assessment. You listen to it and then afterwards we vote on it. So, there is nothing wrong with anybody coming and criticising the report or presenting the report and we adopt it.  When there is such a motion or subject on the Order Paper, we could reject the report. These are the rights of any member of this House.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you. Because of the importance of this topic and because of the impact it has caused to our children, we need government to be represented in this House, not Members of Parliament. Could we have the Government side so that we can take this as a document for government to use as a basis for its policy?

THE SPEAKER: You see there is a minister, first of all there is the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs. So this report is made to us. It is for us to debate and when we adopt it, the Executive may adopt it to see what laws to bring and not to bring. So I do not see why really – and I think that the honourable member should finalise his contribution so that we can get other contributions from members.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I want to assist the minister. Many of my colleagues are not getting the minister right. The minister is only saying, let us be careful in approaching the subject; let us not be puritanical in the approach. If you read Church history people were burnt at stakes for minor things. I read a book by Bernard about St Joan of Arc for my A’ Level at Kings College Buddo, if you considered that play and why that girl was burnt just because she was wearing a man’s dress as one of the reasons! This is the restraint the minister is trying to tell the House and the country that in approaching this subject let us do it with a lot of care. He is not condoning pornography. He is only saying there are certain aspects, which need further study and further clarification. I do not see why my colleagues are jumping up and condemning the minister wholesale. I do not support that. Thank you. 

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are honourable members here who think that we have to be so pure and we do not have to tell the country exactly the problems we face. This is a very difficult topic. It is a topic that has given a lot of countries before us a lot of probleMs I am saying and I repeat: whilst culture is dynamic, there are certain things that are also coming out of this dynamism that are affecting our people. For example, recently it has been found that bras cause breast cancer; some people in the West say that bras cause breast cancer and they have studied it. Who knew because of dynamism everybody wears bras.  

The next thing I am going to say here is that whilst some of the things we have agreed on - and a very good example was brought of mutilating women and so on and so forth - I did not hear her talk about circumcision, which a lot of countries now have adopted. There are certain things that I would like to agree with and certain things that I do not agree with. 

So my caution and I still repeat this, whilst a lot of examples have been quoted in here and even theories, I am saying, let us go carefully. There might be certain things we are saying here and laws that we want to pass that might actually not be the reasons why we are going to stop pornography. We, therefore, have to make laws in our own being mindful of even other countries that have had this.

Lastly, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that I am a Member of Parliament. I represent Kampala Central and I wanted also to say that this report is not a government report. It is of a committee of Parliament and I have a right to comment on it. The position I am giving is my position as a Member of Parliament for Kampala Central, not of government. Government, after hearing this report, will come with their position and when they do at that time I will take collective responsibility and I will go with that.

But at the same time let me end by sounding a caution. There is a lot of erroneous information here and this information -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No I think hon. Babu, I think you put your point. You put your point; it is others to assess.

4.48
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and especially the chairperson for the good representation of this report. I really want to thank the committee for the good work that they have done, they have done research, they have talked to individuals who are personally affected, to groups, to a cross section of people in this country and when they bring this report to us it is a report that is representing the problem that they have discovered around.

One thing that quite often amazes me is that in this country we tend to appreciate and get excited and moved by cultures of other countries. When pornography comes here, the attitude we get is that it is development. It is from America or Britain, from the developed world, therefore, very good and we need to take it on. We put down what we should be proud of as a country as Uganda. 

We have our own cultures in this country, which cultures are very good and very dear to us. But we have these, which are imported and possibly the ones, which we are calling pornography. Nakedness is natural. For example, you can be naked in your bathroom or in your bedroom. But if you get naked on a stage then it becomes different and these are the things we are talking about. When are these things done and where are they done?  

Some of these books and nude pictures, there was a room and a place that they would put them in and they say, “Those who would like to look at them, please go to this place. They are there.” Then possibly that is different but when they are just spread on the street! Mr Speaker, I am concerned about our children whom we are exposing to these naked things and to whom we are exposing this literature.   

I am a teacher by profession and before I came to Parliament we would see children whenever they would see Orumuri with this part of the Shwenkazi, which would be Ssenga in the Bukedde, you would find a group of children gathered around this. Of course they do not have so much money so each one does not buy their own and there is only one and you find this little group of children reading and laughing and giggling and you know this is a problem. So, Mr Speaker, pornography is a problem and we really need to have medicine for it. Pornography is addictive, extremely addictive. At one time just reading a little about pornography would be exciting enough. At another time you need to look at some pictures, but sometimes you need to look at hardcore pictures before you get aroused. It has become a problem, it has affected families and homes, but much more it has affected these children.  

They start enjoying these things at an early age; later in life they may find it difficult to even enjoy sex. We need to really get these things off the street. If we are saying they are okay, they are wanted somewhere, then we need to come up with a different strategy. I really feel disappointed that these children get accessed to these bad things. 

What hurts me also is that from this report all the weaknesses and legislative cases in court, it is the Government side that tends to be weak. It should be government saying, “Oh, no, no, these things should not go on.”  But it is government, which withdraws cases. It is government, which does not seem to mind even when people are on the streets matching against pornography.  

MRS MATEMBE: Actually the information I would like to give hon. Mehangye and the House is that I am extremely happy to hear her talk like that. Finally she has noticed that the Government, which we have continued to tell to pass the necessary laws, to do the right things, is the one, which is weak, and therefore, betraying us with the people who want the right things to be done. Thank God that you have seen it.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for having allowed me. The member who has just given us information was the Minister of Ethics and Integrity in this government for a long time and while she was there I never heard her move any single day a motion in Cabinet on this issue. Thank you.

MRS MATEMBE: No, no. Mr Speaker, I am standing here to correct the record. I think even the whole world and Uganda in particular knows how much the Minister for Ethics and Integrity fought pornography, closed the bimansulo, did all she could, and even bringing information into the House. In fact I want to tell you that one day the Attorney-General had to write to me to warn me that if I do not stop my view in fighting these things, I may cause government loss of money through damages. So be informed very well and put the record correct.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not contradict ourselves. Because if you meant this, he said when you were a minister you closed this, then there was an action by the Executive. So the Government was doing something but the question of withdrawing cases, I think that was his point. There is a case of professionalism. The Executive or ministers do not withdraw cases; professionals must withdraw cases because when they start the case and find that because of the law we have currently, they can. So there are differences. Continue.

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to say that staged pornography pictures are part of poverty. These young girls who stage these pictures are given money. I understand they get paid. It is lack of employment, it is poverty, which is rampant and therefore when government is addressing this issue, they need also to see how to give these girls alternative employment and alternative ways of earning money. If they are earning money out of giving out these pictures (the ones they sell) when we are talking about stopping it we need to give them an alternative source income and see how they can survive.

Then lastly, I would like to say, as a government, which has done well in fighting AIDS, Uganda has been applauded, and the head of the state, President Museveni, has been applauded for fighting AIDS. For anything that we think may reduce our achievement in fighting AIDS then this nation should take it seriously because I think this pornography does. 

For example, one of the things pornography has promoted is the use of drugs. Some young people we have talked to - I do work with some NGOs and we work with young people – some of the young people we have talked to have told us that when they feel shy and want to go out and look at these pictures, they take drugs so that they become bold and go in for these things. So actually drugs and pornography tend to go together. They tend to supplement and support each other so we need to really come out with a way of doing things.

Then this pornography in the bars, the kimansulo, we also need to have a law, if it is not in place, at what age should children be allowed to go to bars? You go to Kabalagala and you will find all children from 10 years of age going out to night clubs. They go out to these overnight dances, which is where they get some of these probleMs So I would like to support the recommendations of the committee in the immediate, in the short-term before the legislation is done, there should be a government statement really restraining some of these pornographic materials on the street. Then there should be legislation, which should be coming to this House so that eventually there should be a constitution amendment to include things that we would support removing and reducing these pornographic tendencies. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: A number of local authorities under the Local Government Act have powers to make regulations or laws to operate within their territory, but apparently I think these local authorities are either not aware or they are not invoking these provisions. The local authority taking care of Kabalagala is free to make regulations affecting bars about people of a given age, or the time of opening bars. They should say, “You should close at this time.” These are laws that can be made and they are enabling laws that can be used. But apparently we need to sensitise our local authorities about their powers under the existing law. And of course we can make other laws to strengthen what is there.

5.02
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of this committee and her committee for a very elaborate and also very educative report. I see in this report a very desperate attempt to save the children of this country and to save this nation. The children of this country are plagued for a number of hostile factors; they are short of food; they live in very poor health conditions and they are also in an environment most of the time, which is socially unacceptable, and pornography is one of those key evils.  

I want to agree with the committee that the consequences of exposing these young people and generally the society to pornographic material are very dangerous. They have been pointed out as ranging from rape to all sorts of moral degeneration. Therefore, for us to come here, if any of us dare do so, to try to think that the evils of pornography are such a simple thing, I think is at best either pretence or a show of ignorance because the report has been very educative. If anyone of us did not know what happens when people are exposed to pornographic stuff, at least the report has tried to educate us.  

I will also say it would be pretence because, Mr Speaker, some of us have been victims of being bombarded by pornographic material right on our parliamentary e-mail addresses. You get pornographic stuff; every time you open your parliamentary e-mail address you get it right there. So, what we are talking about is not a problem in the streets, it is right here with us and somehow it has to be checked. I want, therefore, to support the committee’s recommendations particularly the question of a strong legal framework that provides for very punitive measures to all those who peddle pornographic material.  

I say this with pain because when I wake up in the morning and walk to this building hoping to open my official parliamentary e-mail, which has been made public - it is on our website, anybody can access it – and then the next thing I find is nude people having sex. I say it with a lot of pain, and I think there has to be a very strong legal regime to protect those of us who do not ordinarily wish to go and look at this stuff. If at my age I am complaining, what would happen to young children who are exposed to this type of material day in and day out? The question of a strong and punitive legal framework would address this question of conditioning us, whether you wish to look at it or you do not wish to consume pornography; it would be easily addressed.  

I will give you an example. Apart from forcing such mail onto unwilling consumers, these days if you listen to some adverts – really it is supposed to be a genuine advert promoting maybe a perfume or a Vaseline, but all the stuff, all the words that go with it, the concoction of the advert to say the least is very pornographic. And you ask yourself, what type of conditioning are we going through?

The community is being made to believe that these are normal things; they are not normal! What explains the behaviour of American children who wake up in the morning and they are shooting everybody? I think it is because they went so liberal; they did not think so much about the morals, the consequences of stooping so low thinking that - for instance I know someone will say, “You and the Bible” – thinking that you can chase the Bible out of school, everything that is Godly and you think man on his own can exist without any form of direction? 

You have this one child walking to school with a gun - you know the gun culture has hit them so badly; the children are killing themselves; there is a lot of rape; there is a lot of incest; there is a lot of bestiality going around all over the community. If we do not put our heads together and our feet down as leaders in this nation, we are all being conditioned to believe that pornography is the normal thing and that it is not dangerous.

The question of institutional building, the committee has pointed out that the Police arrests these people. Apart from a weak legal framework, there is also the question of these institutions.  I read it over and over again, today it is Amanda’s angels – I think they are called “angels or dancers” – today they are arrested – there was a time I think even hon. Otto participated in rounding them up at one point. They are arrested this morning, tomorrow morning they are free and back to the streets. It is known, Mr Speaker, where these businesses of people dancing naked take place. 

You walk into the streets – yesterday I was driving through Mbuya and somewhere in some shop hang a kind of a poster saying, “The next show, a blue movie” – you know! It is something that is happening all round us and if we do not work towards strengthening the institutions first by giving them that legal regime that allows them to do it and then also strengthening them to be able to fight these injustices in our society then we will not be honest about our fight on pornography.

I, therefore, want to conclude by saying I am very supportive of the committee’s recommendations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.10
MR REX AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the select committee for the report. The report according to my observation is true of what an average Ugandan should be thinking of. 

I would like to agree with the committee that as Ugandans and as Africans it is not wise for us to kill our race by photocopying and duplicating what the rest of the world is doing to our end. I think pornography in this aspect and in simple words to me means reducing the moral definition of sexual relationship to lower than or to the least of what nature intended it to be. 

When the chairperson of the committee was reading the report that pornography now exists here in Uganda and in Kampala clubs stage live sex, Mr Speaker, this is beyond the limit that we can afford as legislators and leaders of this country. When she read her report and said that some of the publishers of these pornographic materials have aims and objectives, which they forward as ways of exposing what happens in society; that is to me not very clear. What you see in some of these publications it is not really intended to show what is happening but in one way it is intended to promote the behaviour than really showing the negative part of it. 

In other words, it portrays how best the publishers would like to sell their information. That is what exactly the chairperson was saying; you would be reading about AAchilla in the Red Pepper but nearby they there is a naked woman. How do you relate the two? Does it mean what I was addressing was sexually related to that? So, this is what we really want to correct. 

When you look at this pornography, it is associated with prostitution. It is a channel of promoting prostitution such that when we promote this conception of material on pornography we also in a way enhance or allow prostitution to occur. In the past it was very clear that among the Africans sex was respected; sex was seen as a channel of procreation and not anything that goes to abuse the nature of sex, or to disorganise it in the face of showing a woman who is naked, not even the least can we say. 

Among my ancestors, the Karimojong, who up to now you can go in certain societies and find women putting on an apron, but you can call it a big slit. You cannot go to that society and touch a private part of a woman. Or, can you see a naked man in a kraal and you go and touch the private part of that man, or the manhood of that fellow?  You will be seen, first of all, as a wizard and therefore you must be killed there and then. So, there are moral standards for every society that even the most primitive as my honourable friend Mao said, in the Stone Age time I do not think the Africans really just survived like animals.  

Mr Speaker, if we allow this kind of exposure, whether through the Internet, print media or radio or television, or anything that can give us this information, to what extent can you see an African race compared to? When you have stage-managed sex, how will that society be different from domestic animals because it is only domestic animals, which do not see that their sex is pornographic? 

When you go to the class of apes and you find human being doing even what chimpanzees cannot do; if you brought a chimpanzee to this House, it can never have sex until it goes to a suitable environment but when you see human beings staging it there and they are civilized we say it is a modern society. Is it modern for us to have sex just carelessly like that? It is against nature! So, should we say because that is happening in the world, therefore, we should leave society to define itself without any guidance? This gives you the spirit to support the committee for that fact.  

The impact of this has been exposed by the report when they say every two minutes in America there is rape and that is a modern society. What about now when you expose this to Nagongera; you expose it to Kabong, or you take it in a village in Kabale? Will you allow this material to go to our people who do not know even the difference between modernity and the challenges to it, or the difficulties of it? How will we have our society reputable in the state of human development if we expose all these things and allow our society to consume material, which cannot cope up with the present time? I think we shall destine our society to the end of history and we shall come to the end of the African race. 

It is, of course, wise when you look at it from a point of developed countries. For example in the United States in every family there is a TV and you can likewise pace the information through the same media and inform those people that that is bad or such kind of practice promotes the transmission of AIDS. But in a place like Kotido there are very few TVs, somebody comes to watch a TV in a house of an hon. Member of Parliament where there is pornographic material played; when they go back what they take to the village is that it is normal in town to see people having sex. So, no wonder you will find that even among society like that one, insecurity will be promoted. From the perspective of insecurity allowing some of these materials to go wild without control is socially insecure and economically very unfriendly. 

Mr Speaker, with these remarks I would like to support the committee and I thank them for their report. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and for setting up this select committee so that we can deal with this virus, which is eating up our society like cancer.  

I would like to agree with my colleagues that pornography has become a very serious disease and it is affecting all sectors of our society particularly the youth. Because of the poverty situation in the country, there are people who have taken up pornography as an alternative to generating income and I think this is really very serious.  

I have people in my district that I have been fighting. There is a woman who came from Kampala and set up a drinking place named Kanyogoga. She has employed every young beautiful girl there and girls who have no means for income actually compete to go there and men go and buy these girls from her.  

Another example is a place set up by somebody, called Libasi Bara. Libasi Bara is a term in Arabic meaning “pants off”. There are young girls and women who stay there naked. People just go there to either watch them naked or have sex with them.  

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague. Hon. Eriyo puts out a very serious and a very disturbing scenario of somebody who is literally trafficking children and parading them out for prostitution. I would like to know from hon. Eriyo how far her efforts to intervene in this scenario went because it will be very helpful to us if maybe the Police can intervene or have they intervened? If they have not, I think this is a case, which we should take very seriously.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Further to that, it is not only happening there but if you have read on the electricity poles in Kampala today almost on every other electricity pole there is a poster asking, “Are you single, call telephone number this and that. Do you want a lover for pleasure? Call number this and that.” The incentive is trafficking them for the sex trade and being actresses in pornographically materials. 

Before we put the whole burden on hon. Eriyo, we have to pose the question: if we have a government that is saying we should abstain for survival but for every abstinence message there are 100 messages saying, “Come make quick money”, then our government has got to ensure that we care for our people and that we can stop this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, there was only one problem but I had received invitation from some of these people sometime and they had directed the petition to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I think they were also making their case, they did and I do not know how far the committee went with this particular case. They wrote, they gave me the address - these people who advertise on electric poles.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, the committee had actually made a report and I think maybe the current committee could take it up but if need be, we are still available and we are in position to work with the committee so that the report can be tabled. We had interviewed several people and they are available so it could be one of the recommendations that we can take on.

THE SPEAKER: Finish your information.

REV. KABUSHENGA: I was finishing my information by saying that we need to support the point raised by hon. Eriyo by saying our government must investigate who is luring girls regardless of age into activities that are against our national objectives.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, hon. Eriyo. Uganda is also a signatory to the international convention, which is against trafficking and some of us are privately working on the anti human trafficking law. I hope there is some other effort, which the committee maybe could look at, or this Parliament, because indeed we have very many cases. And if you can remember there were early cases of 1990 where women used to go to Dubai. In fact when you go to Dubai one of the experiences you have as an African woman, they ask, “Ugandan, Ugandan?” and you know it is a problem.  

So apart from house girls, people who come to work, others who are lured are told there are great things here and what hon. Eriyo is saying, this problem is real and we need to address it sooner than later.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for the information. In answer to hon. Alaso’s question, I intervened by visiting the authorities and talking to them and even raising it in a public gathering and even going to the Police and these people were suspended for a period of time. 

When I went there later last month I was told they started it again but whenever they see me in the district they close up that place and, therefore, I think there is a loophole either with the Police or the local authorities because I remember somebody telling me that she had raised it before the District Education Officer and some district authorities just brushed her off and said, “How else do you want people to make money?” 

I took it up as a very serious matter and some of the authorities even fear to talk about it. When you raise the issue they say, “Where, we have never heard about it?” Then I say, “But how?” You know there are people who fear talking about it because the society will look at them as customers of such places but they do not stand firm to go and suspend such businesses in these rural places and really it touches my heart. 

I would like to support the committee that this Parliament should expeditiously, perhaps government first before Parliament - we have the powers to make these laws - we should expeditiously look at having a law that will also facilitate the local governments because sometimes leaders at the local government level may not have the capacity to understand some of these issues and to take the steps, which are necessary. And sometimes they are defeated in their arguments, so we should find ways of empowering the local authorities in dealing with such people.  

I think government should also take it upon itself to make sure that at every district level there are paralegals that will help the people in understanding these issues but also reporting the cases and they should be there in supporting the victims when it comes to court cases. Paralegals are there in other districts and in others they are not there, and people are not empowered enough to come up with such issues.  

I would like also to agree with some of the findings of the committee about the difficulty in fighting pornography. Indeed it is very expensive because you cannot put up satellites to follow up people. Some of these things are done in hiding; video halls are put deep in the villages or in corners and you know blue movies are shown at various times of the day. 

When I look at my own district - I am sorry really to base on that because traditionally we did not have these kind of values there but you find that people coming from elsewhere because of liberalization and so forth, are there and setting up these businesses. And many of the youths have come up on the streets to do all jobs like maybe loading things and so forth and they fight for drugs, the mairungi.  

I have talked to some of these youths and some of them say they chew these drugs to suppress their sexual urge. It is because after getting some little money they go to watch movies and this impact on the society, anybody who says that they are not true, I think he is really brushing the issue aside. And it is causing a lot of adultery, young girls are being raped and so forth and yet we have a bigger danger of HIV/AIDS. How can we fight HIV and AIDS if pornography is actually a menu on many people’s daily activities? How can we fight HIV and AIDS? How can we stop people from indulging in illegal sex? It is a very serious issue and yet some of the laws that we have are obsolete. We really must fight hard to repeal these laws and help our society to recover from this very serious vice. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.30
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the first place I would like to thank the committee for a good job done; I think they have tried their best. I want to encourage them to do more research on this so that in the end we are able to come with a very good report that is acceptable to all.  

Pornography in my view is a degeneration of human morals; it must be fought by all of us who are here: the religious leaders, parents and everybody in this country must fight it. 

However, if you read what was written, actually St Paul’s letter to Timothy in that letter he said that in the last days people would be lovers of pleasure instead of being lovers of God and this is exactly what is happening. In this very book it is also said that men will refuse to love women, women will want to put on trousers -(Interruption)- yes, if you read well, men will want to marry fellow men, women will want to marry fellow women, young children will want to marry when they are not yet ready to marry, all sorts of rubbish has been written on and predicted in this book. So, it is very important for all of us as a country to come out very strongly and oppose this thing called pornography.  

It is very unfortunate that many times we tend to think that things, which are being brought by White men, are the best for our people when actually they are causing a lot of probleMs I want to pray –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker and honorable members, I would like to thank the honorable member for giving the way. But surely, I read the Bible and I know the portion where he is quoting; God was saying that these would be by way of a curse. Is he really in order to say that in that scripture there is a statement to say that women will wear trousers and women wearing trousers will be part of pornography and, therefore, liable to God’s curse? 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is a question of interpretation of the Bible. Actually when he says trousers he was not talking about these trousers you are seeing; it is to play the role of a man when you are a woman - that is what he was saying.

MR AWONGO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this very wise ruling but there I was not talking about our sisters who are putting on trousers here. I was saying exactly what the Speaker has said and –(Laughter)- I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think we conclude this matter and I want to put the question that we adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We thank the committee for this report; it is going to be further studied so that the recommendations are effected. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT

THE SPEAKER: The Chairman is not here; maybe we deal with it tomorrow.

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I was supposed lay these documents on the table and to mention what they were.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, name them.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, the first document is a document that was sent to the committee by the DPP, which is labeled document No. 1 entitled, “Pornography and Criminal Law in Uganda” - no that is documents No.2. The DPP’s submission to the Select Committee entitled, “Pornography and the Criminal law in Uganda” is document No.2; document No.1 is a copy of the New Vision’s editorial policy guidelines and internal memo dated 29 December 1999.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. These documents are considered as part of the proceedings of the others, which we have disposed of.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking a clarification.  There are a number of things that have been raised here and some of them are to do with bringing in laws to this House, amendments, and maybe new ones for enactment. I am just wondering now in the absence of the relevant minister, how do we make sure that we have that linkage so that we know exactly how to follow this up; do we expect that the minister will come and give us some assurances concerning those comments raised by the committee?  

THE SPEAKER: No, what has happened: the House has adopted the report and the recommendations are contained in the report. Definitely the minister concerned will know because there is a Minister here responsible for Parliamentary Affairs who is supposed to liaise with Parliament. I am sure she has taken note of that; I think that is the position now.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are indeed right. The report has been adopted and government will study the report and its recommendations and will implement as much as possible those in the short term, medium term and those in long term. 

However, I also wish to underscore the fact that morals start in the families. While government will be implementing the report, we need concerted efforts starting with the parents, teachers and Members of Parliament; I did not hear the role of Members of Parliament in the report but obviously we must all work in cooperation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Very good.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, just for the record, I wish to inform the honorable minister that we made recommendations, which are policy and also legislative. They are not for Members of Parliament as individuals but as the Legislature, a group responsible for making laws; it is in there.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, what I was alluding to is the fact that many debaters were actually quoting incidents that are happening in their local areas; so as representatives of those areas that is what I am trying to underscore that we have a lot to work with our local authorities and the people we represent. Government by itself cannot fight pornography.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


