Wednesday, 3 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanya, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. The Parliamentary Commission is in the process of procuring medical insurance for Members and staff. The following health members’ organisations and insurance companies licensed by the Insurance Regulatory Authority are scheduled to meet with Members at 9.00 a.m. in the Members’ lounge starting tomorrow Thursday, 4 October 2012 and Friday, 5 October 2012, same venue, same time.
Please take time to attend these important meetings. The organisations so far identified are:

1.	Sanlam Insurance Uganda Limited
2.	Kampala International Medical Centre
3.	International Air Ambulance (IAA)
4.	International Medical Link
5.	International Health Network
6.	Case Medicare
7.	Kadic Hospital Bukoto
8.	AAR

Please have meetings with these agencies so that they can help us in our medical insurance matters. At an appropriate time, I will be amending the Order Paper to deal with a matter that has come up, which we have to deal with today.

STATEMENT BY HON. SSEBAGALA ABDU LATIF SSENGENDO 

2.17
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am reading this statement on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary caucus and the entire Muslim community. 

We Members of the Parliamentary Muslim Community wish to join the rest of the Muslim world in condemning all those who were responsible for the production and dissemination of the anti-Islam film; the innocence of Moslems.

This film has polarised the global Muslim community. It has caused an emotive response not seen since the infamous cartoons published in the Danish newspaper Jyllands Posten in 2005.

Moslems all over the world have lived in harmony with other people of various religious denominations with respect and honour. We believe in prophets of Allah, include Prophet Issa – Jesus Christ - and the differences in belief has never been a source of acrimony between the Moslems and other people.

Our legitimate concern is the continued provocation and ultimate confrontational approach by individuals who decide to insult Islam and incite Moslems using various means, including cartoons, books, novels, films and other means.

In Uganda, we call upon Government to ensure that the constitutional freedom of worship is exercised and enjoyed by all Ugandans and to restrain anybody, group or organisations that provokes another by way of hate preaching or undermining other people’s beliefs.

In this respect, we Moslems would request Government to monitor the roadside preachers so that they only concentrate on propagating their faith than hauling insults and provocations as well as antagonising others.

We call upon security agencies in the country to handle this delicate situation with uttermost care and caution since Moslems are already grieved by the provocations of the anti-Islamic information flowing all over the world in form of films and cartoons.

Moslems in Uganda are peace loving and law abiding citizens, but may not accommodate insults and provocations against their cherished Islamic values and the principles, including respect to their beloved Prophet Mohammed; peace be up on Him.

We call upon our brothers and sisters to act with restraint and avoid acts of violence in relation to the provocation. Moslems surrender to anger they will achieve the objectives of those who are behind the production of this offensive movie.

We are in consultation with various stakeholders, including security agencies, to show our displeasure by carrying a peaceful demonstration against this anti-Islam film. 

We appreciate the condemnation of these provocative acts by some world leaders, but still believe that leaders should compel those perpetrators to stop further production and dissemination of such actions whose consequences to innocent victims have led to international violence involving death and destruction of property.

We, therefore, call upon Government and international bodies to criminalise insults against all prophets.

We also call upon the United Nations to criminalise any insults against Prophet Mohammed - peace be upon him to promote universal tolerance for everlasting peace and tranquillity.
Finally, we call upon Government of Uganda to come out strongly to condemn these perpetrators of hate that are responsible for unwanted violence in the world.

As a country, our constitution guarantees freedom of worship and does not, therefore, condone acts of provocation as enshrined in this film.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement will attract a short debate.

2.21
MR KASSAINO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I have not stood up to seek for guidance, but to see if I have caught your eye such that the debate ensues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR KASSIANO: I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Imam Latif Ssebagala for the very timely issuance of this statement, and more particularly, in a manner that it really touches our hearts.

I want to begin by commending Ugandans because when these films and videos were being sent to various websites - we all know what happened in the Arab world; we all know what happened in Benghazi where the US Ambassador had to lose his life. We know what happened in Khartoum; we know what happened in the Middle East.

I think as a country, we need to appreciate the fact that we are one people. We are one people in the sense that these religions that we have, if you believe in any of them, certainly you will reach where you want to reach.

There is no religion in this world which is said to be the best that when you belong to it, then you automatically go to heaven. All these religions in one way or another, as long as you are able to abide by the rules of the belief, certainly, heaven will be at your gate.

Therefore, the uttermost tolerance is what we need in this country. We need to respect each other and respect each other’s faith. Issues dealing with faith are so sentimental. If you came up today and said, “Wadri you are a pagan”, certainly I will take offence. If you came and started criticising the Bible that I believe in or my saviour that I believe in, certainly, I will take offence. And, therefore, the only way through which we can be able to avert all these tensions is for us to believe strongly that we are one people and all these religions are equally dear to those who believe in them and we do not need to antagonise ourselves.

I remember that sometime back here in Uganda we nearly went that far. I can quote a case in Jinja where there was a rift between the Islamic faith and a savedee church. The savedees came up and said that they are the only people who should slaughter cows in the abattoirs of Jinja; until when all leaders, religious, civil and political came together to talk; that is when sanity prevailed.

Where you know that your action offends your colleague’s faith, it is only fair that we as individuals and leaders should be able talk to those who follow us and who believe in our faith; so that we do not need to go to the extreme end of violence.

I call upon all of us as civil leaders and political leaders to talk to those who listen to us and those who follow us. More importantly, there are these public bazaars that I see, where people go and begin addressing the crowd along the roadside in the name of religion and I am already seeing it here in Kampala.
I see a lot of people - I do not know whether they are redundant - they stand along the roads with Bibles shouting in the name of preaching. Those are the types of things which can easily incite us into violence. I do not know whether KCCA in its attempt to redeem its image is also considering having restraint on self-preachers along roads. I do not think they are competent because I have been a student of the seminary, and I know what it is.

By the way for us in the Catholic Church not every Tom, Dick and Harry was allowed to read the Bible and interpret it. It was only during the second Vatican that the Bible became open to everybody and indeed the language of the Bible is different. It is written in a manner that you just do not read it and think you have got the meaning. Such are the things that I see creeping up on our roads; where you find, with due respect, a person who does not have authority also begins to take up a Koran and he is seen preaching without full understanding. Those are the instances which cause misunderstanding. I wish Government could also come up to restrain and establish control over some of these things. 

All of you know that when you move through the streets of Kampala, you will find people speaking with their voices high; moving with bottles of water that they are preaching, both in the Catholic and Islam faiths. Therefore, little minds that are not able to interpret these religious doctrines certainly can lead us into temptations where violence erupts and -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. From your submission you are saying that along the roads of Kampala and elsewhere, you find people are preaching and you deliberately mentioned that Catholics are there. I am seeking your clarification whether you were able to identify those with a Bible as really originating from the Catholic Church.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much. Probably I have to be more succinct; I will say Christians because the Catholic Church is one of the Christian religions. You may also find the Seventh Day Adventists, the Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the Orthodox are there, and even the Anglican Church. The point I am making is that let these holy books be interpreted and used for preaching by the competent authorities so that they are not misunderstood and they do not degenerate in the long-run into chaos.

This statement has come timely and we really need to restrain our people; we need to respect each other’s religion. I thank you Mr Speaker.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am quite disturbed when I hear that people who move along the road with Bibles can cause commotion. Many times I have seen some of them; and I have heard them preach. They do not harm anybody. The honourable member has said that you cannot know who they are. It is true, you cannot, but sometimes it is difficult to gauge who is qualified and who is not, because you do not have the yardstick to gauge who these people are. If these people are preaching and not harming anyone, but they are only propagating the word of God; I do not see any harm in that because many of them are called evangelists and an evangelist goes out there to talk to people. 

An evangelist has to move out to people, some of them move door to door; others move on the streets; others move in the markets. So, I do not see anything wrong with somebody preaching without harming anybody.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for this timely statement and I would like to say that it is good that it has come to the Floor of this House.

I have been wondering when the country would come up with this statement and debate it. We do not see it as it is happening in other countries. I want to thank my Moslem brothers for being patient and I thank them also for showing maturity. I am a student of world religions where I even studied Islam.

I want to thank my colleague that this statement you have made on the Floor of the House - and how I wish the Minister of Ethics and Integrity was around to capture its content.

I also want to say that our country cherishes freedom of prayer and worship, and I would pray that this freedom is respected by all people.

Finally, I want to say that this was unfortunate. As people, we should learn to tolerate each others’ opinions though divergent. What happened was unfortunate, and I wish it does not happen in our country. I would like to urge Ugandans to condemn it; we should respect people’s religions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable. member for presenting this statement. However, I would like to refer to Article 29(1)(c) of the Constitution, which states that: “Every person shall have the right to freedom to practice any religion and manifest such practice, which shall include the right to belong to and participate in the practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent with this Constitution”.

The Constitution being our supreme law – and by the way, our Government has been tolerant by allowing the formation of many religions. Everybody has a right to hear people pray throughout the night. So, I believe this will not happen in Uganda. But in case it happens, the law will take its course.

In the circumstances, I would like to encourage my honourable colleague to take heart and believe that such a thing will not happen in our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.34
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to add my voice in echoing the need to respect each others’ faith. I mean we don’t really need to emphasise that. As we deliberate on this very important issue, I got to wonder as to why – we are seeing all  this violence manifest through religion resulting in huge global escalations to the extent that we are now feeling some of the effects here. This means that we should not just look at this as a smaller issue for Uganda; it is a big global problem. And as Ugandans, we must start positioning ourselves on how we will handle this external extremism because this is not something small. It can manifest itself in our young people. Yet we have a crisis of a huge population that is unemployed because the unemployment rate as we talk, among the youth, is around 70 percent. That is quite high.

So, when you see many of these young people on the streets with Bibles and other religious books just know they are looking for employment. Many of the churches that are coming up engage these young people because they have to survive. So, as a country, we have to think about alternatives on how we can keep the most energetic portion of our population busy. If we don’t get that into mind, we are going to see many of these conflicts escalate and this will really cause a big problem –(Interruptions)

MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I rightly heard the honourable member holding the Floor, he said that some of the people who are always on the streets preaching are idle, or they are looking for something to do because they don’t have any employment. But I would like to find out whether the Member is in order to say that, because we have prominent pastors like Sserwadda and Kayanja who started their pastoral work from the streets. I don’t think they were looking for jobs because that was just a calling. So, is the Member, therefore, in order to say that 50 percent are looking for employment yet they are only preaching God’s word?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my understanding of the Member’s contribution is that he talked about the young and old people who stand at roundabouts or road junctions talking to everybody but nobody in particular, but shouting or preaching. Are you trying to suggest that pastors like  Kayanja also do that? I think let us have the Member conclude his contribution.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. Anyway, what I was trying to emphasise was about the breakdown of values in this country. When we look at the vanguard of values – some of these spaces are supposed to be highly organised. But you will realise that we have let this country to go on with many people taking on the responsibility of values; and many individuals committing crimes after taking advantage of these. So, we are not talking about something small because many of the people will go and seek faith from others because of their spiritual needs, but at the end of the day, they will be taken advantage of. 

So, the issue I am referring to is not a small one. As a country we need to rethink and put mechanisms through which we can control devices to protect our values. Thank you.

2.40
MR ISIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Christian and I am called Isaiah, which is a prophetical name. I have moved to a few countries nearby. However, when you move on the streets of Kampala, you see a lot of disorder. There is a lot of shouting. Yes, I accept and appreciate the preaching. However, the way this preaching is being done on the streets of Kampala – yes, I am a Christian, but I can’t subscribe to it. I am saying this because even in the house of the Lord, there must be order.

So, Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues who advocate that the preaching in the city must be restricted to the sacred places. If I feel I should go for prayers because I need the word of the Lord, I will go and worship from the gazetted places. But I don’t believe in whoever thinks they can preach from all over the city, disturb other people’s peace by moving and shouting anyhow. I am a Christian and I stand by my words. I know my churches in my constituency in Budadiri East could be listening to me, but I believe there must be order in worshiping and preaching. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.43
MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must also begin by confession; I am a Christian. My name, at one particular stage in the directory, had been confused to be like the one of Latif. I was associated with the Muslim community, but it was corrected.

Mr Speaker, I wish to associate myself with hon. Latif Ssebagala and the Muslim community, not only in Uganda, but the World over. Religious extremism is a creeping disease. It may not yet have come to Uganda yet at the level of other Arab countries, but the signs are that it is coming.

I have read widely about it and I have seen the causes and some of the causes are already here, especially in Kampala. One major cause is the religious contests; Muslims versus Christians. I have seen galas in places like Nakivubo organised by both Muslims and Christians, and then contesting, I don’t know for what.

They begin to argue that Allah is better than God. At the end of the day, one of the two parties feels that he is defeated. That is why you are now beginning to see things like videos demonising prophets especially Prophet Mohammed.

The Constitution of Uganda guarantees the freedom of worship, and actually it does not specify the mode of worship, but it does not guarantee demonising of other people’s beliefs.

I don’t want to condone people who move along streets in Kampala telling others that they should get saved even when they are not aware whether they are not yet saved. But the way some of them do it is by demonising some other people’s beliefs. In fact, they read judgements against us even when they have not heard about us.

Mr Speaker, I beg to pray that Government does something about those people on the streets and also considers regulating the religious contests. I have seen many around Kampala, especially Muslims versus Christians. I so pray, Mr Speaker.

2.45
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am forced to rise up because of what I have heard coming from every corner that people who are making noise and polluting the environment of Kampala should be stopped.

I am a Christian and a preacher of the gospel. I must say that for those who read the Bible, many called Jesus Christ a mad man; others called him possessed by a spirit called Beelzebub. He was regarded by different inferences by the people. For that matter, it is not surprising that today we may be speaking using statements, which were used 2000 years ago against the Saviour of mankind.

But Mr Speaker, if I may ask, can anybody really attest to this House that he has seen people who were preaching on the streets causing trouble or problems for that matter? If somebody is standing in a safe place and speaking the word of God to the people, what crime has he committed? Is he making more noise than the DMC vehicles that we have on the streets? Is he making more noise than those people who are driving around and hooting everywhere?

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, in the Bible in the Book of Isaiah, one time God told that man called Isaiah to walk naked on the streets and in so doing, he was trying to show the people what was going to happen to Egypt and to other nations that had defied the Lord. So what you may be calling madness today could be the message that is intended to save you.

For that reason, I would like to say that if we are debating this matter, we must actually be sure that what we are saying is that these people are a source of problems otherwise somebody who is simply speaking the message of God, I believe should be allowed to continue with his message. After all, the Bible says go out and preach the gospel to every creature. Every creature must be preached to. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bulamogi, if you should obey that command of God that you should walk naked on the street and do it now, you would violate another law and you will be arrested and prosecuted for indecent exposure. You would go straight against the law. So, what happened in the Old Testament days might not have a lot of avenue today because there are some considerations about the decency of the human race.

2.48
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to condemn what is happening against our Muslim brothers but here in Uganda, we have the Inter Religious Council and I believe this Council comprises of people from various denominations. So, I call upon the leaders of this Council to really streamline how the Gospel is moving to many people in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that in James in the Bible, it is said that God chooses people with very humble beginnings to challenge the wise. So, I would like to say that those you see on the streets have a very humble beginning and for us to stand here and say that they are incompetent - I think we are going wrong as far as our deliberations are concerned.

Maybe it may benefit you to go and read the Book of James in the New Testament. It will clarify what I am talking about, that God calls people from humble beginnings to challenge the wise.

When I was in the university, I happened to study religion in the first year of my studies. What we study in religion is that there were seven blind men. When they were asked to describe who God is, each one of them described Him differently. When one blind man went and touched the elephant from the tail, he said the elephant looks like a snake. When another one touched the ears, he said a different thing all together. When another one touched the back, he gave a different description. 

I appeal to fellow Ugandans that we all do not know matters of faith and religion. Nobody has ever seen God, and so we should take it with a sober mind and take it easy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have had a long discussion on this subject and ordinarily the debate should have taken 15 minutes but we have gone beyond that by far. So, why don’t we make progress and allow the Leader of Government Business to make a statement on this?
2.51
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, on behalf of Government, to appreciate the statement made by the Imam, hon. Latif Ssebagala. I also want to appreciate the contents of the statement, and I want to thank him for the leadership – his statement is actually giving leadership to the rest of the Muslims who are antagonised by this anti-Islam film. 

As a country, we have different religions and we have our Constitution. And so far, as far as I am concerned, I think the religious people in the country are living in harmony. I attend several occasions of Muslims, Protestants and Catholics and that is how we shall have a peaceful country.

Mr Speaker, a religious belief is a very serious issue because my belief is mine; if what I believe in hurts you, then you should leave me alone because you cannot help it. Since everybody has their own belief, we should respect each other’s belief. These people who go around insulting other people’s religions are causing people problems all-over the world. As a result of that, many people in Muslim countries, for example, have held demonstrations and many have been killed. Now, why should those people be killed? They should not really be killed because that person has his own motives – even the American president has condemned his action. In fact, I understand that he has even been arrested in America. So, I think we should concentrate more on what unites us; we have unity in diversity. We have many differences, but let us concentrate on what will bring us together.

In the statement, Government is asked to make a statement. Government made a statement long time ago; by that time, Government had promulgated the Constitution. That is the government’s position; that everybody will respect each other, and that you cannot insult somebody else’s religion or faith. There is a law. So, we cannot make statements every now and then. If somebody is preaching along the road, it will be too much work for the government if we are to listen to what they are going to talk about. But since there is freedom of worship in this country, that freedom does not include abusing others. 
In law, if you are aggrieved, you must go to Police and make an accusation. If the people you see on the street are abusing you and you have proof, then you can go ahead and accuse them to the Police; there is law that will cater for that. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on a statement here to the effect that the Muslim community should be allowed to hold a demonstration. There are procedures to follow; this House cannot give permission to anyone to hold demonstrations because it has different roles. Actually, this House played its role long time ago by enacting a law on demonstrations. So, we may not ask Parliament to give you permission; this is a wrong institution to give people who want to hold demonstrations permission. But the Minister of Internal Affairs is here; he has his system. They can go to him and ask for permission. If they are allowed, the Police will take care of that. (Interruption)

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague for allowing me to seek clarification. I am a believer, and I believe in freedom of worship. I sympathise with my brothers and sisters in the Muslim faith. The clarification I am seeking as per the statement of the Third Deputy Prime Minister is that our Muslim brothers and sisters would like to show their displeasure about what came out of the film; should the whole world, therefore, be put on tension? Should many more people die because of the mistake of one person who has already been arrested? Should we, too, take the actions of the media like cartoons and the like to be the gospel truth? I have seen even in this country – actually I was here looking at the President’s photo which is always caricatured. If he were to go for the necks of all those doing that, how many people would have survived? (Applause) That is the clarification I need.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My statement is very clear and everybody knows what is going on around the world as a result of this anti-Islam film. You know how many innocent people have been killed as a result of this film. Is it in order for the honourable member to compare the cartoons of a human being to that of the prophet? We are talking here about a cartoon that was inciting Muslims by demonising and degrading Prophet Mohammed. So, is it in order for the honourable member to compare our prophets to ordinary leaders like myself and others?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A comparison between a prophet and an ordinary human being is an improper comparison. Therefore, the honourable member is ruled out of order. 

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. But I was concluding that as a country and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of clarification while another Member was holding the Floor. 

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Yes, that was what I am concluding on so that he can guide me on. (Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: You have finished; you are just joking. (Laughter) [MS ATIM: “That is not fair.”] (Laughter) When you are seeking clarification, you do not take the Floor as though it were yours. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I was saying that we should concentrate on what unites us, not what divides us. Let us also not judge each individual’s feelings and reactions. If a snake “walked” in here, some people may just go and jump over it while others would be falling down as they attempt to run away – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say that a snake “walks”? (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I meant to say “enters”. (Laughter) Sorry, Mr Speaker. So, I want to end by emphasising again that we are grateful. This statement to me is a guideline to the rest of us, and at the same time I am very happy with colleagues who do not share the Moslem faith for being positive and accepting this. That shows exactly what we are and we must keep this up so that we as leaders are seen to be leading through practice. So, for that I would like to advise that should the team of the Imam think it is necessary to go and hold a demonstration then I will refer them to Internal Affairs and they will be advised accordingly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, two procedural points - can I deal with these then I deal with the procedural questions?  Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have, Mr Kondiwani Chifkafwa, a research officer from the Malawi National Assembly. He is here to benchmark with the Parliamentary Research Office and to share experience on how Members of Parliament benefit from the research department. Please join me in welcoming him.  You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I said I would alter the Order Paper at an appropriate time to deal with the matter that has come to the attention of the Speaker as urgent. In place of items - this would be item No.5 for now. As you will recall, honourable members, there have been some appointments in Cabinet and that has affected the position of the Pan-African Parliament. This morning I received notification from the Government Chief Whip to this effect; Nomination of hon. Amongin Jacquiline as member of the Pan-African Parliament. 

“Following the appointment of hon. Kataike Sarah Ndobooli, NRM, former Pan-African Parliament Member as Minister of State for Health, General Duties, the position fell vacant. In accordance with rule 13(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012, which enjoins political parties represented in Parliament to submit such names, I am hereby accordingly submitting the name of Amongin Jacquiline, District Woman Representative, NRM, Ngora District, to replace hon. Sarah Kataike Ndobooli as Member of the Pan-African Parliament. Signed, Justine Kasule Lumumba (MP), Government Chief Whip.” (Applause)

I am required by the rules to put this question for the Members for the approval of this particular person whose name has been sent to this House. I will accordingly put the question that the hon. Amongin Jacquiline, MP, Ngora District, be approved as Member of the Pan-African Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause)

3.06
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point to pose two questions to Government under Rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rule is about urgent questions without notice. What urgent question do you have?

MR AMURIAT: Yes, Mr Speaker, this is a security related matter that appeared in the international press, precisely, the International Herald Tribute, which is a global edition of the New York Times. It also appeared in our local press, relating to activities of our national Army in the Garamba National Park. This is an article -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent question, honourable?

MR AMURIAT: It is about suspected poaching. Mr Speaker, if you allow me to read part of this article - it is a long article, but I think for the benefit of this House, I will read a few sentences. The article is titled, “Ivory Becomes Africa’s Latest Conflict Resource: Armed Groups Including US Backed Armies Carry out Epic Slaughter”. It is written by Jeffrey Gettleman. I will just read a bit of it, Mr Speaker. 

“In 30 years of fighting poachers, Paul Onyango had never seen anything like this. Twenty-two dead elephants, including several very young ones, clumped together on the open savanna, many killed by a single bullet to the top of the head. 

There were no tracks leading away, no sign that the poachers had stalked their prey from the ground. The tusks had been hacked away, but none of the meat, and subsistence poachers almost always carve themselves a little meat for the long walk home. 

Several days later, in early April, the Garamba National Park guards spotted a Ugandan military helicopter flying very low over the park, on an unauthorised flight, but they said it abruptly turned around after being detected. Park officials, scientists and the Congolese authorities now believe that the Ugandan Army — one of the Pentagon’s closest partners in Africa — killed the 22 elephants from a helicopter and spirited away more than a million dollars worth of ivory. 

‘They were good shots, very good shots,’ said Mr Onyango, Garamba’s chief ranger. ‘They even shot the babies. Why? It was like they came here to destroy everything.’” 

“Africa is in the midst of an epic elephant slaughter. Conservation groups say poachers are wiping out tens of thousands of elephants a year, more than at any time in the previous two decades, with the underground ivory trade becoming increasingly militarised.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you now like to ask the question?

MR AMURIAT: Just a second, Mr Speaker.  “Like blood diamonds from Sierra Leone or plundered minerals from Congo, ivory, it seems, is the latest conflict resource in Africa, dragged out of remote battle zones, easily converted into cash, and now fuelling conflicts across the continent.”

Mr Speaker, I think anybody listening to me will appreciate that these are very serious allegations and it is coming to one month ago; and I have not heard or seen, to the best of my recollection, a response, a statement, or an article in the international press that shows concern by the Government of Uganda; and yet these are serious allegations which should be of concern to us especially on the backdrop of the penalty slapped on Uganda for  plunder of the Congo of over US$ 10 billion by the International Court for stealing timber and the rest.  

The question I would like to pose, therefore, Mr Speaker, is whether Government is concerned about what has appeared in the international and local press. 

Secondly, whether based on that, they have proceeded to carry out investigations to find out whether our armies are involved in association with terrorist groups like Al-Shabab in poaching in the Garamba. If they have done this, what action have they have taken to hold those responsible for this menace, accountable?

Finally, whether they have done anything to clear the image of our UPDF, in both the national and international press. Mr Speaker, those are my concerns and questions, and I thank you for giving me this opportunity.

3.12
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say that this is my first time to hear this and I do not know whether the UPDF authority has seen it. If we go by newspapers and here in the House we have no way of substantiating -(Ms Anywar rose)- procedure can wait.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My senior, these are our rules of Parliament; you cannot just put them aside. On a point of procedure, the issue raised by hon. Oboi Amuriat is very grave, because it involves our neighbouring countries, and it has security implications. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that through you, we ask the minister concerned to make the necessary consultations and investigations and come with a statement on the Floor of Parliament so that we appreciate the truth or the falseness of this statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, but I had not heard the Leader of Government Business - he had not finished; probably that is what he was going to say. [MR AMURIAT: “Mr Speaker, may I clarify something?”] Please.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I think if I had been given time - these papers in the world, you cannot just go by them. However, he who alleges must proVE. Have you heard of this principle of law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, would you like to take time, come in a proper way and make a response to these issues.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I would, Mr Speaker, following your advice. I refer the matter to the Minister of Defence to come and make a statement to the House. Thank you.

3.15
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising under Rule 39 to ask questions to the Frontbench.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that requires that I approve. That is a question without notice.

MR SSIMBWA: Yes, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you need to justify to me that it deserves to be treated that way.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, before I ask, I think I need to give the background so that I justify that it falls within rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In two minutes, please.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, a section of the people of Kampala is living under a lot of tension. They are living under a lot of fear, and they are not sure whether tomorrow, they will have a roof over their heads. 

The people living within the areas of: Lower Nsambya, Lower Kansanga, parts of Ggaba, parts of Kawuku, Lower Bukasa, parts of Munyonyo, parts of Salaama, parts of Butabika, parts of Kinawataka, parts of Natete, parts of Busega, parts of Nalukolongo, Bwaise, Kalerwe, Nsooba and Lower Nkomamboga are uncertain whether they will survive or they will live under a roof because of the eminent demolition of their properties by KCCA and NEMA. 

The President in 2006, made a Presidential Executive Order, and in that Presidential Executive Order, he halted all evictions of people at that time who were in forest reserves and wetlands. So, the question I want to ask the Frontbench is: One, whether that Executive Order has ever been revoked, because to my understanding, the Executive Order of the President is still in force. There is no instrument that has ever revoked it.

Two, I want to find out from the Frontbench - especially from the Minister in charge of Environment - when did NEMA physically demarcate and gazette the so-called wetlands as provided for under the environment laws. I am aware NEMA is supposed to demarcate physically and even gazette. So, when did it do that in order to facilitate the demolition of peoples’ houses?

Three, I would also want to know from the Minister in charge of the Presidency, how was recruitment of people in KCCA done? Many people, who are leading this exercise - according to me  - do not deserve to be in those positions. At an appropriate time if requested, I will table on the Floor of Parliament some individuals operating under KCCA today, who are not supposed to be in those positions because of their education and their track records. So, I want to know from the Minister in charge of Kampala, how was the recruitment of those people in those positions done. It is out of that, Mr Speaker, that we are seeing a lot of anti-people actions being done by those officers of KCCA.

As I conclude, I request for answers of those questions so that the people of Kampala can rest assured that they will live in Kampala.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a response to these questions? These are urgent questions.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Again, this matter, I will refer to the minister in charge to come and brief the House comprehensively; why demolition is taking place. I will have to inform the minister responsible. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable, he has not yet said anything and now you are seeking clarification. He has not yet said anything surely, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. Please conclude.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: So, I am going to say exactly what I said earlier. This is a very serious matter, but I am going to ask the minister responsible to come and give us comprehensive information about what is happening.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to interrupt the General, but on further examination of the magnitude of the matter, I thought I would stand under a point of procedure and seek clarification -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, would you like to resume your seat because you rose on a point of procedure, now you want clarification. Kindly resume your seat, please. 

Honourable members, it looks like we are beginning to be very creative with our Rules of Procedure to try and bypass my earlier rulings that we should be raising matters of urgent public importance towards the end of the debate. That still stands today, but Members have found a clever way of going around Rule 39 to raise urgent questions and they have succeeded. I will not allow them to proceed like that. Let us go to the business on the Order Paper. All urgent matters will be raised towards the end of the sitting. (Mr Atwooki rose_) Is it on what I have just said?   

3.22
PROF. BALTAZAR ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, last week, the Speaker directed the Minister of Trade to come back this week, and precisely, it should have been yesterday. But since we did not have a sitting, I thought it would be today. The Minister of Trade was supposed to come and inform this House about the status of the licences issued to Continental Tobacco Uganda. We could have taken advantage of today’s sitting to get that status. 

3.23
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Once again, Mr Speaker, I will remind the responsible minister to bring that paper she was directed to present to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been informed about a situation which has affected one of our Members. I would like to allow the hon. Ssekikubo to give a short brief of what has happened so that we can all know, then we will go straight to the business on the Order Paper. 

3.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter regarding one of us, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, the MP Buyaga West. Arsonists attacked his home in Mukono in the early hours of Tuesday. The result was, one Agnes and a cousin, who are still admitted in Mulago Hospital. For Barnabas, he has been discharged today and gone back home. 

But I rise on this matter to seek your guidance on this move so that the Minister of Internal Affairs who is around - how come in matters where there are controversies, something arises to scuttle the effort of Parliament? It was at a time when hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire was deeply involved in the affairs of the city, which Members have complained about. He stood firm on those matters, and he had received threats before, which he had reported to Police - he had made statements. They were using mobile numbers of Kenya and Southern Sudan, and he reported all this to Police. To my dismay, up to this time, not much headway has been achieved. I thought since the minister was here, it would be important to give reassurances to Members of Parliament and the general public. (Dr Bitekyerezo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, on what point are you rising? Please, let him finish. Have you finished? Let him finish, then you can give information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we seriously need to be assured as Parliament and even the general public; that everybody is free to discharge their duties as mandated without hindrance, without any threat or fear whatsoever. 

I know at an appropriate time, probably a statement will be made. I was at Mulago yesterday and today, and this reflects back on what we had to go through as Members of Parliament. The hospital needed urgent attention. Members of Parliament may never know when they will be a subject or will be admitted there. You can feel strong today - alive and kicking; but it so happens that you may be a visitor there or you could be admitted. So, it is incumbent upon Parliament to always never flinch away from that responsibility of equipping our only referral facility, a national one. 

As I was reading, it was unveiled in October, 1962 as a gift to Uganda for Independence. I do not know how we have emulated that. Now that we are going to celebrate the 50 years, the challenge is big for Government to at least show that for the 50 years of statehood, there is something to add to what the British left with us. It is important that all of us, whatever tribe, whatever position, whatever side of this Parliament you sit; that we promote those matters and in any way, they are there for all of us and all Ugandans.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we do not need to move away from the issue of hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire. That is the issue on which I have allowed this debate. 

3.30
MR GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue which has been presented on behalf of our honourable Member of Parliament is worrying. There are also those who are the silent majority and may not be heard. In my constituency, I have had three young people murdered by the slit of the throat. They just cut off the heads. One was a young girl aged 22; the other was a young boy aged 29; and so forth. In fact, in my –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Is it in order according to our rules, for the honourable member to read newspapers from the House? Is he in order? The honourable member seated over there was reading newspapers - the hon. Ayena. Is it in order for you to read the newspapers –(Interjections)- when we are busy proceeding? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The points we raise should facilitate debate -(Laughter)- and where there is serious breach of the order, a Member is perfectly in order to raise those issues which bring the reputation of the House into question. In the circumstances, I have not been able – I monitor this House very closely. I have not noticed a Member -(Laughter)- who was reading. I have not noticed anybody reading a newspaper for now. Please, hon. -

MR BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if there is a Member who is tempted to read a newspaper, please know that you are going against the rules. Please proceed. 

MR BUKENYA: The issue, Mr Speaker, is a very serious one. There is an increased rate of crime, especially in areas which surround Kampala. For us in the villages, we think this is a result of the destabilisation of the poor population who have been doing vending and so forth. As a result, they are flashing back into our own populations.  

I am raising this issue for the majority who are not actually sleeping in their own houses in the surrounding areas of Kampala. If you move around, they have set up illegal road-blocks to manage the affairs of their own villages. I would wish that the honourable minister of Internal Affairs could help to expound on this major issue and perhaps give us the numbers of such crimes that have been reported to the Police in the last week or so. For us, since we reported, we have never had a response. People dig through your house and enter and then cut your throat –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving me this opportunity to give the House this information. The information that I wish to give is that these murders are not only taking place in Kampala. The murders are everywhere in the countryside. 

I want to report to this House that in the last six months, in Kasese District, we have buried over six victims of murder. The unfortunate issue why I would imagine these murders are escalating to untold magnitude is because our investigative mechanisms are poor. Maybe the departments are not taking these matters serious that when a person is killed, no culprit is apprehended; no report ever comes out and, therefore, there is no way we can tress the perpetrators of these crimes. As a result, it becomes a vicious cycle; possibly, the people who murder people in Kampala are the same who carry out the murders say in Mukono; and are the same who murder people in Kasese.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, if I am given an opportunity, I can table on the Floor of this House the number of people who have died in Kasese during the last three years – even for ten years - and no report ever came out to indicate who are responsible for these murders. I think the perpetrators of these murders say, “It is a holiday, we can carry on with the murders”. 

I sympathise with my brother Tinkasimiire –(Interjections)– I really felt sad when I saw what happened to him. What is happening to us in this country may scare many of the people who would want to contribute to the growth of this country and national building. People are scared for their life because nobody is bothered with what is happening to the population of this country. That is the information I wanted to give my colleague. The murders are everywhere in the country and maybe the instability in Kampala City is affecting the whole country. 

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I think we have made an outcry. My biggest worry is that since they cut the necks of these young people in my constituency, I have not heard any visible response to that issue. 

Somebody was whispering to me that even in Kyanamukaka, they cut six people –(Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, in Kyanamukaka, in a constituency bordering mine, which His Excellency the Vice President, hon. Ssekandi is representing - unfortunately he is not in the House - the night before yesterday, five people in the same house were killed. People dug through the wall and five people, husband, wife and three children were all slaughtered in cold blood. 

In that same place, Kyanamukaka, bordering my constituency, three nights before that, two people had been killed in the same manner. You all know that almost in every parish, there is a Police post. We are wondering why Police, which is almost in every parish is not giving the security required to protect Ugandans and their properties. 

Since yesterday’s incident, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has not come up to issue a statement – can you imagine, five people in the same house? Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, could you tell this House whether Ugandans are safe? 

PROF. BUKENYA: We are in great fear, honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. I appeal for more Police support to my area. Because, people are no longer sleeping in their houses; they are all out. They have put up illegal road-blocks and anybody who comes up, they have spears and knives to protect themselves. I do not think this is their mandate. The mandate is for our Government to protect the citizens. So, I appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to our help.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed this matter to be raised because of the Member who has been affected, but you can now see that it is a much bigger issue that we are dealing with. But in the context of the debate right now, we cannot handle it. I am going to allow specific information relating to hon. Barnabas. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, yesterday after the House, I could not attend the Presidential lecture because of my brother Tinkasimiire. I went to look for him in Nsambya, but I found they had transferred the lady to Mulago. I went to Mulago with hon. Dr Twatwa and we were allowed to enter the intensive care unit as doctors. This lady called Agnes is burnt – actually 70 percent of the total body surface area is burnt and that gives very poor prognostic future. Even the young girl is also burnt. 

But what is very hurting, is that hon. Tinkasimiire had told me – I even went to Ward 6C where he was and he told me he had received seven threatening calls from only men, there was no woman. They were men with wonderful voices telling him that they would burn him. On top of that, his brother who works in KCCA, that very night, they broke into his house through the back and destroyed so many things and then went away.

Mr Speaker, I received a phone call from Mbarara saying that, “We know you are a bit talkative, are you safe?” those were my voters. I very well know that the people of Uganda sent us here to speak and to represent them. But if I get a threat, I go to Police. If I get another threat, I go to Police. If I get seven threats, I go to Police. In the seventh one, I am burnt; and there is no report that is given to this House. 

Mr Speaker, it leaves my constituents, and Ugandans whom we are trying to defend, very suspicious. (Mr Ogwang Peter rose_ )  Okay, I will allow hon. Ogwang.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable nember, you had risen on a point of information –

DR BITEKYEREZO: Okay, let me finish. Mr Speaker, I would like to end by requesting the Minister of Internal Affairs to kindly bring us the report as soon as possible so that we can debate very freely. If this is not effected, I am seeing a scenario where Members of Parliament are going to come here and sit down and go away without talking, which is terrible. Can you imagine being held incommunicado? We need to get some free time to speak as honourable Members of Parliament; and to speak the truth on the things that affect Ugandans because we are people’s representatives. What we are doing, we do for the good of this country. We need to be protected. I thank you.

3.43
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the information I had wanted to give was. I was in the presence of Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire when we reported this matter to the parliamentary Police. The first person hon. Tinkasimiire called was me. We sat in the canteen. He came with the numbers. He showed me all the numbers of the people who had called threatening his life. 

Mr Speaker, I was the first victim of this - during the censure saga. I was trailed from here to my home. I made noise. People thought I was joking. It is God who saved me from these thugs. Imagine attempting to get Ogwang from his car; one car behind and one in front. Two cars block you in the middle. You lock yourself inside. Honestly, where are we headed as Members of Parliament? If we are saying we are talking for this country - the matters we were handling in line with the issue of wetlands in Kampala are very contentious. And it is painful to our colleagues who represent these communities within Kampala. 

We know our lives are being threatened, but we are not going to back off. It is not us who passed this law; we found this law here. We are only helping Government to implement what we passed. Why should our lives be put in the target of these people?

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you this. I am not comfortable. The honourable minister is here. I have built a house. I am meant to be protected, but what do Police tell me - I also want to report this to the House. The Police came to my area; they made their own survey; they told me I should put up another building for them to stay. (Interjection) Yes, without that they cannot protect me. 

Honestly, is this the way we are going to move? We might be many here who are being given security and at the same time the very security is asking for accommodation. Maybe the ministers should tell us. Are you also providing the ones protecting you with houses to stay in? I am not refusing to provide them with food, but I cannot incur the cost of building another house for people to protect my life. Honourable minister, can you please assure us here; how should we be protected. 

Lastly, should we keep quiet for the interest of this country when the vampires want to finish all the money for themselves? Honestly, should we keep quiet? No! No! No!

3.46
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What happened to our colleague yesterday can happen to anyone of us. I particularly talk as a member of the accountability committee. We as members of accountability committees are the ones who handle all ranges of corruption in this country; ranging from politicians, to businessmen and civil servants. All their dirty political deals are known to us. And as a result, that compromises our own safety. We get ourselves at crossroads and, therefore, suffer as a result of occupational hazards. 

Mr Speaker, this is a real big challenge to you as the head of this institution. I remember at the beginning of the Ninth Parliament, there were many of us who had sleepless nights. We received threats both written and on phone; that you are doing this, on these billions, you will see; if you are immortal, wait and you will see. Some of us said, well, Jesus Christ died at the age of 33, and some of us are above 33. So, if you think that you want to kill because the Public Accounts Committee members are telling you that money has gone missing, you are wasting your time. We will go on. But more importantly, many of us said, well, we don’t have Police escorts or military escorts, but we have got our rosaries that we go about with.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give the honourable member is that these threats are not limited to members of the accountability committees. Even ministers are threatened. In today’s The Daily Monitor newspaper, hon. Muruli Mukasa has been threatened several times and he has reported to Police. (Laughter) So, you can see how hopeless hon. Muruli Mukasa, who is supposed to be the Minister for Security, is. He is also threatened. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my brother, for that useful information. You cannot compare the hon. Ssekikubos and the Wadris of this Parliament with the hon. Muruli Mukasa, who has got security. 

We are very unfortunate as a Parliament. Go next door to Kenya. In Kenya, Members of Parliament have got personal security; police paid for by Government of Kenya. (Applause) But in our situation, probably because of the large size of Parliament, with every village becoming a district and, therefore, increasing the number of MPs, increasing the administrative overhead costs - that may be the problem. But I think in the long-run, Mr Speaker, as the head of this institution, you may have to seriously consider what you need to do in order to safeguard the lives of your Members. Otherwise, at this rate, what people will do most of the time will be to say well, I cannot sacrifice my life by pronouncing the truth; well, I resign quietly by just being a dormant Member. And this will make - not only those whom we wish to expose, but we will be betraying the citizens of this country. 

The issue of security for us, in the course of executing our duties, is very cardinal. All these front bench Members, including the General – even when he is a General, he still has got other escorts to add on to the “Generalship” he already has. So, the issue is; what is it that we can do? My elder, Gen. Moses Ali, you don’t see him move alone; there will always be other people to make sure that he is protected, although he is a General. 

The point I am making is, these MPs are certainly vulnerable. They are vulnerable in the course of executing their duties. As a Parliamentary Commission and as an institution, something had better be designed otherwise we will be irrelevant because we will fear to pronounce ourselves on the truth. We will fear that when we make these pronouncements, we may not be able to reach our places of abode and that will make us irrelevant, at worst to say, impotent. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek guidance from you. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire’s wife is very sick; and as a Member of Parliament, I am sure he is entitled to medical insurance. But in the current circumstances, medical insurance for the year 2011/2012 expired on 30th June. So, as we talk, no Member here is insured. Members need to know why they are not insured, because according to the information we are getting from the Office of the Chief Accountant or that of the Clerk to Parliament is that they are still procuring a company that will provide insurance services for Members – I don’t know how many they are supposed to be, but at least I know the process is still going on.

So, the guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is that given the circumstances, isn’t hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire entitled to take his wife to a better facility out of the country since we have failed to manage our medical facilities? And in the circumstances that any Member here gets an emergency situation that requires them to be flown out – when they are insured, the insurance comes in handy. But in the current circumstances – assuming we get into such situations like what hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire is in, what do we do now that we are not insured because Parliament is still in the process of securing service providers. I beg to know from you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, at the beginning of the proceedings I communicated except most of the Members had not come in. So, maybe I should read this again and it reads: “The Parliamentary Commission is in the process of procuring medical insurance for Members and staff. The following health member organisations and insurance companies licensed by the Insurance Regulatory Authority are scheduled to meet Members at 9.00 a.m. in the Members’ Lounge, starting tomorrow, Thursday, 4 October and on Friday, 5th  October at the same venue. The insurance companies are: Sanlam Insurance (U) Ltd, Kampala International Medical Centre, International Air Ambulance, International Medical Link, International Health Network, Case Medicare, Cardic Hospital, Bukoto and AAR.” 

The Parliamentary Commission took a decision that an arrangement for a transition be put in place so that there is no gap in the issue of coverage of Members. So, even when this is still taking place, I am sure there is something that can be done. They say, this will be done on case-by-case basis depending on what happens. If anything happens, I am sure the situation will be accordingly handled by the Parliamentary Commission. These meetings will start tomorrow upstairs. Please go for consultations and choose one of them. Yes, minister.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Mr Speaker, it is saddening to witness and hear the kind of things that are happening in our country. It is unlawful, savage and criminal for whoever attacked the home of our colleague, hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire, burning it and causing bodily harm to members of his family. I must categorically state, as Minister of Internal Affairs, that Government condemns this act with all that it deserves. We shall do everything possible to investigate and apprehend the criminals. And we are glad –(Ms Beatrice Anywar rose_)– please can you give me the chance to say what I have to say and seek clarification later?

MS ANYWAR: You don’t have to get annoyed because I am seeking clarification.

MR ONEK: No, I have a lot to tell about what has happened because I have also been a victim of those threats. Personally, I was one time followed by two cars in Luzira when we were debating this oil/energy stuff, and had to get reinforcement. So, really it is a very serious matter that we must be together and united on this matter.

I am glad that there are some clues available because there are some threats that were made on telephone. We have got the mechanisms to trace these telephone lines and where they came from. Unfortunately, Government has not yet completed registering all the telephone lines in Uganda. I would wish this exercise is done quickly so that we are able to know who owns what telephone line and when such people commit crimes, they can be easily traced.

I am saddened by what was said by my colleague in regard to what is happening in his area, which is the same thing happening in Kasese. But definitely, I will follow this up with the help of the Police authority to ensure that Parliament is informed of what process is going on. 
However, one thing I want to assure this House about is that if those mafia activities are being carried out by corrupt people trying to eliminate others, the Police is now very serious about fighting corruption. So, we will fight to get those corrupt people, particularly those stealing Government property, monies, resources and so forth. You must be witnessing a lot of activities in terms of arrests, going on. Unfortunately, our Police Force is under manned. We need about 65,000 Police officers in this country, but we have only 43,000. But we are maximising on the deployment of those few that we have.

The cases of the various murders – I want if possible, colleagues, to inform me of anything that happens in your constituency as reported by hon. Mathias Nsubuga and others. I will ask the Parliamentary Police to give me a report detailing whatever is happening in your respective constituencies so that after gathering this information, I will have working information –(Interruptions)

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for giving me this opportunity to seek this clarification. Some two incidents happened in Agago District early this year, which were similar to what we have been talking about now. I personally wrote and submitted my letter to the office of the Minister of Internal Affairs, copied to the permanent secretary and all the relevant offices. However, to date I have never received any response or communication from the ministry. So, are you trying to say that you are instructing the Parliamentary Police to take up the responsibilities of the ministry? 

The second clarification I am seeking is, you are complaining of the lack of manpower in the Police Force, but you deploy so many policemen to guard only one person. Let me give you an example. When you go to Dr Besigye’s residence now in Kasangati, you get so many policemen. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, when you move within just the radius of Kampala alone, you will realise that the deployment of the Police is just too heavy. Why don’t you spread the little manpower that you have countrywide so that we can have some security? Those are the few clarifications I wanted to seek.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, my brother for at last giving me the opportunity to seek clarification. One has been alluded to by my colleague, so I will go to the second one.

I think as a victim of such undertaking, I was on this Floor of Parliament showing my fear of being trailed. This time around, the person trailing me was well-known and I pronounced his name, Arinaitwe, on this Floor of Parliament. My senior brother, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, even allowed that security be granted to me. As my colleague alluded, the Police who came there actually wanted me to give them a house so as to give me protection.

As if that was not bad enough, as they were trying to ask me to incur more costs, the same Arinaitwe Bwana went ahead and trailed me until I got an accident. Right now, I am seeking clarification from the minister that since the incident, which was reported on the Floor of Parliament; and since the incident where I was involved in the accident as a result of being trailed by Arinaitwe, what have you done to this very Arinaitwe rather than leaving him at large and giving him more promotions? I seek that clarification.

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving us an opportunity to seek these clarifications. Mr Speaker, when you hear the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs, it is evident that he is not in charge, even of his own security because he has categorically said that he had to seek reinforcement from somewhere else. He is the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs, who should be giving us assurances of our security and safety. If at all I was him, I would urge the President to convene an urgent Cabinet meeting –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable member to blame the Minister for Internal Affairs yet he knows very well that actually it is the State that has collapsed? Is the Minister of Internal Affairs the state of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any violation of the order of the proceedings of the House? Is there any violation of the Rules of Procedure? I see none in the matter raised by the honourable member for Aswa. Please proceed.

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: I am seeking clarification.

MR ONEK: No, I have taken enough information. Can I continue? Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister had given me chance to seek clarification and I was stopped midway. Is it procedurally right for him not to allow me to complete this statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourbale member, he is the one who allowed you so he is the one who can also dis-allow you. Please finish.

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, the minister does not seem to be in charge and this worries not only us as Members of Parliament, but also the rest of the community. Would the minister categorically state to this Parliament what measures he is going to take to ensure that one, all Members of Parliament have the adequate security deserving of Members of Parliament?

Two, that all cases which have been mentioned here and others which have not been mentioned, will be investigated and a statement be laid on Table for our consideration as Parliament? Thank you very much -(Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is you holding the Floor.

MR ONEK: My friend hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, next time I will allow you; let me first answer some of these.

First of all, why did I ask Members of Parliament to report issues or things that happened in their constituency with respect to those criminal activities to Parliamentary Police? I thought it was easier for them to get the Parliamentary Police here to record because Parliamentary Police is my Police as well as a Minister of Internal Affairs. They report to me and, therefore, I can get whatever information on a routine basis so that I can handle it.

Concerning the other information brought by hon. Franca, I tasked the Director of CID to work on this. I believe it might have taken her longer than what you expect. So, I hope to get you the response soon. I will try to contact the Director of CID to get me a response in order to answer your concerns.

I will put together all these concerns and cause a statement to come from my ministry in respect of all this. As to whether I am in charge, yes, I am in charge -(Interruption)

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have quietly listened to the Minister of Internal Affairs talking about how he also had issues with security, and even listened to other honourable members, because these problems cut across. The murders are all over the country even in Ntoroko.

I find it rather ironical that what the minister is saying - actually, he is going to end up killing himself. I would say this because he is in charge of what appears as the ID project. I have heard that you have forensic investigators. I don’t know how these can work without a database that has finger prints -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order? Please state the order that he has violated so that I can rule.

MR BAHINDUKA: I am seeking a point of order from the honourable minister. Is the honourable minister in order to continue convincing us that he is going to come up with proper measures and bring everyone to book yet there is no single way he can trace the suspects unless there is a database that has been created where he can easily identify people by using the fingerprint method? Is he, therefore, in order to continue convincing us over something that will not come to pass or be of any effect? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The order I am asked to rule on is whether the minister is in order to continue convincing Parliament. It is perfectly in order for any Member, minister or not, to continue convincing Members of Parliament. So, please, the minister is in order to try and convince the Members. 

MR ONEK: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ogwang said that when we gave him Police guards -[MR LUKYAMUZI: “Clarification.”] That is why we have more insecurity in this country because nobody wants to listen.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, it is good that I have been given a chance to raise a matter of clarification. I was cautioned by the people of Rubaga South, namely, Nateete, Najjanankumbi and Ndeeba that if I do not seek an answer from Government, I should not go back. 

The clarification I am seeking is: In Nateete, Kitebi and Ndeeba, insecurity is so alarming that the thieves have developed a new tactic of invading people’s houses at night – they enter through the roof and it becomes totally difficult for anyone to defend himself or herself. What is Government doing to make sure that the people of Rubaga South are secure? They told me that without an answer, they will “chuck” me. And I said to them, “If you “chuck” me, you should equally “chuck” Government.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, is that the same area you had some difficulties in 2002 with the Police? (Laughter)

MR ONEK: Thank you, my brother Ken. Definitely, as the Minister in charge of the Police and security, I will ask the Police Patrol Unit to be more vigilant in your area and move around because of such criminals. Anybody seen on the roof at night can then be brought down because I would not want you be out of Parliament. That is not my desire.

Hon. Ogwang stated that when he asked for Police protection; when we gave him the personnel, and they asked for a house. I do not think the Police would ordinarily ask for a house; they would ask for shelter at you gate so that if it rains –[HON. BEATRICE ATIM: “Order.”] And the same applies to the one “ordering” me. The Police would not ask for a house.

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As Members, I stood here to give information and my honourable colleague gave information to this House on what precisely happened to us in our homes; we are not telling lies to this Parliament; we are telling the truth and the truth will always set us free. Is the honourable minister in order to refute what we are giving as the honest information to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, honesty is a matter of opinion and a subjective assessment. The Speaker is in no position to judge whether what you are saying is honest or dishonest. Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR ONEK: Colleagues, I do trust you. There can be errors; if a policeman asks for a house that will be too much. Well, I believe that if you have any complaint about the Police deployed to guard your place, normally there is an OC Station from where they come. Kindly take those complaints to them so that he or she can guide them to behave properly.

Hon. Wadri, the Police are now very serious on corruption and they are your allies – you the accountability committee. That one I can talk in affirmative because I know what is happening, and I will make sure that they help you. But if for some reason, particularly those Members from the accountability committees who feel threatened, we can make a special arrangement to see that your security is guaranteed. You could contact me in my office so that I see that the VIP Protection Unit takes care of your security. Otherwise, we do not have enough Police to take care of the entire Parliament – that will be 370 Police personnel and that will become a problem. (Hon. Isabirye rose_)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, honourable minister, for accepting this clarification. Mr Speaker, the point I want the inister to clarify to is: On Sunday morning, Andrew Kananura, the proprietor of Panamera Bar and Lodge, located on Naguru Road near Kampala Parents School, beat his employee to death. And now I hear that Kananura is in Nairobi. Can the minister clarify why Police cannot go for him? What is the distance between Nairobi and Kampala? Can’t the Police go and bring him here so that he can be prosecuted?

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, Mr Kananura is on the run because Police has been trailing him. And if you can affirmatively confirm that he is in Nairobi that is good information. I would advise you to take that information to Interpol because we can get him extradited from Kenya up to here on murder charges. We did not know that he was in Kenya. Now that you have said so, let us work together and get him back to the country. 

There was a statement by hon. Anywar about being trailed by Arinaitwe. At one time she denied that Arinaitwe was trailing her, but this time she is again stating it. So, I will have to get the correct version since she is an honest lady; we will want the correct version so that we can find out where the crime is. We shall not condone any Police officer being violent to anybody.

Somebody made a statement that I am not in charge, but I have told you that I am in charge. I do not agree, however, with my brother, hon. Okumu that the state has collapsed. The state has never collapsed; we are firmly in charge. You try “Walk-to-Work” again and we will show you that it is not possible. 

So, we shall make sure that the country is peaceful and we celebrate our Independence – all of you are part of this Independence; that is why you are here in Parliament and able to say whatever you want to say, because we achieved that Independence together. Let us celebrate and if there is any demonstration let it come after so that we can mingle. But now we have a celebration that should give us honour as a country. Very often some of the violence we are witnessing in the countryside is reflecting the way the leadership behaves –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, honourable minister. A while ago, you were talking about the usage of Interpol. I want to tell you that Interpol is one of the most incompetent agencies in Police. The Committee on Public Accounts wrote to the Interpol Director here in Uganda, requesting them to assist us find one of the most corrupt officials involved in the loss of colossal sums of money to the tune of Shs 40 billion, and when the letter went, your officer wrote back saying – after even I had told him the type of business this person does in Nairobi. They wrote back to me saying, “Can you tell us the plot number, where he resides and his telephone…” I mean, honestly, if I went to America or Britain and committed a crime there, Interpol swings into action; they will not ask whether this man Wadri resides in Terego, Jinja or Kampala. It is just the name Kassiano Wadri, which should swing the Police into action to look for me as a suspect. So, your Police - your Interpol is not reliable. That is the information I want to give.

MR ONEK: Well, thank you for the information. I am glad you are also Chairman of the accountability committee. Can you help us to arrest those who are corrupt? (Laughter) If you say Interpol is corrupt get the officers concerned who are corrupt and we shall arrest them. There will be nobody spared. Whether you are Police or a Member of Parliament or a minister, nobody will be spared. We shall ensure that. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I want that record corrected. I did not say that Interpol is corrupt. I said that Interpol is incompetent. I did not use the word “corrupt.” So, let that record be corrected so that in future people do not come and read the Hansard and say, “Wadri alluded to corruption in Interpol.” 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I feel it would be procedurally right for the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs to take off time to go and find out more details about the critical issues Members have raised instead of attempting to answer for the sake of the Hansard. These are issues concerning security. We do not want to leave suspicion or speculation among Members and the country. Can I, therefore, propose that the minister be asked or he takes off time to investigate some of the sensitive issues raised by Members instead of referring some of the issues to Members: “Go and do this; go and make a statement.” It is not right. 

So, can I request you, Sir, to advise or guide the House that the minister takes off time to go and investigate some of the concrete issues raised by Members then he comes up with                   a detailed statement? (Applause)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues that may not require being referred to a report. Some of those issues can be dealt with now and here. So, should the minister have just gotten up and said, “I will come back?” The whole House would have stood uo if he had said that. So, there are issues that are direct and he should respond to them and then there are those that are more involving that he can respond to with a full report. We are not saying today he has finished so that when he leaves here he is done; he should get an opportunity to come back and brief the House properly. Honourable minister please wind up.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I already promised at the beginning that I will come with a comprehensive report on the issues you raise here. This will be as soon as possible. Give me a week or two and I will have the reports here.

I want to conclude by saying that we are all together in fighting crimes. I want us all to be responsible particularly when you are a leader; whatever statements you utter - if you utter a statement of violence, it will create violence even among the community. That is why at one time I stated here, when we were honouring one of the heroes of our country whose body was brought here, that how many of us are emulating his example? 

As a leader, whatever words come from your mouth must be measured against the repercussion that you know they can bring. Some of this violence could have come because the country is now seen by the ordinary people and by the other people that there is violence because of the behaviour of some political leaders. Their behaviour is violent and, therefore, generates violence among the population. Therefore, you are partially responsible for some of this violence. Let us be together and make sure that we stop violence. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have leaders from Buikwe South Constituency. They are here to witness the proceedings of Parliament. I do not know where they are seated. You are very welcome to Parliament.

Honourable members, this is to inform you that the 14th National Prayer Breakfast organised by Parliament of Uganda will take place on 8th October this year at Hotel Africana. The national host is His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. The host is the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. The keynote speaker is Dr Abubakar Bako of Lagos, Rhema Foundation for Leadership Resource Development, Ghana. 

The theme, “Ebenezer Uganda: Towards National Transformation”.  You are all requested to attend and please confirm your attendance by calling telephone number 0774 527874 or registering at the Public Relations Office, South Wing, 1st Floor, Room 114. The telephone number again is 0774 527874. Thank you.

Honourable members, I think we need to deal with some of these matters tomorrow. Let us go to the Order Paper now. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been briefed that the discussions on this particular Bill had been concluded. It was time for the ministers to make responses to this. I will now start by asking the Learned Attorney-General and the Minister for Environment to make some responses before I come to the Minister for Energy. 

4.28
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, on 20th September, I responded to some issues which I thought that the Attorney-General’s Chambers needed to respond to, particularly the essence and importance of international arbitration; the delicate principle or concept of separation of powers; and to what extent Parliament can get involved in matters of oil exploitation and development. 

I left one or two other sensitive issues which I thought I should also respond to, namely, the issue relating to what form, what type of vehicle the National Oil Company should take; whether it should be by a statutory corporation or whether it should be through a limited liability company. This matter exercised our minds in the Executive and I am sure it must also have exercised your minds. But we came to the conclusion that the best would be through a limited liability company and these are the reasons:

With a limited liability company, this type of vehicle will protect the owners and shareholders from personal liability in case of judgements or debts against the business. Whereas the oil industry is characterised by big returns, there are enormous risks involved in this industry. Owing to this fact, many oil companies have run bankrupt; some have been taken over by others and many have merged in a bid to reduce risks and increase capitalisation. In such cases, if the national oil company is incorporated under the Companies Act, the liability will be limited to Government’s shares in the company. However, if formed as a statutory body the liability will be extended to the Ugandan taxpayer’s money. 

A good example in this case is the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico from the BP operated Macondo well, which resulted in billions of dollars in claims. Whereas the British Government is a major shareholder in BP the claims against the company were limited to the company’s capitalisation and, therefore, cannot be any claims against the British Government directly. 

Another advantage of a national oil company as a limited liability company is in respect of sourcing of funds. Due to the nature of the oil industry, sometimes companies are required to raise large sums of capital in a short time to respond to cash calls and by their joint venture partners. It will be easier for the company to borrow by a resolution of the board of directors depending on the articles of association.

There is the element of capital markets. Oil companies raise capital through trading of shares on stock exchange worldwide. Currently, the Capital Markets Authority can only list entities incorporated under the Companies Act. Where the national oil company is established by an Act of Parliament. It will have to first be incorporated under the Companies Act, for example, as a public company, before being listed on the stock exchange market. The investors who consider buying shares in the company internationally will be more comfortable investing in a limited company than a statutory corporation. 

Then there is the element of insolvency. Where a private company becomes insolvent, it may be wound up and the debts paid from the available assets of the company. However, in a case where a statutory corporation makes losses, the liability will be passed to the taxpayers.[MR SSEKIKUBO: “Clarification.”]Do you want to seek clarification from me or you want to give me clarification?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Attorney-General. I am seeking clarification from the minister, what sort of company is he telling Parliament about? He is talking of companies; are they private companies you are talking about? Because there are private oil companies, which are different from the national oil companies? Can you cite which of the national companies you are talking about which have run bankrupt? 

I am raising this, Mr Speaker, because we are here talking about a national oil company and indeed within a country there are other private oil companies like Shell, Total and others. This is the beef of the oil industry. A national oil company to state that it has run bankrupt is a real understatement. So, can the minister clarify so that we can all be at per; so that we can as well raise the counter arguments to those he is trying to raise in the guise of the private company, yet what we are talking about is the national oil company.

MR SABIITI: Further clarification. Mr Speaker, I would like the Attorney-General to explain the relevance of his statement. If we look at Article 244 in our Constitution regarding minerals and petroleum - because this product actually belongs to the government and in this regard, I felt if you want this to be a private company and yet the Constitution says something different, won’t that contradict this Article.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Attorney-General whom I respect in matters of the law, for giving way and allowing this clarification. You have made a very good case in my view for a limited liability company incorporated under the Companies Act. In view of your submissions and in light of the provisions in this Bill relating to the national oil company, if indeed provisions are to be maintained, would you actually state that such a company formed under the Companies Act but referred to under this Bill, and actually getting its original birth under this Bill, is a private company or is a company limited by shares under the Companies Act or a company incorporated under this Bill? Wouldn’t that company then be a statutory company?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, knowing that the Attorney-General did not answer the constitutional issues I raised, I beg you to let me reiterate the importance of the issues I raised briefly because this is very important.

The constitutional concerns I raised cut across the contents of Article 119(3), namely, that the Attorney-General is mandated to give legal advice to the government. The issues I raised cut across normal Government. They would be under normal conditions dealt with by Parliament sitting as the Constituent Assembly.

But let me raise them for the good of the people of Uganda. I raised some important constitutional concerns and I did not get any meaningful answer to the issues. Because of this, I would like to state that we are not going to the moon and we are not in a rush. These issues should be understood and the answers brought forward. Namely, this is the first time Uganda is going to produce oil and refine it. I am not against oil refinery; I am against a methodology that will not honour Uganda’s environment because many countries have fallen prey under such, and this is the concern I am raising. 

The Albertine Graben is the concentration of all the oil wells we are going to deal with. As if that is not enough, the same Graben is the habitat of a number of endangered species, which Uganda greatly values. There are no given safeguards that will enable Ugandans reap the resources of wildlife in a situation where they are not protected. The two Bills, including the refinery Bill and this one, are supposed to operationalise -(Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I remember Counsel Ken-Lukyamuzi -[MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “I am not a counsel.”]- he is a law student now. He raised the same questions and your Chair guided that the government comes with answers. I think he could find out if Government has responses or not before he gets into the same questions that he raised and your Chair guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, if I may start with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s observation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Learned Attorney-General, the issues were already raised; these are the responses. Before they have finished responding to the issues, you are re-raising them. If the responses were complete and those issues were not dealt with, it would make a lot of sense for the Speaker to allow a direct search for answers for specific issues. But you raised those issues and these are the responses they are trying to make to them. Please, allow them to respond. If the issues are still pending, then you can raise them again. 

MR RUHINDI: Before I proceed, taking into consideration your good guidance, Mr Speaker, if hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi looks at the Hansard of Wednesday, 19 September 2012, he will notice that I ably tackled his issues on constitutionalism. Not only did I do so, even the Speaker herself who was in the Chair had this to say: “I may also draw the attention of hon. Lukyamuzi to Article 79(2) of the Constitution which provides as follows: ‘Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under the authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.’” So, we are the ones to make all the laws of Uganda. 

Why was she saying that? She was saying that, because Article 244(2) of the Constitution gives that provision, which you were referring to. What it means is that the Petroleum Bills before Parliament now, seek to operationalise Article 244 of the Constitution. The Constitution only gives broad principles under which the Petroleum Bills have been drafted. Once passed, the laws will provide a legal framework for the regulation of the petroleum sector. It is now your opportunity to make the necessary laws.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, please let –

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Humbly, clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable member finish then you can seek the clarification? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I wish that colleagues who gave points of information, points of clarification had waited until I finished my submission. For instance, what hon. Jack Sabiiti raises does not arise to me because, for instance, there are companies you know of, which are limited liability companies, but are Government companies. For instance, the National Housing and Construction Company Limited is a Government company –(Interjection)– It is a Government Company! Who is saying no? Let me finish then you can come in later. Let me first finish, please. 

I had finished the issue of insolvency. I was going to talk about the issue of business and administrative matters. Now it has been proven that it is more efficient to operate a private limited company than a statutory corporation. Decision-making is quicker in private limited companies, and that is trite knowledge. 

We also need to talk about a level playing field. The entity will be able to compete favourably with other international oil companies when it is registered as a private company, compared to when it is a statutory corporation. Its partners operating in Uganda will view the company as a separate entity from Government, hence limited political interference and more confidence in doing business with it. 

In terms of visibility and transparency, the company will declare its assets in a more transparent manner and more so when listing on the stock exchange. It will also be audited by an independent auditor. 

What surprises me on this issue is that personally, when it was being debated in Cabinet, I could see the trend shifting towards a statutory corporation until convinced otherwise. My imagination at that time was that certainly, the feeling and wishes of Parliament would be that it is a national oil company limited by shares. It is surprising, but that is the trend. This is our advice that this national oil company (NOC) be a limited liability company.

The issue raised by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, whether you can have a national – you see, this law is an enabling legislation. It does not stop you from putting a command within the law to operationalise that command through another vehicle like a limited liability company. There is nothing to stop you from doing that. I am sure hon. Niwagaba knows that. It does not make it statutory. It reminds me of the argument which was floated by Prof. Kanyeihamba about monarchs, that once we come here with the legislation, for instance, providing that monarchs should not participate in partisan politics, they cease to be cultural leaders; they become statutory traditional leaders. (Interjection) I do not know, but that is being academic.

There is the other issue which was raised I think by hon. Gerald Karuhanga, who said that a model production agreement be generated and that it also becomes a schedule to the proposed upstream bill. He also said that almost all oil producing countries have their model production sharing agreements as schedules to their laws. My response is that first and foremost, it is not true that all oil producing countries have their model production sharing agreements as schedules to their laws. The practice is, model production sharing agreements are normally part of the bid documents when a country is conducting a licensing round. Uganda has a model production sharing agreement that has been used to negotiate the current PSAs. In a bid to reduce the aspects of negotiation in the PSAs, many provisions in the model PSA have been incorporated in the proposed upstream bill, and as such, the model PSA shall be updated as soon as the Bills are passed into law.

The oil and gas industry is quite dynamic, and a model production sharing agreement attached as a schedule would not easily change as it forms part of the law. Every time a new aspect is to be considered or negotiated, it will then require an amendment. 

Although for now PSAs are still the most ideal for Uganda, it is also worth noting that the Petroleum Upstream Bill has been drafted in such a way that the country is not tied to PSAs. The country should be able to use other types of licencing regimes or contracting arrangements if they are evaluated as being most beneficial.

Finally, let me respond to hon. Ssekikubo. My part in giving technical legal advice is to see the most suitable legal vehicle through which we can conduct business; I have done so. But for experiences worldwide, in which companies have collapsed, when they had, for instance, statutory corporations as operating vehicles or otherwise, the Minister of Energy will give more specific information in those areas. But for now, I rest my case.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This point is very fundamental. The national oil company we are talking about is the trading arm of oil in this country. We must, therefore, have the role and relationship between this agency, the public and the state clearly defined. He was not confronting the question I raised. I want to add that once it is a public company, it allows the oversight function of Parliament to set in. But the arrangement we are having right now is for it to be floated and for the public to buy shares, yet this is the juicy part of the entire oil sector, where every Ugandan stands to benefit –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The impression I get from hon. Ssekikubo is that the company is going to right away have shares floated to the public. If we cared to look at the details in the clauses, this company is going to be owned by the state 100 percent. In the event that there is need to float the shares, it can only be done when Parliament is involved, by approving or not the process of floating shares. So, I would like to give information that the company we are talking about is going to be owned 100 percent by the state; it is not going to be floated right away. And in case it is going to be floated, Parliament will have to take that decision.


MR NIWAGABA: I want to get clarification from the chairman of the committee – if the company is going to be private, then let it be a public-related liability under the Companies Act. Then the decision-making should be by board of directors and it should be entirely private. But if the board of directors decide to list on the stock exchange, there is no way Parliament is going to get involved. If you want to say Parliament will be involved, why don’t you have it incorporated in this Bill? Once it is private, tell me how Parliament can come into the affairs of a company incorporated under the Companies Act – and remember we even amended the Act and allowed single-member companies. How will Parliament then be involved in the affairs of a purely private limited company?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due humility, I am not satisfied with the answer given by the Attorney-General. First of all, the premises of his answer should not be restricted to the contents of Article 119(3). Mine is a move that goes across. Why am I not constitutionally satisfied? This Bill we are about to pass is supposed to operationalise the contents of Article 244. That Article badly lacks a provision capable of causing action in terms of effect, to address gross negligence and acute environmental degradation. 

I am not talking out of the blue; I am talking with reference to the Constitution which we are already following. Under Article 22(1) it is stated that no person shall be deprived of life. But the Penal Code, Section 188, goes on to say that no person shall terminate the life of another. 

So, why am I complaining? I am saying that we may not right now take action of a constitutional nature, but it is important for us to know that the safeguards in the Constitution, namely, Article 244, are not strong enough to handle the defects of what will come out of the Bills on petroleum exploration and petroleum refining. I did not get an adequate answer pursuant to what I highlighted. What do I do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, have you looked at both articles 244 and 245? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t that the answer to the issues you have been raising from the beginning?

MR KEN- LUKYAMUZI: It is not an answer with reference – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This Parliament has passed a law that regulates issues of environment – environmental impact assessment and so forth are in existing legislation. We are not re-inventing the wheel here. It is in existence; it is provided for under Article 245; and it is the same Constitution making the same provisions and giving authority to this House to legislate in a comprehensive manner. The law is not just one legislation; the law is a statute book – it is the whole spectrum of the law looked at together, not in isolation. 

So, if you look at the environmental law passed under Article 245, would you still be raising those same issues under 244? We need to look at this thing comprehensively as we deal with it.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is from the chairperson. He should confirm to the House that if government is going to own this company 100 percent, I need to be assured that if this company becomes insolvent – because the business of oil is volatile - they should not come back to taxpayers in case of selling those assets to foot the Bill due to mismanagement of the board. 

I know that business companies can be mismanaged. But if it is incorporated within Government and it is a public entity, they will come for taxpayers’ money to pay for the liabilities of that company. So, I seek guidance for the benefit of the Hansard; if this company is owned by Government 100 percent and the board of directors are appointed by Government to run it, if it runs insolvent - when you run insolvent, it means that your assets cannot be sold to to meet the debts of the company; and this is most likely to happen. So, I don’t want Government to go for the taxpayer’s money to pay for the mismanagement of that company, which is owned by Government. I want that assurance. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I think we should not create a body out of this matter. The national oil company we are talking about is basically a company that will sell our oil. Members should not be perturbed by thinking that the company will be a middle company. It represents our interests, and with knowledge in which market we can sell our oil; it would actually be a money-minting entity. In the entire petroleum sector, the National Oil Company is the trading arm; gets its oil and finds market, and it mints money. It is as plain as that. 

But what the honourable chairman of the committee is trying to say – I have read through the Bill and the report – it is only an insertion, which they proposed in the report; that should the National Oil Company acquire the capacity and capability, then it can go ahead to float its shares to the public, given that Ugandans would retain 67 percent.

Mr Speaker, you are making this company prey to all the money sharks around town, and if anybody had money, there is no way they can stop them from buying shares in this company because it is generally for minting money-. There are no risks; it is basically for minting money. 

That is why we, as Ugandans, have to start from the word “go”. Once it is left as a private company, you will be curtailing the scrutiny and oversight function of Parliament. You will not be able to define the relationship between this company, the public and the state. All of us Ugandans are looking at the 3.5 billion barrels of oil and how the money that shall be gotten from this shall translate in improving the lives of Ugandans. 

Should you float it – we had this with the National Insurance Corporation; we started by floating shares and in the end where are we, honourable members? 

So, this business of taking this Parliament for granted, Mr Speaker, I would plead with Members that this is a money-minting company; we should leave it in the hands of Government; we should leave it in the hands of the public; we should all be looking at it rather than giving it away to the few who are advantaged to buy the shares of this company. 

MR KENNETH LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the Attorney-General. Given that oil is an issue which is of such great concern to every Ugandan, when the Attorney-General talks about registering a limited liability company under the Companies Act, my understanding is that the law we are making now is not sufficient to make that company operational. My understanding is that this company would then go ahead to be registered under its own memorandum and articles of association, which would allow it to operate on its own. In that case, it would mean that we have ceded power completely to those who are going to run the company, to run it according to those articles that they have drafted. 

I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General that where are our interests as Members of Parliament in seeing that this company is actually controlled according to the law we are making. Because, when you go out and make the articles of association, which are going to operationalise this company, you will not need to come back here again. We shall have given you authority to go ahead, create the company and let the company run. So, those internal laws that are going to run the company are not going to be for the concern of this Parliament. We are, therefore, wondering how this company will be controlled without being abused. I thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to this Constitution, this oil is supposed to be vested in the government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda. Really, what this means, as far as I am concerned, is that it cannot be compared with the company that is being described by the Attorney-General. 

Parliament must have a hand in overseeing what goes on in that particular company. If it is going to be a company by guarantee or whatever way he was explaining here, it means the Government of Uganda is just going to leave it out, and this in itself contradicts this particular article.

Unless otherwise clearly explained further by the Attorney-General, we may have to seek constitutional explanation of this particular article in as far as this company is concerned. Because, if you just leave it out and Parliament does not know what goes on - the directors are going to take charge; they will direct. Even what my colleague has been talking about in terms of the environment, there is no way you are going to run away from the risks that emanate from the operations of this entire activity. 

I, therefore, would like to ask the Attorney-General to clearly look at this article and understand what it meant for the people who made this Constitution. This petroleum must be controlled by the people of Uganda and there is no way you are going to just hand it over to others to do it. If the company is 100 percent Ugandan – 100 percent Government controlled, then Parliament must have a say and must oversee what goes on in this particular company.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we are here grappling with the national oil company, and I can understand why the stakes are high; they are extraordinarily high. In my hand is credible information that as we are trying to come up with a company we are envisaging as Ugandans, the ministry has already proceeded to form one and has already appointed people to work in it. The commercial unit structure is already in place. It is so perturbing that this Parliament is taken for granted and for a ride. It is as if we are already wasting time. We come to plead for their understanding, but they cannot understand. We want to present our feelings on this matter, but they seem to be overriding us and yet the matters are already fait accompli. So, what is remaining for the people of this country? Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, as Minister in charge of Energy and Mineral Development, which includes petroleum, I am not aware of any company that has been created as the national oil company to take care of business on behalf of Government. Is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to misguide this House and impute that there is a company which has already been created. Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to substantiate.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. As I said, there is already a structure for this company and appointments to it have also already been made.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a company?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the commercial unit structure, which is the national oil company, yes. It is headed by one Davis; the head of legal is Mr Isaac Kabuye. The Division Head, Technical/Joint Venture Co-ordination is Mr Andrew Ochan. The Division Head, Business is Ms Peninah Ahebwa. 

When you get to petroleum engineering, there is Mr Karim K. David Basiima; cost engineering is headed by Mr Wandera Robert, Daniel Muwooya and another to be recruited. Also, the one for the Joint/Venture Co-ordination is yet to be recruited. 

In pricing, there is Mr David Basiima. In Gas and Physical terms there is Mr Herbert Mugizi, ECP Benjamin Ariho and Sherura Stephen, and it is already in place. I, therefore, beg to lay these – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member; let us not rush these things. Is there a company? If so, what is the name of that company? Can you present to us the registration certificate of this company for us to confirm there is one?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I want to be clear on record. To say that I bring the registration certificate is not possible because it is still in the formative stages. But what I am saying is that already as we talk, these employees – and it is called the commercial unit structure of the national oil company, and it is already in place.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for my colleague, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, to continue insisting that there is a company when he cannot prove its existence to us using the relevant documents that there is a registered company which he is alluding to? I am saying this because just saying there is a “commercial unit” does not constitute a registered company. If he cannot do that, I think hon. Theodore Ssekikubo should withdraw his statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member rose on a point of order. Honourable members, the little understanding by the Speaker of companies is that a company becomes a living person or natural person from the date of registration. A company upon registration is presented with a certificate of incorporation. And for a company to be registered, it must present memoranda of association and articles of association. Those documents must contain signatures of the promoters of that company.

The only way that the Speaker would confirm that there is such a company in existence would be upon the presentation of – even if just photocopies which are not certified, because we would ask for certification from the registration services bureau; but just copies of articles and memorandum of association, and a certificate of registration, would be sufficient proof of the existence of such a company. Anything else is incorrect. That is the understanding of the Speaker on the subject of company registration, which the Chair is also fairly familiar with because he has incorporated one or two of them. 

So, if the honourable member can present to us a certificate of incorporation - and we don’t care whether it is certified or not because that can take place later - but just copies of a certificate of incorporation and possibly articles of association . Short of that, honourable member, then we cannot go with your statement that such a company exists.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I remember I was very clear on this - the conception that there is a company that is already in registered and incorporated - that while we are here deliberating, already a structure and appointments to that oil company have already been made. It is common knowledge; my chairman does not necessarily have to rush to the registrar of companies , but what we are –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The hon. Theodore Ssekikubo has made a very serious allegation here; he said that the government has already established a company. He went ahead to read names of officers appointed to that company. However, he is now changing his own statement to say that he told us that Government had set up a structure. But a structure with names of people who have already been appointed cannot just be a structure. You are actually stating that Government has already set up a company. And you are telling this Parliament that Government has already set up a company even before we enact the relevant law.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally correct for us to proceed on this matter without the honourable member either substantiating his allegations or withdrawing it officially, or can we move a motion for him not to be heard? Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have stated fairly clearly, that the existence of a company is not by word of mouth; it is not by documents that do not subscribe to what I have just said. A certificate of incorporation, which arises from the filing of memorandum and articles of association, dully signed by the promoters of such a company must be in place. The absence of that would mean there is no company; and if there is such a company, then the honourable member would proceed to say it exists. But if there is no document to prove that such a company exists, then the statements are misleading.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, you know very well, as I do, that before a company is formed, it goes through a process called promotion. Now, if the honourable member has alluded to individuals who are now known to be in the process of promoting and, therefore, forming the company and those individuals have been named, why don’t we allow the minister to confirm whether those individuals exist in her ministry? And two, whether the unit that is said to be already in the process of promoting and substantially forming the company also exists or not, and if that unit is there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely, that is the point I was making; that if there is a company, then show us that company. But if there is none, it should also be clear that there is no company yet. That will help us to go to the next stage of investigating the minister on what is actually there. But we cannot debate on the premises that there is a company when there is none.

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Speaker, I think the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo has an issue. In the oil industry, the commercial entity is the national oil company. Now, if there is another commercial entity that has been established in the ministry, then I think hon. Ssekikubo has a point.

Mr Speaker, one time you guided here that, “What walks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, can be nothing but a duck”. If there is a commercial entity that is walking like a national oil company, and is behaving like a national oil company, then it can be nothing, but something like a national oil company -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, for something to walk like a duck, and to quack like a duck, it must be constituted in that form that conforms to the shape, size and nature of a duck. But if it is an imitation of a duck, but it is quacking and walking like a duck, it can never be a duck. It may be a toy. A toy duck is never a duck, and that is the point we are making.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue, which is being raised by Parliament, should not be bashed. The people out there are full of expectations and suspicion. If such an issue is raised in this House, it would be very important that we get a full explanation whether it is true or not. I can only add that as we were seating in the Committee on Education and Sports, we were informed that Kyambogo University does not have an internal auditor because he is being employed by the incoming national oil company. So, this should be explained clearly to the House and to the public -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I do understand that hon. Anywar is a member of the Committee on Energy and a shadow minister. Is she in order, when she had an opportunity to ask for all this information and to give us a report, and now she is misleading the House that there is a company, which you ably said that we cannot debate on rumours with no evidence? 

Mr Speaker, when there was an oil debate here, we debated and took a decision on mere forged papers and Parliament was ridiculed. Is the honourable member now in order, if she did not ask in the committee - you are ruling that the documents should be laid on Table and if they are not there, the records should be expunged. Is she in order to mislead this House that there is a point she is making?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think going to rule on that matter would be taking us away from the subject because the subject really is, is there a company already in existence before we pass the law? The answer up to now is no. But have there been steps taken towards that before the formulation of the law? That is where we are now going to ask the minister to explain. Can we ask the minister to explain if there is such a situation or not, and on which we can take assurances from?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Before the minister can come and clarify this, Mr Speaker, it may not have docked. It is in the process and being promoted. We even have the designations, the roles, the job descriptions and the personnel who are holders of those offices.

I want the minister to deny this, if this is false, rather than the anxiety of the chairman of the committee who rises up without knowing details of this, yet he is also a Member like me. We already have it, their names are there and everything is laid down. Can the minister deny this, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we listen to the honourable minister?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the Ninth Parliament. We are here legislating not for ourselves, but for the future generations. Good enough we have young boys and girls up here in the gallery watching us. Tomorrow they will ask us a fundamental question, Where is our oil? When our oil was being taken away, where were you? We will say we were in Parliament. So, what were you doing in Parliament when all these ideas were being hatched? What did you do?

So, Madam Minister, when we are asking you these questions as per the revelations made by hon. Ssekikubo, it is because we care for this country. All that we are doing is going to be for posterity. We will be judged accordingly, and we will be judged harshly. Should we be so careless with the usage of these God given resources that we legislate in such a way that we cushion a few people here and there to give them leverage over this country. I think it will be very unfortunate!

So, Madam Minister, I respect you. You are called Irene and that is a very precious name. You got that name when water was poured on your forehead and you must live up to it. If you are going to be here to shame this name “Irene” for reasons best known to you, I think that will be very unfortunate and history will judge you harshly first before it judges us later on. 

So, please, be yourself Engineer Irene Muloni, the minister now, but who will retire tomorrow and will be a mukaikuru or an old lady in Mbale. People will continue to go to you to ask these pertinent questions. So, please help us. All we are doing is for the benefit of this country. We have heard experiences from other countries that have been endowed with this resource, but they have been mismanaged it and they have plunged their countries into chaos. We do not want to see this happen here in Uganda.

Please, Madam Minister, this is my humble appeal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see that the seminarian days of the hon. Kassiano have not gone away. He has delivered – Please, let us hear from the minister and then we can move forward on this.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to assure the honourable members that as Government we care for this country. As a Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, I care for this country, and whatever we are doing is to the best of our ability. As a mother, I care for this country.

I will still repeat that there is no company that has been created as a national oil company until the law is in place. The names of members of my ministry that hon. Ssekikubo is mentioning are staff in my Petroleum Exploration and Production Department. They are the ones who are handling all these issues that we are debating here. They have put in a lot to ensure that we come up with a good law that is going to manage this resource in the most transparent and accountable manner.

Mr Speaker, as honourable Members of Parliament, we need to do our part. Let us put in place a good law that is going to enable me manage this resource in the best way possible.

Hon. Ssekikubo is telling lies. He wants to derail this House and I demand that he withdraws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to find a way of moving through this properly. A statement was made by hon. Ssekikubo and he read names. The honourable minister has said that those names read are for the staff in her ministry – the people who have been responsible for preparing this document that we are now processing. What is the outstanding issue on this matter so that I can see how we can move forward?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of the national oil company is something we have wrestled with at committee level for a long time. And what premised our contest, especially with the ministry’s position is that some of us felt very strongly that this oil company should never ever be a private something company. The reason we thought so was that we needed to have ownership of our oil proceeds and we must audit it.

I would like to be educated, because even with hon. Ssekikubo’s submission, the underlying principle we are trying to obtain is something that gives this nation an assurance that Ugandans will own the oil money and they will manage and audit it. 

I would like to be helped, later on, that we can secure that middle ground given our record as a country and the record of this Government at managing public resources. You know you have a problem. 

That aside, let me ask you, the experts in law, you talked about a company and if it is, then it has to have a memorandum of association and articles of association. I would like to find out who draws those documents before a company is registered? Isn’t it the members who will run that entity after it is registered?

I would like to try to figure out how this concern comes about; there may not be a company, but I should also be assured why the ministry is very rigid if there is nothing like this. So, if we are asking and it is just in the process, there should be some human beings drawing these documents – memorandum of association and articles of association. It is possible at my level right now to assume that those are the people who will later on draw these documents, and that is the reason why the ministry should not be so rigid. But if that is not the case and we have to believe the minister, let her bring to this House tomorrow, the appointment letters of all those people who have been read, showing that they were given jobs in the Energy ministry a year ago and not yesterday. That will put our concerns to rest and convince us that this is not the commercial arm of the ministry, and it is not the reason for her being rigid; then we will look for the middle ground. Thank you.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At this level, I need your guidance because I can no longer follow the debate. First of all, hon. Ssekikubo has not proved to this House that the national oil company does exist. When we sought clarification from the minister, she said that the company does not exist. Now, how can we get into the explanation of the commercial unit of the oil company, when the company, in the first place, is not there? Mr Speaker, please help those of us who are listening and want to follow properly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not yet decided what shape this company will be in; whether it will be a private or public company. At least, to my knowledge, we have not gone that far – whether it is going to be a public company where Uganda owns 100 percent or a private company –well, as much as the law is clear, we have not finished that stage. 

My point is, if we have not gone that far, how can we now start discussing the recruitment? Hon. Ssekikubo, I would like you to read those names again; and hon. Irene Muloni, please take down those names and respond to them specifically.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your strong determination on this matter. I do not know whether time can even allow, because I could read their names, designations, roles and even their job descriptions minus qualifications. And indeed there is a laid out structure; an organogram is already in existence and I hope nobody can run away from this. 

The head is Davis Abeinomugisha. His designation is the head of the commercial unit, and the job description involves, among others, participating in the selection of new recruits, liaising with the regulatory and policy units to ensure effective implementation of joint responsibilities. He manages the business aspect of state participation to maximise value to Government. He spearheads the coordination of ECP and IPP projects. He spearheads the sale of test crude. He reports regularly on the performance of the joint venture, especially on the challenges of state participation. He proposes investments that Government may be engaged in. He participates in joint venture meetings; and he coordinates the incorporation of NAT-Oil (National Oil Company).

The second one is Andrew Ochan, who is the head technical/joint venture coordination. He assists the unit head in matters of exploration, development and production. He participates in the preparation and review of field development plans. He participates in monitoring of petroleum operations. He participates in advising Government on the level of state participation.

He participates in negotiating agreements for the ECP, IPP and the safe test crude. He identifies capacity-building needs for the technical team. He communicates on technical issues. He participates in JV meetings and in operations meetings.

There is Vivian Sempala, Tumushabe and Tonny Dungu. These are G and G. They participate in: Geological and geophysicist studies; monitoring petroleum operations; review of field development plans; andreview of geological and geochemical survey designs. They also participate in monitoring geological and geophysical survey contracts with contractors in geophysical data acquisition processing, interpretation and archiving; and  in evaluation of geological and geophysical data acquired by the contractors – not Government, but contractors.

We have David Basiima and Herbert Mugizi who are in petroleum engineering. They deal in preparation of building and official programmes for wells. They participate in implementation of drilling programmes; work closely with other disciplines to achieve well construction; data gathering objectives; optimise drilling programmes by recommending appropriate well bore hydraulics; bit and casing site selection; mud and cementing programmes and procedures to predict and detect abnormal pressures; keep abreast of new equipment; rotational basis to provide day and night holiday or weekend contact with drilling companies; participate in preparation of appropriate drilling methodologies; high pressure wells, had rock; hard angle; deviation; horizontal well; fishing etc. They also participate in compilation, review of field development plans, monitoring petroleum operations, technical assistance and guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now just read the next names. We have got the –

MR SSEKIKUBO: I read David Muwooya and Wandera Robert - Cost Engineering. These are involved with the compilation of SDPs; participate in preparation of review of annual work, and evaluation of monitoring costs of petroleum operation. 

The joint venture coordinator; this one is still vacant. 

The head of business is Peninah Ahebwa. With all the designation; prepares transitional capacity building programmes for the sub-team; keep abreast with applicable Government laws; handles fiscal matters regarding state participation; participates in operations meetings; SD preparation and review; steering committee meetings; gas fiscal terms, identification of potential buyers for the EWT crude; participates in JV meetings; performs cash flow analysis and participates in the economic modelling of the production sharing agreements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you now read the rest of the names? Just the names because we have understood the rest of -

MR SSEKIKUBO: I go to pricing, Mr Speaker. There is David Basiima and one vacant post. 

There is gas fiscal terms: one Herbert Mugizi and Winston Mugumya, and one position is still vacant. They are still scouting for it.  

We have ECP: Ariho Benjamin, Jarumu Robert and Sherura Stephen. Those are the ones, Mr Speaker, that I have with me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you please deal with those? Who are those people and what are they doing there?

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I listened to hon. Ssekikubo, the names of the people he is reading are staff in my ministry and they work in the Petroleum Exploration and Development Department.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use the microphone please. Please let the minister first explain so that we see where we are going. 

MS MULONI: I have said that the names that he has read are members of staff in my ministry in the Petroleum Exploration and Development Department. They are members of staff.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not doubt the competencies of my colleague in writing down whatever hon. Ssekikubo has been reading. But wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he lays on Table that document so that Parliament owns it, and so that we can reflect on it and in order to simplify the work of the minister? This is the point of procedure I want to raise, that he lays the document on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I keep saying, I monitor this House closely. I have just noticed that the minister has a copy of that same document - what document were you looking at? Okay, proceed and let the honourable member lay this on Table. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to lay on Table the commercial unit structure of the proposed national oil company -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what is written on the document?

MR SSEKIKUBO: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please read what is on the document you are going to lay. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the commercial unit structure of the national oil company with the core roles of those personnel appointed to be heads of department and the departments. I further lay an organogram of the same. I rather lay the human resource allocation and job description with the designation, role, job description and the personnel holding those posts. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me take a look. Honourable members the document that the hon. Ssekikubo proposes to lay on the Table has an organogram which is for the commercial unit structure. It has: Head commercial unit; legal division; head technical joint venture coordination; division head business; and then the lower levels have G and G - I do not know what that is. Petroleum Engineering, Cost Engineering, Joint Venture Coordination, Pricing, Gas Fiscal Terms and ECP. That is the organogram and it has names under those particular heads. 

The next set of documents is the commercial unit. It has roles and other things. The next set of documents is the human resource allocation and job description. It does not make any reference to any institution - whether oil company. This particular document I am holding does not even refer to a ministry or a company. It is simply commercial unit structure. These are the documents that hon. Ssekikubo proposes to lay on the Table. So, let the record capture the documents as read for the purposes of the House. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Ssekikubo has laid before this Parliament a document to which the honourable minister says is a list of her departmental staff. I know for a fact that all civil servants have two important documents in the human resource department. They have got their appointment letters and the Public Service Commission minutes. Can we, as a matter of procedure to help us marry the two, request the honourable minister to confirm this - because she says these are her staff. If they are her staff, then the letters of appointment and the Public Service Commission minutes must be there in her registry, which she should be able to produce to us then we will know that these are her staff. Short of that, we will go by hon. Ssekikubo’s document.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, as you rightly put it, the document that my honourable Member of Parliament has laid on the Table does not have a title. Anyone can actually manufacture this. It so happens that the names being mentioned there are names amongst my staff. Those are not all my staff. Those names are amongst staff in my ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the document that has been laid on Table has names. The minister has stated that some of those names are actually names of staff - can you re-state what you said about the names?

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I have a long list of names of staff in my ministry. The names that I have heard read as staff on that organogram are members of my staff. I can cross-check and read out for you and confirm.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you just take a sample and give us a description in the document you have. What are their job descriptions?

MS MULONI: Yes, I can sample out. Davis Abeinomugisha is an acting principal geologist; there is Winston Mugumya, that one is a petroleum engineer; there is Robert Wandera Omwembe, a petroleum engineer; there is Peninah Ahebwa a senior development analyst; Isaac Kabuye is a legal officer; Daniel Muwoya is a cost engineer and Vivian Sempala is a phrenologist. They are members of my staff and they have designations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay that also on the Table?

MS MULONI: Yes, Mr Speaker. I was going to lay this on the Table as part of the requirement because Members of Parliament asked me to lay -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At this moment, would you like to lay that document on the Table?

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, let me clarify. Last week when we were debating the oil Bills, Members requested to know the list of personnel trained in oil and gas courses since 1986. So, this is the list which I have brought specifically as a requirement of Parliament, but for purposes of sampling, I was trying to cross-check because I am supposed to lay it on the Table in my response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you going to lay it on the Table now or you want to lay - please let us be orderly.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I can lay this document on the Table; there is no problem and then I will lay it again when I make my response -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, once you have already laid it on the Table, it will be finished; you will only speak about it.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, this list is for personnel trained in oil and gas courses since 1986 as requested by Parliament. So, I had brought it for that purpose. I can lay it on the Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that list as presented by the minister. The title of the document that the minister proposes to lay on the Table is, “The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - List of personnel trained in oil and gas resources since 1986.” Let the records capture this as such.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you so much for the efforts being taken to clarify the seeming confusion between hon. Ssekikubo and the minister. 

The point of guidance I am seeking is that, hon. Ssekikubo presented a commercial unit. Could you assist us by guiding this Parliament whether the Ministry of Energy has any petroleum unit that is almost equivalent to the commercial unit. I think that is very important for clarification. Is it a unit? What is the practice under the petroleum management unit of the Ministry of Energy? I think that will clear whether it is a commercial unit or a petroleum unit. I think that will help us to clarify whether there are people positioned in those various departments. I seek that guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go step by step. Honourable minister, the issue is, do you have a commercial unit in the ministry? That is the question being asked. Do you have a commercial unit which has personnel?

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a petroleum exploration and development department and under that department, there are various units that carry out different work. I will request to bring details of the various -(Interjections)- Yes, tomorrow, let me bring the details of the various units in the petroleum department.

MR BIGIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you. I have listened very carefully to the submission from a colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, and especially in line with the company in quote, and the responses raised by the minister in that regard. 

But as a sober person, I was looking at - and of course no one is drunk, but as sober people in the House and in particular myself, I was wondering about first of all, the source. Because I am seated near him, I quietly began to read including names and positions. As a person who is hosting the oil industry in Bunyoro, I started to have a point of doubt in my mind and I would not be indulged in that doubt because the minister is here to clarify. 

The point I am raising is, wouldn’t it be better to guide, for example, the honourable minister - because she has not denied the knowledge of these names; she has been asked whether she knows the existence of the commercial department and she is not aware. Wouldn’t it be better, like she is already alluding to in terms of requesting, for her to be given time, and she goes back, because there are things which are done by technical people. By the time these people are aware, it has taken time. So, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance in that direction. Is it not better for the minister to go back to the ministry, find out all this, because this is whistle-blowing? In any case, as a good manager, when I hear a rumour or information of this nature, I would get interested in finding out why. How is this coming in? Where is the source other than just coming and saying, “No, those are names?” At one point you accept these are your people then at the other point you deny some. So, that is the guidance, Mr Speaker.

MR BALTAZAR ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, I remember all of us in this House agreed that the issue of oil is not partisan. First and foremost, it is not NRM, it is not Opposition. It is Uganda. I want us to take it in the same spirit. However, I remember hon. Mukitale consistently used to bring information to this House regarding companies doing business down there in the oil wells, and many people kept on denying that companies existed until when Mukitale even brought the names of people and companies which were there. 

So, it is not necessary to deny or defend; what we need as Ugandans is a good industry. If things are not going well, we should all as a group of parliamentarians given the mandate to make laws for Uganda in the Ninth Parliament, see how best – as hon. Junjura has said, the technical people could be doing certain things without the minister’s knowledge. Now that this information has come - and I want to thank hon. Ssekikubo. That is why we passed the Whistleblower’s Act. Whether a document is signed or not, look at the credibility of the information rather than saying it is anonymous. Yes, a whistleblower’s document will always be anonymous. The issue is, what is the content of the information? If we move in that direction, we might move very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues raised are clear in my mind; that there are names which are concurring on both sides. The minister has said she has departments and under those departments, she has units, details of which she does not have now because she was not prepared for that. Details of which she can present tomorrow which will give this House proper time to delve deeper into this matter and finalise all these issues. 

The document presented by the hon. Ssekikubo has been received on record. The list of people trained since 1986 presented by the minister has been received on record. So, this debate is deferred to tomorrow when those documents are ready and then we proceed like that.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kyankwanzi Junior Primary School in Kiboga represented by the hon. Samuel Ssemugaba and hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa. They are here to witness the proceedings of the House. I am sure they have had a good time this afternoon seeing how we try to defend the interests of this country, and their future as children of this country.

Honourable members, with that I will allow a presentation of a petition and then we will adjourn until the ministers come back with these particular documents. Can we go back to Item No.3?   

PETITION TO PARLIAMENT OVER THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION PROJECT

6.06
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to present to Parliament a petition under Rule 31 of our Rules of Procedure, on behalf of the undersigned and business communities in Uganda and along the borders of Uganda over the National Identity Card Project:

Mr Speaker, you recently instituted an inquiry into the procurement of equipment for the National Security Information System/National ID Project with the objective of clearing hindrances and bringing back on track the project implementation for Ugandans to acquire national IDs, and enjoy the benefits that accrue from the project, such as conforming to the East African Federation requirements under the East African Common Market Protocol for each citizen to have a national ID for easier movement within the federal states.

Consequently, the Government of Uganda promised Ugandans that it will issue national IDs to the 4.7 million Ugandans whose data was captured in June 2010 during the implementation of phase 1 of the National Security Information System by the Electoral Commission and the contractor Muhlbauer. On the 19 July 2010, the government received all the necessary equipment for personalisation and ID card printing and since then, the equipment is all sitting idle and deteriorating at the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation in Entebbe. 

So far, Government has received 10 million blank ID cards sitting in Bank of Uganda ready to be printed into 10 million national ID cards for 10 million Ugandans. However, the current activities of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Department of Immigration do not support the recent recommendation by the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee regarding the National ID Project.

Mr Speaker, we the undersigned, it is our prayer that -

Parliament of Uganda speeds up the process to enable us acquire our national IDs for easy identification at this time of terrorism and to enable us do business across borders without interruptions currently experienced within our partner states

Parliament of Uganda should avert an imminent financial loss of Euros 64 million equivalent to close to Shs 200 billion worth of equipment, and blank IDs sitting idle in an unconducive and dust-prone environment for more than two years, and deteriorating by the day, losing warrant on equipment and software.

Parliament of Uganda averts a foreseeable constitutional crisis for failure to have a national register that must be in place by 2014 in order to have elections in 2016. Otherwise, to avert a crisis, the Electoral Commission will have no choice but to submit a technology budget to Parliament with intentions of undertaking a parallel, expensive registration exercise and production of voter ID cards for the 2016 elections.

We, therefore, appeal that part of the recent allocated funds of Shs 25 billion by Parliament to the Immigration Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs be used for the renovation of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation facility in Entebbe, whose specifications for civil works for the personalisation centre are ready and a negotiated rental agreement between the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation is already in place, instead of embarking on a new plan by the Department of Immigration to buy land as a priority, undergo a long procurement process and putting up buildings, while the equipment at Entebbe is wasting away day by day. 

The contractor, Muhlbauer, needs only Shs 125 million to initially refurbish space big enough to install at least one scope personalisation machine and be able to begin immediately the process of personalisation of the available data of the 4.7 million data sets into the 4.7 million Ugandan national Ids, which will be done within a few months.

We further appeal that Parliament of Uganda averts an impending law suit against the government for unfulfilled contractual obligation and breach of contract for delayed payment to the German contractor demanding for Euros 13 million and save the country against avoidable litigations and penalties. 

That Parliament causes a meeting with all the various players like Ministry of Internal Affairs, Immigration, Electoral Commission, Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, NITA, UBOS and the contractor with a view of putting individual interests aside and use the successful Electoral Commission model which was used in phase 1, for massive enrolment of citizens to the tune of 5.2 million data cards in a record of six weeks. With this approach, mass registration of national IDs can be achieved sooner to avoid a constitutional crisis without a voter’s register by 2014, which will be in preparation for the 2016 elections. 

The immigration board be urgently put in place – currently there is no immigration board – to streamline the activities of the immigration department. Its absence is partly slowing down the implementation of the national ID process.

Mr Speaker, the lead petitioner on behalf of the 94 citizens is Godfrey Sseruwagi, independent consultant, and all the 94 signatories who are praying to Parliament to make sure that we fast-track the process of the national ID to avert the imminent loss of Shs 200 billion we passed in this Parliament to have IDs for Ugandans, and we would have celebrated 50 years better having given every Uganda a national identity card. 

Mr Speaker, I want to lay on Table the petition for consideration by Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. Honourable members, this petition stands committed to the appropriate committee, which would be the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for expeditious handling –to the appropriate committee. The rule is that within 45 days, they should come back but petitions as usual are shorter issues; the respective committee should handle it quickly and report to the House so that we can take decisions. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of the issues being raised in the petition have already been dealt with by the committee and are already part of the committee recommendations. So, the procedural point I am raising is whether it would not be better to first implement the recommendations which Parliament has already made; if the recommendations of Parliament are put in place, then some of the issues being raised would not come up because they would be answered already. Now, when you refer this new petition to the committee, aren’t they going to be re-doing work which was previously done?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 45(1). I am in possession of a letter dated 1 October 2012 from the Clerk to Parliament, concerning the Independence celebrations. When I read paragraph one and four, the two confuse me. Let me read them for the benefit of the House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we haven’t finished this matter. 

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In regard to the project of national identity cards, the Auditor-General carried out his mandate and the report was produced. It was laid on Table and was referred to the Public Accounts Committee. That committee has been proceeding on that same matter of national identity cards. So, would it be procedurally right to refer it to a sessional committee when PAC, a standing committee, is handling it?

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, Parliament debated the report on the identity card project and we made recommendations. Cabinet is supposed to come here with a report detailing how far it has gone in implementing the recommendations of Parliament. Are we procedurally right to receive another petition before we get the report from Cabinet telling us how far they have gone with the implementation of the Parliament recommendations?

6.17
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to augment the point which was raised by hon. Eddy Kwizera. This Parliament is, I would say, at crossroads or at loss sometimes. There are issues which are of accountability nature, rightly served to this Parliament through the report of the Auditor-General. While the appropriate committee is in top gear handling the matter, policy committees also come in, just like in the issue of the bicycles. 

I think as a Parliament, we need to respect mandates, otherwise we will be criss-crossing and stepping on another’s toes. At the end of the day, we will move as if we are not coordinated. And to respond to hon. Majegere, we will only know as Parliament that Government has implemented or acted on the recommendations of Parliament when we receive the treasury memorandum. Fortunately, they are here; the prime ministers are here, the Leader of Government Business is here, the Government Chief Whip is here, the ministers are here and others have taken leave –(Interjections)– they have taken leave when Parliament is still sitting and that is why the Rt hon. Speaker is still in the Chair. 

So, I do not think we can even recollect when the Executive last served this Parliament with treasury memorandum to show that they are implementing the recommendations of Parliament. Without that, we know they have not implemented. And as Parliament, we will not get tired of stuffing their throats with more work that they must do. As far as we are concerned in Parliament, Government has not pronounced itself on the recommendations that were made by the Internal Affairs Committee. The same permanent secretaries, the same civil servants, who are according the recommendation of Parliament were supposed to be relieved of their duties by the appointing authorities continue to appear before this Parliament to defend their policy statements. That is a sign that Government is not committed to implementing the recommendations of Parliament.

We as Parliament are not bound to wait for them to come; pro-actively, we will continue to make recommendations and send to them. The onus is on them to implement or not; the public will judge us accordingly. So, we need to pronounce ourselves on these issues. 

Even as I speak, the Public Accounts Committee is with its report in completion stage. Actually, I am now at a loss as to what we will do with it. Should we go ahead and present our report, or should we just keep quiet and wait for the Executive to take a holiday –(Interjections)– I know General you are practicing to stand up and reply to me, but I should say that this is something that you as the Executive need to respond to. It is no point for us to stand here and make recommendations in the interest of this country and we do not even hear from you whether you have taken it or not. Not all treasury memorandums are to be positive. You can just say in a sentence, “We as the Executive we are not going to implement this recommendation”, and we will take that. But when you keep quiet, then we are left with no option but to begin reading your mind. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there have been procedural issues, guidance issues raised at this point and I should guide as follows: We can deal with any matter and handle it with laxity. But when it comes to direct petitions to this House by members of the public, we should pay attention, and special attention at that; because it is no longer coming from the Executive and it’s no longer coming from a parliamentary committee; it is not coming from Members of Parliament, but it is coming directly from the people we represent. We should treat it carefully. 

They may be saying that whereas Parliament has said things about this, we have not seen anything happening, so we are asking you again through a petition. So, there is no way this Parliament will shut its doors to public petitions coming to the Floor of the House. Even if the matter is already there, it is for the committee to go and say, “With this we have already made recommendations on it; take action on these recommendations; these ones we are going to handle as follows”; and proceed as such.

Otherwise, a public that has so much confidence on us right now will start thinking otherwise if we start turning away matters that they think are of concern to them, and we stand and say we have already handled it, when they did not see results coming. That is my take on this matter and this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 October 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
