Tuesday, 25 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you from the weekend and from other engagements, public and private. In the public gallery, I want to welcome the students of the School of International Training. This group of students is representative of countries such as Sudan, Japan and United States of America. They are here to learn more about the role of Parliament in Uganda’s development. You are most welcome to Uganda and Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, I regret to announce that our member, hon. Banyenzaki, lost a sister over the weekend, Sr Petronella Akikira, who was heading Nyakibaale Secondary School in Rukungiri. She died unexpectedly. We grieve with you, hon. Banyenzaki, and I think we should observe a minute of silence for her.

(Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I want to welcome back those who were able to go for the burial of former President Obote in Apac. I was able to go to represent you and we came back safely. 

I want to take this opportunity, although our friends are not here, to congratulate our hon. Members of Parliament representing the UPDF who were promoted yesterday or the other day, and these include hon. Aronda Nyakairima, who is now a General, hon. David Tinyefuza, hon. Elly Tumwine, hon. Phinehas Katirima, hon. Francis Okello, hon. Andrew Gutti and hon. Noble Mayombo, who is now a Brigadier. We congratulate them and wish them well. Now that they are leaders in the UPDF, I think we will be able to interact with them more so that we work together with them. Thank you very much.

As I indicated last week, it is important that you reschedule your work, reschedule your tours in the constituencies so that you come here at least this month or this week so that we are able to transact business, especially to deal with two or three Bills that are relevant to the transition and to the elections. I had expected to finish one of these Bills today, at least in the general debate and deal with the other one so that by Friday we clear these Bills. These Bills are the same; I am surprised that they are separated because everything is the same but one is dealing with the President, another is dealing with us. But having dealt with one then you know what is in the other and it will be easy to handle them. I appeal to you that we really concentrate on this work. In November you may relax a little but this month I want us to finish this work, so I appeal to you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 be read a second time.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Seconded.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, the object of the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 is to regulate the parliamentary elections in Uganda in accordance with Chapters 5 and 6 of the Constitution, and to repeal and replace the Parliamentary Elections Act of 2001, which was designed to regulate the parliamentary elections under the Movement political system. 

Sir, following the change –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, although I have seconded the minister, I do not see the chairman of the committee. I do not know whether we have the report, whether there is a member standing in for the chairperson.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us deal with this one because this has nothing to do with the chairperson. When we reach a stage when I need the chairperson, I will make a ruling.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Sir. I had said that following the change of the political system on the 20th of July 2005, and the passing of the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, the Bill seeks to cater for the transition when the political system changes from one system to another under Article 74 of the Constitution. Accordingly, where relevant the Bill takes into account the amendments proposed to the Constitution by the two recent Bills introduced in Parliament to amend the Constitution. 

The Bill further provides for qualifications and disqualifications for election, the manner of establishing the equivalent of Advanced Level standard of education, nominations, campaigning, polling and counting of votes, tallying and declaration of election results, petitions for challenging election results, election offences, parliamentary constituencies and tenure of office of the Members of Parliament. 

The provisions relating to qualifications and disqualifications of parliamentary candidates have remained the same, namely, A’ Level or its equivalent. Learning from the experiences of 1996 and 2001 parliamentary elections, the Bill proposes elaborate mechanisms of detecting forged certificates and verifying documents, and imposes deterrent sanctions on those who engage in electoral fraud. The responsibility for verifying qualifications and determining equivalent qualifications has been shifted from UNEB to National Council for Higher Education. The Bill limits the existence of the right recall to the period when the Movement political system is in force as provided by the recently enacted Constitution Amendment Act, 2005.  

The Bill caters for parliamentary elections, both under the Movement political system and under the multi-party political system. District women representatives and special interest groups are provided for as well as the requirement for the review of such representation as required by Article 78(2) of the Constitution.  For nomination of candidates for elections as members of Parliament and appointment of nomination days, the rules of nomination have essentially remained the same except that candidates sponsored by parties will be required to be nominated by parties, candidates nominated by parties will also be required to provide party symbols and colours. 

The voting procedure has also been reviewed to accommodate multiple elections on the same day.  The Electoral Commission is responsible for appointing polling days and tallying places.  

Campaign regulations have remained the same, campaign programmes, protection and immunity of candidates, rights of candidates, none sectarian campaigns and interference with election activities of other persons are all well regulated in the Bill. Voting and voting procedure, I elaborately provided for in part 8 the Bill to ensure a smooth polling process. Counting of votes is to be done at each polling station. Declaration of winning candidates and declaration of results and reports by the Electoral Commission are also provided for.

Part 10 of the Bill deals with election petitions. Elections offences and illegal practices have been dealt with in part 11 and part 13 of the Bill. The offences include bribery, procuring prohibited persons to vote, publication of false statements as to illness, death or with draw of candidate and obstruction of voters. Deterrent penalties are prescribed for there illegal practices.

In part 13 deals with general matters, including the prior consent of the DPP to prosecute offences under the Bill and the time within which criminal proceedings must be commenced. 

Finally, the minister is empowered by the Bill to make regulations to give further effect to the provision of the Act once passed by this House.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the process of amending this law interests and involves many stakeholders. This Bill is not intended to foreclose receipt of ideas on the subject matter of the Bill. Government will continue to welcome ideas and proposals from honourable members during the anticipated debate.  

Government will also continue to be receptive to proposals for amendments to the Bill, subject of course to the rules of procedure of this House.  Proposals intended to improve this Bill are welcome and government will take serious note of them.  

I once again beg to move that the Bill entitled the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 be now read a second time. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Can I now ask hon. Rex Aachilla, Member of the Committee, to give us the report of the committee?

2.49
MR REX AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido):  Mr Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs pursued and perused the Parliamentary Election’s Bill and I beg to present the report.  

The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 was laid on the Table on the 27th of September 2005 and was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny. The committee has accordingly scrutinized the Bill and now wishes to report its findings.

Background:  

The previous parliamentary elections were held under the Movement political system, which is based on individual merit as provided for in the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001. 

Following the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Act, 2005 and the results of the referendum held in 2005 on the political system, there arose need to address the issues contained therein. This Bill, therefore, addresses the concerns raised in the above provisions and provides for the transition from the Movement political system to the multi-party system. 

It further addresses the concerns of how group merit will be handled during the elections. 

Methodology: 

Many views were received through meetings and some submissions from a number of witnesses. A number of witnesses - up to 26 - are contained on page 2 of the report.

The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005 addresses the following issues: 

1.	It provides for the production of certificate for A’ Level equivalent by the National Council for Higher Education.
2.	Harmonising the electoral laws with the recent amendments to the Constitution.
3.	The transition from movement to multi-party system as enshrined in the Constitution (Article 74) and under the results of the referendum held in July 2005. 

Observations:

The Bill is unnecessarily big because the whole of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 was transplanted in the current Bill. The Government should have brought an amendment Bill to save time and resources.

We observed that there was a need to address the issues of transition from the movement system to multi-party political system, which has been under restriction for about 20 years. The Bill provides ample checks in the parliamentary elections.

The Bill provides for the production of a certificate by the National Council of Higher Education. The management of National Council for Higher Education, however, submitted that their competence is on post-advanced level. The committee noted that various countries have different requirements for elective office, which are not necessarily academic. It was reported that due to malpractices, it may not be possible to have genuine verification of the High School Certificate. It was also noted that there are two issues at hand: verification and description of the word “equivalent”.

The committee was informed that the system of setting educational qualifications for electoral offices is archaic and no longer an issue to most countries, including the East African region. It was, however, noted that this is a constitutional matter.

The Bill maintains the gender and special interest groups’ representation in Parliament as provided for in the Constitution under Article 78. The committee, however, received petitions, which were against the representation of the UPDF, that is, the Army in Parliament in a multi-party setting. They submitted that the army should be neutral. Whereas other special interest groups are extensively covered in this representation, the committee noted that the workers are not provided for.

The appointment of election constable by presiding officers was noted to be vulnerable to abuse. The committee however noted that due to the shortage of police constables, this would be a stopgap measure. However, some witnesses were of the view that it should only be police constables.

The committee was petitioned on the limitation of appealing to the Court of Appeal. It was noted that this limits the freedom to explore all courts of law. The right to appeal should be upheld.

The issue of location of a polling station also came up and petitions to this effect were submitted. The proposals were that polling stations should be created in not less than three weeks before elections. The committee noted that there might be situations contrary to the above and should therefore be addressed in the law.

There were concerns that nomination dates were fixed without any law but the committee noted that the Electoral Commission acted pro-actively to set a political road map, which is adequate.

The limitation of the use of government resources during campaigns might be difficult to police because some officials cannot clearly separate their private work from official work.

The committee received numerous petitions on why the Movement system still exists in the law despite the onset of multi-party system and proposed its deletion. However, the committee observed that this is a constitutional matter.

On recall of MPs, it was submitted by some witnesses that the recall should be in both settings, that is, multi-party and movement system. The committee, however, noted that recalling a member under the multi-party is a function of the party’s internal arrangement.

A number of witnesses proposed an increase for women representation at all levels to a clear and definite percentage. The committee noted that affirmative action has taken root in the country and most administrative and political units address this.

Recommendations:

The National Council for Higher Education should be empowered to prescribe and verify in time the issue of equivalence to A’ Level. This issue should however be reviewed in the subsequent constitutional amendments.

Parliament should exercise its mandate to review the provisions of Article 78 of the Constitution by providing a resolution reviewing the interest groups representation in Parliament.

The presiding officer should be allowed to appoint election constables due to the limited number of police constables in the country.

The Electoral Commission should not encourage practices, which might lead to vote rigging, for example, creation of polling stations abruptly and voting in hospitals. 

The right to appeal should not be stifled by limiting appeals to Court of Appeal.

In conclusion, the committee is grateful to the groups, individuals, all persons of good will in Uganda who appeared before the committee, and all who forwarded their ideas for consideration in terms of memoranda. The committee, therefore, begs the House to adopt this report with proposed amendments. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Rex Aachilla, I must thank you sincerely in that you have been able to present the report within a minute and the way you have presented it has satisfied me that you duly participated in the writing of this report. (Applause) Therefore, I want to thank you and I want to welcome the chairman; your work has been well handled by your colleague.  

Honourable members, we have got the position of the minister and the purpose of the policy behind and we have also received the position of the committee. You have looked through the Bill itself, I am sure that now you are ready to participate in the debate and as I indicated many things in this Bill are not new, we may also have to concentrate on areas that have caused problems so that we can finish and deal with another, which is also as important as this one. So, you are welcome to participate in the debate if you have any contributions to make.

3.01
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I have listened to the presentation by the committee but I would like to be clarified on a new development, which is taking place. I understand there are new arrangements being made by the Electoral Commission in that Ugandans who are outside the country would also be voting. I do not know whether this matter will be covered in this particular Bill or it is outside the Bill. But more importantly, the Bill omits the issue of nomination fees, which I think is part and parcel of the electoral process for Members of Parliament. The issue of the nomination fee is important because it determines the commitment of the individual or the party in the people they have selected to represent them. 

The position in the Bill itself is that an intending candidate will have to pay a non-refundable fee of ten currency points. This has been the position for a very long time, since 1994, when there was a Constituent Assembly election. It was carried on in the 1996 elections; it was also carried on in 2001 elections. Bearing in mind that in order to carry out effective elections and determining that members who get elected are those who want to be nominated as serious people, that seriousness can only be expressed by the determination of the individual to pay an appropriate nomination fee commensurate with costs that will be undertaken in that elections.

I believe that our elections have always had problems, shortage of funds being one of the problems, and making the work of Electoral Commission slightly difficult and in fact it very much impairing the work. Often the Treasury is saying that there is lack of funds, creating situations –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I do not want to interrupt you but did you not say that the Bill does not deal with nomination fee?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the report does not state matters regarding the nomination fee. It states something about it but I expected this matter also to be covered in the report. It is a significant part of elections for Member of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the report need not cover everything in the Bill. It covers those issues, which they think should be reported on. Proceed.

MR ERESU: So, in regard with your guidance I proceed that the figure, which is stated in the Bill, be looked into either with the intention to vary it upwards or downwards or maintain it but in my view, we would vary it upwards for the reasons I have stated. Thank you.

3.05
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want also to take this opportunity to thank the committee and to thank the Government for bringing this Bill, which is a very important Bill. I may not dwell on many of the issues but I would specifically labour on the recommendations of the committee, which I find very good, although I think we need to see how we can detail these recommendations. 

On the National Council for Higher Education the committee recommends that it should be empowered to prescribe and verify in time the issue of equivalent, and this is very important. We hardly have three or two months left and I do not know what is in place currently. Would this require a Bill or an amendment of the existing arrangement? I think we need to be a little bit categorical because we do not want to reach January and the National Council for Higher Education is still hampered because it is not either logistically facilitated or otherwise.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform Mama Kampala that the National Council for Higher Education has written to the committee requesting for Shs 2 billion to be able to get capacity. So if it is available, well and good.

THE SPEAKER: Shs 2 billion? You said Shs 2 billion?

MR KAYONGO: Shs 2 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Eh! (Laughter)

MRS ZZIWA: I thank my brother hon. Kayongo and I think this should have been included in this report because it directs this House on how to move forward and it is still the responsibility of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to be able to recommend how much at least within - because now the process of the budgeting is on and if the National Council for Higher Education is not availed with this money then it would be incompetent to perform this duty. So it should be carried within this recommendation to make it competent to be able for this august House to make a recommendation, which is substantial or which is effective and which can be carried out. 

I also want to salute the members who appeared before the committee on the provisions of Article 78 of the Constitution. I had submitted my thoughts over Article 78 of the Constitution and I was advised in the report of the committee that this issue will be dealt with in the report. I would have wanted a little more input on this issue because I remember there were – I was able to submit some views, which at least went to the view of at least increasing the percentage to 40, yes! I would have expected a concrete recommendation because it was not dealt with in the amendment to the Constitution. So it should have come in the Bill but it has been left hanging, so the recommendation is perhaps good but it has not paved the way forward. 

I wish the committee can advise us accordingly and we know very well the list for new districts, which have been created, which may bring in a new number of women Members of Parliament. But still on aggregate, Parliament will be expanding. So we would need a provision, which would give at least 40 percent representation of women in this august House.

Thirdly, I want also to react very briefly to the issue of the presiding officers and the issue of the Electoral Commission electing or appointing election constables. This issue was also very prominent in the constitutional review and there were many concerns about the Army being involved in the elections. One of the reasons, which was given was that the numbers of the police officers were not adequate that is why it would require or necessitate the Army to be involved or to be called upon in one way or another to help in the elections.  

I remember I was carrying out consultations on the White Paper. This is one of the points and I want to say that I support giving the Electoral Commission opportunity to recruit election constables provided also the budget is looked into. When we had the opportunity to look at or visit the Electoral Commission of Ghana, we were informed that neither the national Police nor the Army are used to monitor or supervise the elections.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and member for giving way. I have heard very clearly that the honourable member supports the idea of the commission recruiting elections constables but from where are they going to recruit them? Are they trained? Do you have a pool of them?

MRS ZZIWA: I am sure that when the mandate is given, the Electoral Commission would put in place a mechanism of putting these election constables and being able to train them to be able to do the job because fundamentally you find that the Public Service also regulates the number of people to be recruited in the Police force and you find that many police officers may not be able to be deployed in the required numbers in the polling stations.

For that matter, trying to run away from the issue, which many people thought was controversial of deploying the Army in the election exercise, I think it would be a better alternative if we could give an opportunity to the Electoral Commission to recruit the electoral constables. They can have a framework provided they have the funding.

I was actually giving a testimony, which we had from Ghana. In Ghana they do not use the national police, they do not use the Army to the extreme, they use the services of the Red Cross but they have their own electoral constables and they are able to give them the mandate to carry out the functions equivalent to what the national police would do. So I support this recommendation, Mr Speaker.

I think I will need some help from the honourable minister on recommendation No. 4, “the Electoral Commission should not encourage practices, which might lead to vote rigging, for example creation of polling stations, which are created abruptly, voting in hospitals and voting” - maybe I could add – ‘in personal residences’.” Mr Speaker, we have had a very serious scenario in Kampala where voting stations have disappeared. Recently in the referendum, which we have just concluded, in Makerere 2, zone C, the polling station disappeared, the materials disappeared, they were in some individual’s home and that was the end of it. Also in another parish in Kyebando, the station is in a home, even the taking of the pictures so I want to find out –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has laboured and taken quiet a bit of time on a matter of the recruitment of the constables by the Electoral Commission and I have been listening carefully and you may go to methodology, which is on page 2. The Electoral Commission was one of those bodies that submitted their views to the committee. May I, therefore, seek the following clarification as to whether the recommendation of the committee arises from the submission of the Electoral Commission as to whether they have the capacity and the means to pay these constables if we pass the law giving them the authority to recruit the constables?

MRS ZZIWA: I think the chair will give clarification on that. It will not be given by me because circumstantially they are of the view that this is the way forward. We do not want to see polling stations, which are not manned and likewise we do not want the Electoral Commission to be constrained. We want it to perform its job effectively. So let us enable them by giving them the necessary logistics and resources. So I support the view of the committee.

I had moved to the issue of the polling stations being either put abruptly or removed abruptly or those ones, which are not in places, which should be public places, which make them vulnerable for individuals to make them personal. I have given two examples, which are known and we do not know where the results of that zone - it is zone B in and it is Mr Kasule’s home where the results of the referendum went. I want to put that on the record.

I want to add that on this list we should add that at least these places should be public and when I say public, even if somebody is willing to offer his compound, it should be to some extent or to a great extent public otherwise we will have many problems of some of these voting stations being put in private homes and they become personal.

I also want to say that in Kampala we still have a problem now that registration is going on and is due to be closed on the 28th. I want to say that many people are still not yet registered, the cameras are not yet available, and many people want to move to where they are supposed to go. Let me give you an example. Yesterday in Mulimira zone the leadership of Mulimira zone in Bukoto I parish, have waited for the camera for the whole period and the cameras were not coming, they had to go to the Electoral Commission to demand that the cameras should be brought. At nine O’clock they were promised that the cameras would come. The cameras did not come until three O’clock, they moved to the Electoral Commission and they were promised that the camera would come. The camera came in and they said that there was no electricity. After that the person said, “We cannot do much.” They had to hire a generator to be able to have this camera either charged or to be able to take pictures. In about two hours they said that, “The fuel is finished in the generator,” and the people who had lined up were over 160 and by that time the electoral official said, “I cannot do much more”, and the camera was taken. Where are these cameras? This is just three or four days to the closure of the exercise. Who can help us?

We also have another problem in Kampala; I think I should list it that the combining of the office of the presiding officer with the position of the town clerk has given the opportunity of the parish chiefs to be responsible for the election exercise. Many of the parish chiefs have become partisan, they have shown sides in this arrangement whereby when they know that the kind of people in this area do not support this kind of side or this kind of party, they do not take the pictures. I want to be assured. We had submitted a recommendation to the honourable minister that since Kampala is nearest to the Electoral Commission, can this office be separated? Can the Electoral Commission accord us the opportunity to host the office for the presiding officer for Kampala? Even if the town clerk remains as the presiding officer, but let him sit elsewhere, otherwise you find that what happens in city council at times is appalling.

I want to appeal on the honourable minister to implore the Electoral Commission, this morning I was talking with hon. Bakkabulindi Charles who happens also to reside in Mutundwe, he tells me he and his family and many other people in the neighbourhood are not registered. I want to plead – I was in Kyambogo yesterday, people are not yet registered. We need help in this matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I appeal for your indulgence to welcome our visitors in the public gallery this afternoon. We have members of the Guild Council of Makerere University Business School. Their speaker, Mr Agaba Gerald Kakima, is their leader here. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. We also have Kuzimba Market Saving and Credit Association from Kamuli. They are here to see for themselves how the legislative system is working. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament.

3.20
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the short and precise report that has been presented today by hon. Aachilla John Rex. 

However, Mr Speaker, you will give guidance on this because in the Bill on page 10, points (f), (g) and (h) are so contentious that I feel that the committee should have actually looked into this matter and given some more elaboration on it. For example, if it says that a person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person has been convicted by a competent court of crime involving dishonesty, in this case how would the Electoral Commission stop a nomination of a candidate basing on this? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think that is very easy. If you know you are convicted by court of this nature of offence, you do not qualify and you will eventually be found out. What you can do is to present yourself but the nomination becomes invalid because some people will come with evidence against you. It is not really the duty of the Electoral Commission to have prior knowledge of it, but if you are convicted by the court please, do not try because your nomination will be invalid.   

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee goes on to say that a person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person has within seven years immediately preceding election been disqualified for election as a Member of Parliament by the commission. In this case, what about those that have been Members of Parliament and their membership has been nullified by court? If you include these that have been disqualified to be Members of Parliament, what about those that were already Members of Parliament and court disqualified them? Would it not have been prudent for the committee to look into such a case and give us guidance?

THE SPEAKER: They did not know you would give us guidance. The committee has made this report but it does not mean you are tied by the report. You can come and make up a case to persuade the House to deal with such a situation because what you are seeing here is - suppose the Electoral Commission disqualified me because I presented myself and I am under age, but now I am of age? These are issues which we are going to discuss. Make your contribution; you can refer to the report but if you have something new, nobody will prevent you from raising it during the debate.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on this. When we make laws, are they applied retrospectively or do they become laws from that point onwards. I think there is relevance in what he has been saying.

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, if he has a case, let him present it. If he does not think that apart from the court conviction it is not retrospective but the conviction by the Electoral Commission may not be well founded, the Constitution prevents the Parliament from making laws that are retrospective in certain cases. But there are certain cases where you can make retrospective legislation. You cannot make something unlawful backwards but there are other laws, which you can make in general.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, is this the type of law we can make to make it retrospective or not to make it retrospective?

THE SPEAKER: At the moment I have not addressed the issue. I am only giving you guidance to scrutinize the law and then later if you classify it. That way we shall be able to deal with it. The question was, “Can you make retrospective legislation?” and my general answer is that in some cases you can and in others you cannot.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, having given us that guidance, I think at the committee stage I will come up with an appropriate amendment on (f), (g) and (h). Thank you.  

3.27
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join other colleagues in congratulating the committee on giving a very precise report. I think the committee must be commended for setting very high standards of reporting. It is out of those very high standards set that sometimes our expectations are quite high also. In that vein, I am surprised that on pages 5 and 12 about the limitation of government resources during campaigns making it difficult to police because some officials cannot clearly separate their private work from official work, how does the committee leave that to individuals to determine? Why should it be left to an individual to determine the boundary between his private work and his official work? 

I thought that is what the law should be trying to do so that an individual clearly knows that beyond a certain limit they are using public resources for their private work. That is why there have been cases of abuse of office. Of course -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But do you not see a problem, for instance, if a vehicle was to take me to my home from office and at home I find people who have gathered to be advised politically, I am entitled to a vehicle to take me to my home all the time? What will you do if I hold a rally in my home? I think these are some of the difficulties we may have in some cases. I travel to Masaka where I live every morning; I come to Kampala and go back to Masaka. If there are people and I address them, are you going to say I am contravening any law?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I agree, Mr Speaker, that there are certain officials who have certain entitlements but these are defined. My question is why should the committee wonder that certain individuals cannot draw a difference between their official work and their private work? The law should make a distinction of where official resources can be used and where they should not. There are gray areas and it is high time such areas were defined by the law to avoid any doubt and to avoid people taking advantage it.

Mr Speaker, I have come across a document where the National Commission for Higher Education was putting it to the committee that UNEB was still in a better position to verify the equivalents of A’ Level. This has been a very controversial issue in the past and I would have expected the committee to clearly address this issue rather than leaving it to subsequent constitutional amendments. I think the country needs guidance, particularly those who still have the equivalent qualifications although my advice would be for Ugandans to actually seek qualifications that are clear and be understood rather than bogging the country down with this verification of the equivalence.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to amplify on what he has raised on the issue of the National Council for Higher Education and UNEB handling verification because of the problems we have had in the past. We have had problems with forgeries and equivalence. Those people who have higher qualifications do not normally cause a problem unless they have obtained them from overseas. When you look at the experience here, we need the guidance of the Minister of Education. Is it possible that the National Council for Higher Education is able to establish these equivalents to O’ and A’ Level, and then establish the forgeries because these are the ones where we have a problem? If you push this thing to the National Council for Higher Education, which is supposed to handle the post-secondary school qualifications and tertiary qualifications, then it will be very difficult for it to marshal up capacity to handle forgeries and the equivalents. 

I think the Minister of Education here has to guide us before we make a decision. UNEB has been having an expertise in handling this issue, they have been verifying these documents and they should be the right people to handle these equivalents and forgeries.

THE SPEAKER: But does it need traveling overseas to find out what is equivalent in this age of dot com? Can’t anybody get the data about what is equivalent so that anything presented is clarified on whether you have the equivalent? 

The question of forgery is a different matter. You take it on face value and say, “If this is what one presents, this is the equivalent because I have got the information here.” But forgery is a different matter -(Mrs Bitamazire rose_) the minister was trying to help us.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION & SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Probably I should start by adding to what hon. Muguli has said. The education system and facilities have been expanded so much that there is an opportunity for everybody to go back and improve on his or her qualifications at any age. I want to make that clear. 

But then secondly, I have been listening to the debates about the capacity of the National Council or that of UNEB and indeed I would like to say that probably one has to go a little bit deeper with these two organisations to assess what they can do and what level they can go in consultation with the minister. Probably this is an area where further work would help to make a decision on how best these two organisations can divide up the work so that each one takes part. But from past experience, there are not many candidates who come up with these requests. Most candidates have got clear qualifications from recognized universities and institutions. Normally, the percentage can be estimated at about 10 to 15 of those candidates who might require this service. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that some further consultations with these two bodies be done so that we come up with what can guide decisions in this House. It seems there is some doubt and probably more information is required on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, you heard the information from the Member from Lubaga North, which said for them to have capacity they need Shs 2 billion. Did this not look ridiculous?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify to the House that the National Council for Higher Education is a very young institution and its staff ceiling is very low. They do not have much manpower because the area they deal with is a little bit small than what might be expected of them. They are handling higher education, which is a very small fraction of the education sector and, therefore, their posts are equivalent to the nature of work, which they are right now carrying out. Therefore, if they are given this - I will call it influx for lack of a better term - and they are to face these very many people coming to have their verifications, definitely they will need to hire some staff and probably some other facilities to cope with the work. That is why I am saying that the minister should with other concerned people in this House have a little bit more consultation with this group to define the nature of the work they extend and what they can expect so that this can give them direction as to how much resource will be required. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I think you can see that there was justification in raising this issue and that the committee should not have just glossed over it. While we agree that a permanent solution should be found, for the moment the country should actually regard these equivalents as excess baggage, which should be dealt with.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of workers. Again on pages 4 and 5, and I quote, “Whereas other special interest groups are extensively covered in their representation, the committee noted that the workers are not provided for.” Why should the committee simply note it? I thought they should have questioned the minister responsible to the Bill why the workers are not adequately provided for. The purpose of making any electoral law is to harmonise practices and the law governing all manner of people presenting themselves as candidates so that when we all come to this House, we should not feel that we came through a ventilator while others walked through the main door. I think there should be adequate provision.

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt you, but I think you have to look again at the recommendation. In their recommendations that is where you find the solution and their comment on what is lacking. And because they have commented on what is lacking then they suggest in their recommendation an amendment to provide for a solution. I think that is what has been done.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, actually in paragraph 6 of the list of amendments to clause 11, we propose an amendment to that effect. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I quite agree that the review of the interest groups will cover also other interest groups but while we are waiting for that general review, what happens in the case of the workers?

THE SPEAKER: That general review is a mandatory review, which has to be done. Whether we are making this law or not, it is a constitutional programme, which has to be adhered to. Irrespective of whether we make this law or not, it directs us to do it, and I suppose the minister is making arrangements to bring the necessary resolutions for us to consider and decide. Otherwise, it may be a problem to the Electoral Commission to prepare for the elections of these groups if it is aware of this provision under 78. It is necessary that we promptly deal with this matter so that we fulfill the duty entrusted on us in the current Constitution.  

MR MWANDHA: I quite agree with your guidance and I am surprised that the minister has brought this law before we carry out that constitutional mandate. I am just wondering whether when it comes to deciding on the special interest groups we are going to stand over them or come back to visit the law after we have carried out the review. The minister is putting us in a rather awkward situation because we are going to provide for these interest groups. Suppose it is decided otherwise, what is going to happen?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if it is decided otherwise, it is in my understanding that this will be the position. If the position changes because of operationalising a provision of the Constitution, then the provision in the law will be irrelevant.  So, it has to adjust because as you know, an ordinary law cannot override the Act under the Constitution. But there has been some delay because of other commitments like the constitutional amendment. Anyway, the minister is here. He can tell us his programme so that we know exactly what is going to happen. Is it possible, honourable minister?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, maybe before he does, this very issue has been a subject of debate on the Floor of this House. One member I remember raised the issue as to when this review would be carried out and the House was told that although the Constitution talks about after ten years, it was not categorical as to how long after ten years the matter could be reviewed; which means in essence this law can pass as it is and still no adequate provision will be made in the case of workers because the review, which is anticipated under the recommendation of the committee, will not have been undertaken.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for clarity, you have copies of your Constitution, the relevant provision says, “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter …” The commencement of this Constitution was on 8 October 1995, and ten years expired the other week. “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution, thereafter Parliament shall review the representation under paragraph (b) and (c) of clause 1 of this article for purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to.” So it is a mandatory provision, which we have to adhere to during this period, this month and next month.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, can I then seek the indulgence of the Attorney-General to assure this House that this is going to be done and probably given a time frame? I am sure my friends who are under the special interest groups are in a state of uncertainty. I think we would want things to be predictable so that we make a law, which is fair for all those intending to present themselves as parliamentary candidates irrespective of the constituencies that they may wish to represent. Thank you.

3.45
MS SARAH NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish first of all to thank the committee for the report, short and quick to read through. I also want to thank the minister for the Bill and especially when he was talking he told this House that he is open to amendments and views of this House. I am thanking him for being open. Due to unavoidable circumstances, I was not able to present my views to the committee and I wish to request that at the next stage of this House I will be allowed to make amendments if necessary, if they are not included in this discussion or if the minister is not taking them on himself.

I want to make a few remarks on the Bill and the report starting with page 16 of the Bill. At some appropriate time I will be moving that section 7(3)(c) be deleted because it talks about the terms and conditions under which a Member of Parliament can be recalled from office. Section (c) says that a member can be recalled due to persistent deserting of the electorate without reasonable cause. I think this section is a source of confusion and should be deleted from this Bill because it is vague and it is going to cause confusion. 

First of all, there is no definition of what qualifies to be “persistent deserting of the electorate” and what falls within “reasonable cause”. The yardstick would be difficult to tell. 

The procedure of implementing the paragraph, which is given in section 18 on page 18, is also equally vague and confusing. Whereas the procedures for implementing subsection 3(a) and (b), which basically talks about physical, mental incapacity and misconduct or misbehaviour, the one for (c) which talks about persistent desertion is just that the commission shall conduct such investigations and inquiries as maybe just and practicable. That is the procedure, too wide, too vague and it cannot define what is just and what is practical in this case. I think that that clause should be deleted just to make sure that when members are elected, they come and do business without being harassed by the constituencies in the name of desertion and reasonable cause or no reasonable cause. I think members should be allowed to judge when to go to their constituents and in this age of telephones and Internet, there are so many ways that a member can contact their constituencies without necessarily being there. So, this element should be deleted. I wish to propose to the minister that when I bring an amendment, he accepts it because it is for the good of this nation.

On page 43 of the Bill, 35(4) talks about a representative or polling agent, that a representative or polling agent appointed under this section shall be paid an allowance determined by the commission. I do not know what the intention of government here is because first of all, who is going to pay? If you are saying that if a candidate appoints a polling agent, this agent will be paid according to what will be fixed by the commission, what if the polling agent wants to offer themselves to do a service to a candidate? How will they determine what the candidate can be able to pay a polling agent or their own appointed agent? This is going to be very difficult for those who will be offering themselves as agents to go by the commission’s fixed amount because I think it should be left to individual candidates. After all, when people offer themselves as polling agents, we should leave it to the candidates to determine how much they pay to their polling agents. I think people should not be forced to pay fixed amounts of money. 

Section 37(5) on the same page says the presiding officer or polling assistant shall write the name of the polling station in the space provided on top of the ballot paper before handing the ballot paper to the person claiming to vote. I am not so sure what the value for this section is because I think it is – unless the minister can clarify to me what it is, I am tempted to propose that the Electoral Commission notes the serial numbers that it is sending to the various stations so that people are not delayed by writing on each ballot paper as it goes out. I am also thinking -(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that actually allowing the presiding officer to keep writing on these ballot papers tempts him to do anything. He could look at an illiterate person and even tick and looking at the distance that has been put between the presiding officers and other agents, one can easily do anything. I do not see the use of this section and I support the honourable member. We should not tempt the presiding officers to be writing on the ballot paper because they can even tick before handing the ballot paper to the voter, which would cause us a problem.

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, honourable member. That has helped the minister to see the dangers in this kind of arrangement. The voter should be given their ballot papers and they should be the only ones to write on that ballot paper. The Electoral Commission should simply note which serial numbers it has sent to a particular area and station. 

Mr Speaker, finally, I want to say that I am disappointed by the committee for seemingly treating lightly the matter on the proposals on what it calls some sections. No. 15 of its observations says that the number of witnesses proposed an increase for women representation at all levels to a clear and definite percentage. The committee noted that affirmative action has taken root in the country and most administrative and political units address this. I do not know where the committee members live, but where I live I do not see this affirmative action having taken root. I think what we are talking about here is that we need to increase the numbers so that we form a critical mass at the party level, at the local district councils and in Parliament. We are not talking about the mere presence of the skirts to be seen in the House or in the district committees.  We want a critical mass to influence the decisions that are made in parties and in Parliament. For the committee to just say the thing has taken root - which root are you talking about?  

We have been present and we are tired of just being seen. We want a critical mass and I am sure that is what the members who presented this proposal were talking about. I want to call on my fellow women to support and bring this amendment in this House to have that critical mass included. Mr Speaker, we are going to mobilise ourselves as women. I call on my fellow women to support this amendment so that we get big numbers. I thank you.

4.00
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a very brief and precise report. My first concern is about the recommendation on the National Council for Higher Education. I appeal to the minister to provide this money expeditiously and ensure that the council does its job. We are likely to have similar problems as we had with UNEB. I insist that the council vets this business of equivalents, because you are aware that Mr Matthew Bukenya of UNEB has had many probleMs He has been handling this matter almost single-handedly. The council has people of high integrity who can do a better job. The manufacturer who prints UNEB result slips can do the same for other interested individuals at a fee. Therefore, I insist that the council does this work. The composition of the council has men of high integrity and no junior officers, who would get into this kind of forgery.

THE SPEAKER: Do you doubt the integrity of the officers in UNEB?

MR KUBEKETERYA: When you compare the composition of the council with that of UNEB, you realise that there is reason for worry. Mr Bukenya has often done these things alone and others are always threatening him. I am convinced that the council could do this job better. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. Section 5(k) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act spells out the mandate of the National Council for Higher Education, which among others is to determine the equivalence of all types of academic and professional qualifications of degrees, diplomas and certificates obtained elsewhere, with those awarded by Uganda institutions for higher education. Therefore, the council should vet these qualifications or awards obtained from outside the country and equate them to the ones here in Uganda. I think that is already taken care of. And UNEB should do the vetting of those other awards within Uganda, which are equated to A’ Level. As the minister put it, it is prudent that UNEB shares this role with NCHE. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, hon. Epetait for that information. Mr Speaker, I add that if NCHE is to do this job, then it should clearly spell out the checklist of people who have papers that are likely to be equated so that the public knows. Let it be open such that people whose documents do not meet the requirements do not waste their time. I appeal to that – (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you hon. Kubeketerya for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the holder of the Floor that recently there was a restructuring exercise in the local governments. Staff were told to bring their papers and what came out are the diplomas awarded in various institutions in Uganda yet when some of these diplomas were taken for verification, UNEB says they have no capacity to handle the matter.  Incidentally some of us, including ministers, grace these occasions when there are graduations and to make it even worse, even the ministers from Education. Therefore, most of these people have been retrenched and their papers within Uganda cannot be vetted. If you leave it to UNEB with these many institutions, which are cropping up under the very auspices of the Ministry of Education, I do not know what will happen. Most of these institutions offer diplomas in Economics, Commerce, Business Administration and many others. It is unfortunate that they cannot be vetted. Many Ugandans have been retrenched and the same will happen to candidates who intend to participate in the next election. I pity those who got their diplomas from these institutions and intend to stand. Nobody is going to vet these documents, not even the Universities and Tertiary Institutions Act.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, hon. Ssebuliba. I insist that NCHE clearly spells out a checklist, which will be made public.

My other concern is recommendation 4 on page 6. The committee says that the Electoral Commission should not encourage practices, which might lead to rigging, for example creation of polling stations and voting in hospitals. I seek clarification from the chairman. Are you in other words saying that if somebody is admitted to Mulago Hospital and they have their card, should they travel back to Kitgum, Gulu or Mayuge in order to vote? Are you clearly saying that voting should not be in hospitals?  

The other matter was about the nomination fee that hon. Eresu has raised. He proposed that we revise it upwards but I feel we should leave it as it was. Some of us would not have afforded Shs 2,000,000 that the other Parliament had set. I think we should not increase it.

Lastly, I will talk about voter update and registration although this is not part of the report. I appeal to the minister to inform the Electoral Commission that they should even continue the exercise for another whole month. Out of 12 cameras you may get only one that is functional. So many people would want to register or even transfer. If the deadline remains 28 October, many people will be left out. I thank you.

4.08
MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a very good and precise report. I also thank the committee for guiding this House in so many Bills, which has made our work very easy indeed. We are all very grateful to this committee and we commend them for the hard work they have done in such a short time. 

The question of police constables at the election time is a very serious matter. Some of us who come from the insecure areas and always feel more at ease when we see the police at the polling stations. If we now say that the presiding officers should appoint these people at the polling stations, we run the risk of individuals choosing people from that particular area who may be partisan. I suggest that this task be left to the district returning officer. They can recruit, train and deploy. The minister and the chairman should give this serious consideration in order to put at ease many of us who fear that a local presiding officer might be tempted to appoint some people of his or her choice in order to influence the results of the election.

Mr Speaker, the second point is the question of representation of women. Recently Parliament created many districts, some of which are already operational. I would like to find out from the minister what plan he has for this, since these districts have already been created. Amoro district, where I come from fears that they will miss elections because they will start operating in July and elections will be held much earlier. I understand that the Constitution has already been created but the minister needs to clarify to the ordinary person. The districts are already in effect and what remains is just administrative. These districts will definitely have their woman representatives in this Parliament. This point should be made very clear so that the public is aware that they can elect their woman representatives as well as chairpersons in the forthcoming elections. 

THE SPEAKER: In the Sixth Parliament, we created a new county in Bundibugyo District and it was meant to be effective in July after the general elections. When it was created people in that county wanted to have a Member of Parliament but unfortunately the Electoral Commission had no mandate to conduct elections because it was not a by-election. That complicated the process and they complained a lot. Our hands were tied because of that and I think the point you raised is very important. This matter of new districts, which will be in operation in July next financial year, should be clear. 

MR OLUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My last point is that the Electoral Commission does not seem to have the capacity to handle many election malpractices especially during the campaigns. I do not know what we shall do about the many complaints regarding the conduct of electoral officials and some of the government officials. I will give you an example.  During the 2001 campaigns an army brigade stopped me from going to visit my area. They threatened me by pointed very heavy guns at me. I went and reported this matter to the returning officer and the PC of UPDF in Gulu. The matter was never handled and it just died a natural death. I believe that in the forthcoming general elections we shall have so many of those cases and complaints. 

I know it is a difficult job for the Electoral Commission to handle but I do not know what we as Parliament can do in order to see that this grave breach of electoral laws especially by government functionaries does not occur again. I know my neighbour hon. Mike Ocula was not even able to vote. This particular officer stopped him and made sure that they shout at him and confine him to one polling station, where he voted but could no longer travel. These are some of the issues, which came up in the Elections Violence Bill. However, we have not been able to give some specific recommendations. I hope that the minister and the chairperson will see how we can curb election violence and other malpractices. This tends to give a negative impression on our electoral process. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for making yet another Bill available for us to discuss. I am concerned that the spirit of the new Bill -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to welcome visitors from Luwoko Parish, Buwunga sub-county in Bugiri District. They are here to see how their Members of Parliament transact business. You are most welcome.  

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee does not seem to offer solutions to the very concerns that are presented in the election violence report. This is a matter of concern to me because we thought that through drafting another Parliamentary Elections Bill we would have cured the problems of election violence that occurred in 2001.

I am going to confine myself to part 9 of the Bill, which does not seem to have been captured at all by the report of the committee. I note that we have been beneficiaries of various trainings sponsored by the Commonwealth, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and other partner training organisations like International Republican Institute and the National Democratic Institute. None of the things that we discussed during these trainings is captured here at all. To me this looks like a wasted investment. All the investments from other countries were intended to make us better but as the committee noted, it is like rewriting the old Parliamentary Elections Bills and the committee has only done editing from the amendments that I have seen.

Mr Speaker, I would like to see substantial improvements in the administration of elections this time round. I will make some proposals. Part 9 of the Bill talks about counting of votes and announcement of results; it also talks about votes to be treated as invalid, in section 52. Before you can invalidate a vote, you must tell us what a valid vote looks like. I would like to propose that a valid vote is one that is cast with only one mark; I propose the mark of a thumbprint. Many of us have gone to polling stations and found that the presiding officer has allocated himself the responsibility of voting for everybody. By the time you arrive at a polling station the dead and the living in that village have all finished voting. There is no way you can walk to court and prove that a tick belongs to anybody in that village. Therefore, I think this House, which is very interested in violence free elections, should support me when I move the proposal that it should only be the mark of a thumbprint. 

Technology, which can validate whose thumbprint it was, exists in the world. This will help us in another part –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you mean that we should never use a tick?

MRS MUSUMBA: In the context of the invalid vote, a tick or a cross should be considered an invalid mark. 

In order to fight under age voters and all forms of rigging, we must do something. Therefore – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think people will say, “Are we illiterate?” Won’t they complain about soiling their fingers?

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you hon. Salaamu Musumba for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the thumbprint is very necessary. It will also cater for blind persons and it will be uniform throughout the country, rather than having ticks. Some people do not even know what a tick stands for. Thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, in order to cure all the vices that I have mentioned and in the interest of democracy, the thumbprint should replace all other marks. It is going to sort out all sorts of trouble. It will also bring political decency in an election. I think this country is looking for political decency –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me give you this one story. There was somebody a long time ago who used to make agreements to sell land and other commodities. He used that kind of thumbprint but he was using his small toe rather than his thumb. Your concern is ability to verify. Do you have the capacity to read thumbprints and differentiate them from all the others? Suppose some people used their small toes and printed the cards, what would you do? 

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, at least I want to inform the House that FDC has the capacity to verify. If we a young party can have it, how much more so for an entire Electoral Commission? We can even help the Government to acquire it for the Electoral Commission.

I can see every effort to rig elections in my front and I am worried that the good will and the investment that so many countries and friendly nations have invested in this country and to the leadership is all going to waste. I would like you to take it in good state because it is good for all us. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to look at what should validate a ballot paper in the counting of votes. I propose and I will move an amendment for it that every person who comes to vote is recorded by the agent of the candidate so that their tallying and their record is part of what validates the events of the voting on that particular day. I am sure every serious party will have an agent at every polling station and, therefore, part of the training of the political parties will include writing down the names of everybody who announces their name. I do not have any problem with the presiding officer signing even if the agent refuses. We should have the record of the agents as part of what makes the election result valid.

The transmission of results is not indicated here as a process and for some of us who have had the good lack of losing an election before, we know how elections are lost and part of the problems is transmission of results. I would like to propose that the Electoral Commission gazettes every constituency of the 214 constituencies in this country as a transmitting point. I am proposing the constituency because it can be monitored by the interested people and to reduce congestion at the district because most of the rigging is done at the districts. All the rigging is done at the districts, especially in changing the tarry sheets.  That is why results take more than three days to reach Kampala. In addition, by way of management, that would reduce the district being an added layer of bureaucracy and an entry point of malpractices.

I would also like to propose that declaration of results should be within 24 hours. When you work it out at the constituency level, transmission and the output of the results within 24 hours would reduce malpractices. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable member concerning remote places like Mulungole and Panyimur. How are you going to transmit results to Kampala where there are no telephones in operation? I think we should be realistic. I do not think anybody has ever lost an election because of the activities at the district. We all retain the results of the counting of the votes at the polling station and it is very difficult to change the results of the polling station. I have never seen it. Can you give me a single case where this has happened? However, I would like to point out that you could not deliver results from Mulungole to Kampala within 24 hours. 

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification he is seeking is out of step with what I am proposing. I am proposing and I do not know whether there is a constituency called Mulungole. I am talking about constituencies not polling stations. A polling station exists within a parish, within a sub-county and within a constituency. If that is the demarcation and electoral materials can be delivered on time there, it means results can be transmitted back within the same time.

THE SPEAKER: But is the counting and declaring of results at the polling station immediately you have concluded voting not enough safeguard since all of you are there? The agent is there and they declare the results. Is that really not sufficient guarantee, especially when you write? There is a form where you sign that would be evidence if the presiding officer declares a different number, you will be able to say my signature or my thumb print is there or that does not carry my thumb print and it is not the form you used.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, unfortunately you have never lost an election. I have lost an election and in the last elections in 2001, I almost lost my life at a sub-county where I had gone to monitor my results to receive them and to make sure they do not swap results. I know change and swapping of tally sheets is done at sub-counties. What harm, even if that did not happen, what harm is there in us proposing a double safeguard?

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, some of us have gone to great lengths to do research to discover the loopholes in these processes. More ballot boxes are sent to each district than the gazetted polling stations and we have known this and more ballot boxes are sent to some sub-counties than the number of polling stations in those sub-counties. What happens to the extra boxes at the sub-county level is known only to the returning officer at the sub-county. When the people go to collect results from the sub-counties, they go to collect such results one of which is above the registered polling stations in that sub-county. We have intercepted these boxes, we have embarrassed the officials who go to collect results in my own sub-county asking for more results than the polling stations and they were told off.  

So please, counting the votes and signing them at the polling stations is not enough and where people do not follow up to the districts, more changes can take place there. However, I have instituted these rigorous methods in my constituency. Even in Apac District we have to keep people at the district level to wait for all the ballot boxes whatever time they arrive and we must accept that the number is the same as the number of the registered polling stations in the district. We do the same thing at the sub-county. Any extra ballot boxes, which arrive with a purpose we do not know, we detain and take them to the Police. I am telling you this from a practical experience.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am glad I am seeking this clarification after hon. Okulo Epak has spoken. He has shown that because of the measures in place, it is possible to identify fraudulent behaviour. If you can identify irregularities, therefore, the methods in place are reasonably good. If they were not good, those irregularities would not be detected. 

Secondly, hon. Musumba said that merely by declaring the results at the constituency level, you will reduce irregularities and she has told us that she once nearly lost her life because she was going to look for her results. How will declaring the results at the constituency level reduce the risk to her life?  

Hon. Mallinga said that some places are so remote that it is not the availability of the results at the constituency level, but the availability of results from the polling stations that very often delays these results. 

I have personally gone through petitions regarding regular behaviour. The agents at the polling stations, who are officially identified are the only ones allowed to sign the results sheet. The moment a result sheet is not signed by your agent, you cannot contest this. Your agent must be able to sign, or if he deliberately refuses, the other agents should be able to say, “This person was there and even though there was no irregularity, he decided not to sign because they were losing.” If we allow people not to sign every time they lose, they will indeed refuse to sign. The reason is obvious. Therefore, I wonder whether the honourable member thinks that we can reduce irregularities by merely reporting results at constituencies. In many places by the way, the constituency headquarters are very far from the district headquarters.

Finally, as hon. Mallinga said, many of the constituencies are rural. You cannot transmit results by telephone. Otherwise anybody can pick up the telephone and say, “Hon. Mallinga has won with 20,000 votes.” You have to have documentary evidence for transmitting results and I think the officials at the district headquarters have sufficient responsibility and credibility to say, “Yes, these are the results.” Otherwise, if we start using the constituencies, we shall receive inadequate results from 200 sources with many chances of increased mistakes. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okulo Epak, don’t you think these boxes are always numbered according to the constituency or polling station they are delivered from? I am sure that can be a way of making the process foolproof. All boxes in Uganda are numbered and there is a record where boxes from each constituency are numbered.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, you may number. You have 13 polling stations in Loro sub-county. You number them 1 up to 13 but there will be a 14th box, which polling station is only known to the senders.  

THE SPEAKER: No. All the boxes in the country are numbered and the Electoral Commission knows that for instance Nakawa constituency has such and such a number. In your polling station they sent box number 3012, therefore, the question of another 3005 coming may not arise.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, the very Electoral Commission you are talking about is the source of these extra boxes and I am sure they know them. Unfortunately, I did not appear in the Election Violence Committee. We have taken trouble to do research on all this and I do not want to go into all the details. I will use them for my constituency, to make sure it is foolproof. There should be no fooling around this time.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am rather disappointed at the way this House is handling this matter. What we want as a country is foolproof, tamperproof elections. It is good for everybody. We can do all these things at personal level and cause them in every village. What we are concerned about is, can we use our experience of institutionalising order in elections in this country? Can we use that experience to institutionalise order so that it is one standard for all of us? It might come with blood in 2006 and we want avoid that.  

Mr Speaker, I also believe that the Electoral Commission does not have the capability to handle tension-filled elections. The earlier we help the commission to have all these administrative things ironed out, the better. We could have left interpretation for them to handle administratively, but we know they cannot. We may have to put in this law that there will be clear boxes, because if it is not in the law, they will tell you, “No, you see, it is not indicated in the law”.  That is why we have to go to detail; every minute detail of what worries us as a nation and as people who will participate in this election.

There is a part about illegal practices. It has not listed under age voting as being an illegal practice, let alone its penalty. If we want to have a neat election, we must have heavy penalties for under age voting and that penalty should extend from the minor to the presiding officer. I remember as a child travelling in a bus without any technology, I would put my hand across my ear and they would know I was under age or above age. They could count my teeth for purposes of graduated tax payment in my village. Therefore, the penalty of under age voting should extend to the presiding officer. I do not see it here and the committee did not find any reason to mention it as an illegal practice.  

Mr Speaker, ballot boxes are not listed anywhere. If anybody is trading ballot boxes and ballot papers, they are not indicated as illegal practices. That is an illegal practice that should be mentioned.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, which clause are you dealing with? 

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is part 11, it starts from clause 71. They are not indicated anywhere – we are talking about campaigns, sectarian talk, all that will happen but they are illegal. The illegal practice is an illegal culture or a bad culture where people go ferrying under age voters from schools to have them cast their votes.  

An illegal practice would be one where people are also obstructed, which is indicated here, but it is not expanded to cover the breadth and width of what happens on election day. It should be illegal for any army personnel to participate in an election, apart from him or her voting. We have GISOs terrorizing villages; we should criminalise that because we know where the terror machinery lies. We do have the Kakooza Mutales, the KAP, it is not indicated anywhere as an illegal practice. For people to masquerade in buses, on bicycles or whatever, these are illegal practices. I really think that more needs to be done to make this election a tidy one and one where we have taken lessons from the past. But it looks like business as usual, no value added, and this worries me. When will we tighten the loose ends of the glaring mistakes of the election violence report that we have under our charge? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report they have given us to debate.  

I would like to start with the National Council for Higher Education. The minister actually has given the National Council of Higher Education its rightful job to verify and establish what the equivalent is. But now that the National Council for Education has come out openly that they are incapable, they do not have personnel, they want Shs 2 billion, which we cannot raise now; and even the minister has confirmed that the National Council for Higher Education is unable or incompetent to do the work, I am suggesting that since we are in a transitional period the National Council of Higher Education could consult UNEB so that they can establish the equivalent we are talking about until the time comes when the National Council of Higher Education is able to handle this issue.

My next concern is about the affirmative action. We have been debating the affirmative action right from the time when we were consulting on the Constitutional Review Commission Report. At first it brought a lot of debate but later the Constitutional Review Commission Report established that the affirmative action should be there. And also when it came to the White Paper we also debated widely, we gave the reasons why affirmative action should be there. We know that women, persons with disabilities and youth have been marginalized for a very long time. We cannot expect them to compete favourably with the other men at this time within ten years, and I believe that this should have been the first thing to be done before we start debating these amendment Bills.  

Now that these special interest groups currently form 25 percent of this Parliament and when we include the 22 districts in future it will form 30 percent of this Parliament. This means that if we have not put in place this resolution to ascertain the existence of affirmative action, we are affected. We are all worried whether it will be in our favour or against our favour. Therefore, I am asking all the interest groups to rise up and put their feet down until this resolution is put in Parliament. We should not pass these laws because we shall be left out, we are not certain of our position.

I would like to come to the composition of the different special interest groups. The women have suggested that their percentage should be increased in all bodies to 40 percent. I am one of them and I support the idea. 

I would like to now come to the number of Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities. I am aware that we Members of Parliament are representing all persons with disabilities in Uganda, and you all know how big Uganda is. Five of us, because of administrative purposes, cannot roam around everywhere; we have to allocate for ourselves constituencies. That is administrative, it is not in this law and I am not asking that it be put in the law. But the fact is that we represent these regions as we move in performing our duties. In Northern Uganda I used to represent 12 districts, now they are 18; the same with Eastern Uganda, I think they are now 22, and the same applies to Western Uganda. The districts have increased and the workload has increased. We the five Members of Parliament are really overworked. If I want to consult each district every month, it will take me one and a half years before I do the second round, and the little money given whether it be Shs 1 million, I use it only to see two districts. I cannot manage to cover the 18 districts. 

When the committee was debating this report, we came up with the proposition that we should increase the number of Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities to eight. We just add only three Members of Parliament to make eight so that we have four women and four men representing people with disabilities to balance gender. For sure asking for three more is not too much; the women have increased from 56 to 78, and the Army has ten. So if we can add persons with disabilities to be eight, I think we are not asking for too much; and if you look at our Movement, I have to move with our guide. If I have to use public transport I have to pay and yet Parliament gives us only Shs 120,000 per month, which is not enough. So if we go to our constituency and call people for consultation, the number doubles because of the guides and interpreters, we are extremely overworked. I know that it is not in this report, but I beg you, Members of Parliament, to sympathise with us and give us only these three seats to make it eight. I hope women will also support us because we will also increase the number of women in Parliament by two.  

Let us come to the election of persons with disabilities. For us we have accepted we want national college because we feel part of regional representations so that people come from different regions. We want to see that different disabilities are represented, we have the blind there, we have physically handicapped, we have the deaf and if we go regional we shall not consider that we are contented with the electoral college.  

But what I am not sure of, and it is not written in the report and also in the Bill, is that our national college we have talked about is not written anywhere. They talked of the number of persons with disabilities coming from each district. I think it is important to state clearly that our electoral college will be national and delegates will be coming from the different districts in Uganda. When it comes to the real time of voting, we have a big challenge and we had a nasty experience when we were electing our Members of Parliament in the last two terMs The first term actually the guides cheated the blind persons; you know with voting the candidates can do anything to rig. So they would collect all the guides and say, “Where is your guide, he is nowhere to be seen”, instead he is given money. Now you go to vote they say, “Please vote so and so”, because of the money they have got they vote somebody else. So, you go satisfied that you have voted your person, which is not true. 

In the second elections of 2001 we blind persons said “No, we do not want anymore cheating after all almost of us can read”. We decided to design our ballot papers using Braille, which worked very well. I can read my name and I can feel that square when it is written in Braille and I put my stamp there. So please, when you are preparing your ballot papers, you must be aware that there are blind persons who are able to read and they can vote for themselves without guides. For those who do not know how to read, well, it is fine they can use the thumbprint, but let us have provision for the Braille so that the blind persons can vote individually and have their secret voting.

Then when it comes to the deaf persons, the situation is worse for those who have not read. Those who can read and write they can tick the names, but our ballot papers do not have the photographs just only the names. For a deaf person who does not know how to read, we tried to bring now all the photographs, we put all the candidates in front of them and said, “Tick this one”. It is no longer a secret ballot people will see where he or she is pointing. So, I am suggesting that our ballot papers should bear photographs also so that the deaf persons who cannot read and write can tick the person of their choice.

I would like to talk about the election of woman district Member of Parliament by adult suffrage. I think the women have resolved that one. Because of experience they found that the electoral college becomes very difficult and it is widely spread throughout the district. You look for few people everywhere, at times these people hide themselves, you have to beg them that is why the women say that let us go adult suffrage after all we are representing everybody. We are not representing women alone; we are not presenting a category of people so that is why we support the adult suffrage. I think all women will support it.  

Then the problem is that we are used to our individual merit; we are used to our electoral college. Even up to now, yes, in my constituency they are asking, “How are the women going to be elected. Is it still the electoral college or adult suffrage?” So, I hope the Electoral Commission will do thorough civic education so that people know that women Member of the district is elected using universal adult suffrage and also these two elections because of multi-party. They would think after the primaries, “We have elected our woman MP already”, while actually there is a major election coming.  

So I am begging that the civic education should be done and when you are organising the civic education, let the deaf persons have interpreters and the blind persons be helped so that they can reach and also the physically handicapped. I understand they are doing civic education for people, how many trainers are there with disabilities who can guide these trainers and inform them that persons with disabilities are there, they are not listening for the deaf, for the blind they may not reach the venue? So please, when the time comes for the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, I will raise it again. But bear in mind that always persons with disabilities are left out in this civic education. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.58
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill. I want to thank the committee for scrutinising the Bill and also Members for the practical amendments and observations that have been made.  

I pray to the minister and the committee that those amendments will be included in the final document, because honourable members, if we do not scrutinise correctly these laws will hit us on the ground. We shall find gaps and by that time it would be too late for us to come back to the House and amend the relevant sections. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to start with a clarification.  Some Members who have been contributing have alluded to the fact that there are only 214 demarcated constituencies, the general ones. I recall that Bundibugyo as you rightly said had an additional constituency. So, can the minister clarify to the people of Bundibugyo whether the 15th constituency of Bwendera is being catered for legally now or not? We need that clarification because it came up during our mobilisation on the White Paper.  

I had an opportunity on behalf of the African Union to go and observe elections in Mauritius. I felt so envious because the process there is so clear; it is so transparent, but on the other hand it is very expensive. So when I look at the provisions, first of all, in the areas of polling stations being known and being declared and being accessible, I want to share what I learnt from Mauritius. 

The polling stations are always the same and they are known by everybody and they are mainly located in schools, or in public community areas. And at every polling station, the register is displayed two days in advance. If there are five classrooms going to be used as polling areas, on each classroom the numbers of the voters are displayed and the names are there and when you come to vote, your name is announced publicly and all the polling agents ascertain that the voter is actually the correct one on the voting list and even the parties themselves get the voters registers ahead of time and crosscheck. But I do not see this. Now we are still compiling the voter’s register; it worries me a lot! I do not know how much the Electoral Commission can do to make sure that the voter’s register is displayed for a long enough period and it is availed to all the candidates and their agents in time.  

In Mauritius new voters stop registering in August of the previous year. I was there in July for the election, but registration had ended in August of the previous year so that gave enough time for the register to be cleaned because most of the rigging starts with lack of clarification on the register.  

During the previous election you could find that someone’s name is allocated so far away, they transferred and the transfer was not effected and you find that there is confusion. Administrative announcements that are made by the Electoral Commission at the last hour at best can cause confusion. So, if in this law we could make it in such a way that even those administrative announcements are curtailed so that confusion is not created among the voters, I would be very happy.

My second area of focus is on Article 78 of the Constitution, which has already been talked about, and the committee stated that affirmative action has taken root. I am embarrassed to read that in this Parliament because Uganda and especially NRM Government is known for promoting women, but qualitatively and quantitatively our figures are very embarrassing at continental and global level.  If you talk about the affirmative action of every district being represented by women in this House, it is only 18 percent. The rest, which pushes it up to 23-24, is because of the women who brave the general constituency seat. 

In this Parliament we had 13, they dropped down to 12 when hon. Winnie Byanyima took up another post at the AU Commission and now we are lower. We are not even sure as of now how many parties will field and ensure that more women add on the number of districts that we are talking about. So the affirmative action we are talking about is not sustainable and that is why in the Constituent Assembly we did deliberate that after ten years this provision must be revised. And as you put it, Mr Speaker, time is now.  

So, I have been contemplating and sitting down and I want clarification from this Parliament and perhaps through you, Mr Speaker, and through the Parliamentary Commission, I also want a clear road map from the Minister for Constitutional Affairs because this is a constitutional provision, from the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee, exactly when and who is responsible to bring the resolution for revising the representation of special groups now that ten years are over? As you rightly informed them, is it UWOPA, is it the minister, or is it an individual? Is it going to be catered for? Exactly where is that resolution?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank my sister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is this affirmative action you are talking about, is it static or is it dynamic? Because I also get perplexed at us women sticking at the district, does that add to the dynamism of affirmative action? I really think the cheaper constituency is this one of four sub-counties. But I see that we have defined affirmative action to be a district woman seat and some of us are making it a career thing that we are going to be at the district level until the year 3000. So, the clarification I am seeking from you is, which dimension of affirmative action are you concerned with in this Bill? Thank you very much.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much. Affirmative action is a wide concept.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. The member seems to have a problem with the word “taking root”. In the understanding of the committee, “taking root” meant it is ready to grow, it cannot dry and it has reached a stage where it must now grow.

THE SPEAKER: Yah, honourable members, when you are dealing with this Article 78(2), it appears to me that you think it is only concerning women. That Article is broader than the issue of gender or affirmative action in favour of women. It is dealing with persons with disabilities, it is dealing with workers and it is dealing with even UPDF. So, the question of somebody suggesting that UWOPA; UWOPA is concerned with one section of that particular Article. This is a national programme where actually the resolution has to be brought to cater for all these special interest groups. I thought I should make that clarification to you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much for that observation. In fact I was just beginning and I have been in this House since the House started. I know very well that someone this afternoon has talked about workers being increased and I did not have to repeat that.  

Hon. Baba Diri talked ably about increasing the number of people with disabilities, and I am yet to wait for the voice of the youths to put our policies together and that is why we were asking the minister to be very clear as to when this Article will be effected. When I am speaking for women, I am using it as an entry point because the Article is very clear. It talks about all special groups and it does not only talk about increasing them by the way, it also contemplates eradicating them all together and that is why I am rightly asking when are we even going to get rid of affirmative action because even the male MPs, hon. Musumba, have also leased their constituency. Each time a woman MP or a person with special interest wants to penetrate the constituency, if you have never heard that, it is a real war, you can even be called a rebel. I have experienced that –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Actually what you are saying is right about the male MPs. Recently one of my colleagues asked me whether his constituency was my constituency and I did not know where to stop. So, I thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the information. In fact if we had our way this should have been the time when we should have got rid of affirmative action and have more sustainable modalities of making all groups represented in this House because after ten years I think it is losing meaning.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and member for giving way. The current position is that women can compete for the district position as well as the demarcated constituencies. We have so many women professionals now; actually you are almost equal to the number of men in similar professions. But if women do not go there and these people are pushing for percentage, are we going to consider competency or just allocating places? We must be focused.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me introduce our children here in the gallery. We have pupils from Nawasaso Boarding Primary School, Bugabula South, Kamuli District. You are welcome! They found their Member of Parliament making a serious contribution. We also have pupils from Bugiri Parents’ School, from Bugiri District. You are also welcome. (Applause)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This representation of special groups especially women is perturbing me because of the commitment that Uganda and Africa has taken. I want to share with the African Union Members that the African Union, the summit of the heads of state in Maputo in 2003 declared that actually gender parity should be exercised in member states as a policy and AU is a front runner in that policy and the AU Secretariat, which is the AU Commission as of now has ten directors and five of them are female and five are male.  

It is lovely and at the most recent consultative meeting on AU gender policy framework we wanted to evaluate how gender parity has been taken on by the member states after the heads of state have signed. We found out that when women are not alert during the making of electoral laws, they miss out and during the subsequent Parliament there is so much business that it is not easy to bring an amendment for that policy to be exercised. 

I would be asking the Minister for Gender during this debate how far Uganda has gone in exercising gender parity. The SADAC region, Mr Speaker, put a baseline of 30 percent, UN 30 percent and Uganda is still operating at 18 percent. Although Uganda is ahead in representation of people with disabilities, and I want to commend government for that, we are No.2 actually because South African Parliament is ahead both in the national and regional parliaments. SADAC region has even moved at local government for representation of special groups to ensure that local government signs partnerships making sure that at local government it is 50 percent. 

So, I am asking a general question during this debate and taking advantage that since this government declared gender equality, how far have we gone? I may be asking about a policy matter but I want a practical step in special groups and that is why I recognise that while in the Sixth and Seventh parliaments there were very few chances for women in the military to be represented this Bill, Mr minister, I want to thank you, is very clear on gender representation in the Army. Out of ten at least two, at least that is a step, it was not there at all. I remember hon. Lt Nkalubo was here but when she left the House it was not a guarantee that a successor was going to represent the female gender. That is why I was very excited when I read it. I am, therefore, making a genuine appeal that in policy making –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, I think most of these contributions and suggestions should come when we are specifically handling the business under Article 78(2) because now without that resolution having been done maybe we are talking about something hypothetically.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you for your wise guidance. I recall the same guidance was given when we were debating the White Paper. That is why I was asking the honourable minister when he is going to act and in the same spirit, I long to see a policy where all parties have quotas for special groups. As of now, there is no provision in any law directing parties to consider special groups and in my opinion I think we are missing a moment when this could be considered. Therefore, we can only make an administrative appeal first of all to the women who contend to join politics, the youths, the people with disabilities, that they negotiate and appear on the party lists so that special groups can be represented. I think even before we end this Seventh Parliament we still have opportunity to make this appeal become true. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to finalise by looking at clause 11(4) of the Bill that handles the election of special interest groups. The women of my constituency and Uganda at large are very happy that at last women are going to be voted for using the universal adult suffrage. This is because women who come on board as a result of the electoral college are always looked upon as representatives of other interests other than those of women.  

Article 4(3) on page 23 of the Bill states, “Subject to the provision of this Act, the election of district women representatives may be held on a different day from the day on which the general elections of members of Parliament elected directly to represent constituencies under Article 78(1)(a) of the Constitution is held.” I wish to appeal to the committee and the House to delete the word “may” and replace it with “shall”. This is because of past experiences of voter fatigue. After parliamentary and presidential elections have been held, voters will not come back for women elections. We could hold them before but definitely not after because I have had a nasty experience before regarding that –(Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I want to agree with my sister although from what I understand, her amendment is for these elections to be held on a different day. This is because if you say that “may” should be deleted so that it reads, “shall be held on a different day” we are simply imposing this fatigue on the people, which we do not want.  

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, for your contribution. However, my suggestion is for elections to be held on the same day and I have given the justification. All provisions in that section that propose that these elections be held on the same day are in our interests. Therefore, we would like to request that an amendment be moved to that effect.  

As I end my contribution, I would like to say that we have a report on election malpractices and I pray that the very good recommendations therein be taken into account when the minister responsible for this bill is making regulations. This is because voters are getting confused with the introduction of a number of concepts in the forthcoming elections. Since I believe we would not want to introduce more violence, this House should ensure that there is adequate money for civic education by independent bodies and not by the people who have special interests since these people usually divert and confuse the voters. In an election comprising of so many clashing interests, the illiterate may resort to other means.  

Can the committee elaborate on the concept of having an independent candidate for parliamentary elections? The bulk of the population is concerned and is even applying this to candidates standing for local government positions. What is the actual position in the law and how are the people going to be guided most especially those who would like to stand on an independent ticket? I hope that before we end this debate today we will have more people scrutinizing these provisions so that we can have a smooth election. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No, scrutinizing this Bill will not be part of the general debate but will come during the Committee Stage. Take note of the various features of the Bill so that when we come to the Committee Stage you can make your proposals.  

5.29
DR OKULLO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to beg your indulgence and mention two points that are not necessarily part of this report but which are equally important.

One of them which has already been mentioned and which many MPs have talked about is the question of registering voters. This issue is causing a lot of worry in the constituencies because the photographers are few, are migratory, run short of photographic papers and their batteries always need charging. 

People are worried because the deadline of 28th does not seem to be attainable since it has not achieved the purpose of registration. I got a lot of complaints from my constituency and I think the minister and the chairman of the committee should take this matter up and talk to the Electoral Commission since we holding these elections for the voters and not for the candidates. The more people we allow to register the more they will be able to exercise their constitutional right –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: The information I wanted to give hon. Okulo Epak is that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs was supposed to give a statement on this matter and I am surprised that this statement is not forthcoming yet this problem is widespread. I for one registered and I understand that my name is on the register. However, up to now my card is not available and these are serious matters. If we are going to hold credible elections, government must move. This matter has been raised during every single sitting for the last three or four weeks, but nobody from government has considered it important enough for them to come and give a position on this matter. In all fairness to this House, the minister should make a statement.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I also stand to give more information about the same. I visited many parts of my constituency and the situation is similar. If the photographers do not have the application forms then their batteries are down; if their batteries are not down, they are defective and in other circumstances the cameras are faulty.  

Worst of all is the issue of misspelling names on the voters’ cards. Some names are mispelt and instances where someone’s name appears on a card with another name are not uncommon. All this is happening despite the fact that a voters’ card is a prerequisite for nomination and therefore a single mispelt letter is equally important.  

Many people are worried because today the Electoral Commission put a very strong message in our newspapers stating the deadline for registration. The situation is worsening because some of the people doing this work, like those in my district, still claim that they have not been paid a substantial amount of money. Others claim they are doing us a favour and that if we rush them they will stop. 

We want to emphasize to the minister and the Electoral Commission that we need their help because this is beyond us. When a battery is faulty, what do you expect the voter to do? These people keep trekking to the polling stations day after day but nothing is happening. In my constituency we still have 10,000 plus people who have not been registered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I think that illustrates the magnitude of the problem. I believe the honourable minister is as concerned about this as we are since he also has a constituency and voters. This is unless he was given special treatment and was able to get five photographers. Otherwise, these cameramen are so -(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I have not been given special treatment as my honourable colleague is alleging. When this issue was raised last week, I contacted the Electoral Commission who promptly carried out a survey of the entire country and they will be submitting their report to our ministry tomorrow. I undertake to come with a statement to this House on Thursday without fail.        

DR OKULO EPAK: What is more important to us is the value of that report. It should include the fact that this registration exercise has not been accomplished to the satisfaction of the people in the field whom we represent and who report to us. If the report comes tomorrow and affirms to this then it should also be able to tell us the solution to be employed. Otherwise, we are not interested in a status quo report that is just repeating what we are saying here. Something ought to be done so that citizens can exercise their constitutional right.

My second point concerns civic education. During this transition, the matrix of knowledge gaps is so big that unless we embark on civic education early enough we are going to have a lot of probleMs Everybody still believes that we are going to stand the way we used to. People do not know that in a multiparty system there are primary elections. Furthermore, people don’t know whether there are going to be primary elections for LC I LC II, LC III, LC V, parliamentary candidates as well as special interest groups. Are these matters to be addressed by individual parties or by the government? The Electoral Commission and the people must be made aware.

Sometime back we insisted that this should have been the responsibility of the Human Rights Commission and we argued that we should not wait for elections. As it is, civic education is a periodic occurrence that the Electoral Commission only engages in right before elections. After elections they fold their hands and stop. I think we should review who should be responsible for carrying out civic education. Apparently, the Electoral Commission has enough on its plate otherwise they would be concentrating on explaining the electoral laws instead of emphasising issues like human rights and people’s entitlement to vote.

Concerning the substantive issue for our debate, I want to repeat what I said during the Constituent Assembly during the White Paper debate, and in my submissions to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. This question of academic qualifications is the most unfortunate appearance in our Constitution and it has brought about its own type of corruption. Much as we are fighting to stop corruption, we are still introducing systems that encourage corruption. Which party wants to submit an illiterate to campaign with a PhD holder? It is in the interests of a party to campaign for its best. Why should anybody prescribe a candidate for parties?

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that the honourable member should be reminded that one candidate during the last elections told voters that he did not mind who was elected to this House even if they were coming to sleep as long as they would vote for his policies. I think such a person is likely to disregard the issue of qualifications as long as people vote his policies through.

DR OKULO EPAK: The only problem is that Parliament does not provide enough sleeping space so those who come to snore will be embarrassed. Mr Speaker, I feel I am just flogging a dead horse since this is a constitutional matter. Therefore, I will not dwell on it anymore although I would like to repeat that I find this part of our electoral law most unnecessary.

I would also like to add that I do not think the question of extending the role of the National Council for Higher Education to cover foreign qualifications is necessarily a constitutional matter. Rather, I think it is a legal one. What remains now is the implementation of that requirement. However, I find it to be rather strenuous. This is because all over the world there is a requirement for minimum qualifications for those who want to enter various academic institutions. Why then do we want to transplant UNEB’s requirement to cover people who qualify abroad?

I have talked to UNEB, I have talked to some people in the National Council for Higher Education they are really least interested in this burden we are giving to them, and you can expect them to execute it in the most reluctant way. Since they are not keen to take up this assignment why we are bent on it? If somebody leaves Uganda with a primary leaving certificate and comes back with a degree, so what? As long as the degree is from a credible institution we can assume that the degree is part of the academic brilliance that he acquired abroad. In any case, the National Council for Higher Education claims that they have a way of calculating the years spent while acquiring these higher qualifications. Why are we wasting our time giving them a futile exercise?  

This system of finding out the number of years somebody who left the country with a school certificate spent studying in order to get a masters or bachelors’ degree is futile. You cannot use this information as the basis for determining an equivalent. What then shall we do with those people who are using such degrees to get jobs all over the world, if during these elections you turn around and condemn them as inadequate qualifications? Is Parliament the place to demand for the highest academic qualifications? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as you have rightly pointed out, this is a constitutional matter that we cannot change. We are simply trying to find a way to determine an equivalent. We have to find somebody to do the job for us hence the proposal. Otherwise why propose? Having said that this is a constitutional matter, we must find a way of assessing equivalent qualifications.

DR OKULO EPAK: My argument is that the requirement to vet qualifications from abroad is not necessarily a constitutional matter and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is actually a constitutional matter. This is because if these qualifications were not acquired here, there is need to find out whether they are equivalent since the Constitution talks about an equivalent.

DR OKULO EPAK: Well, as far as I am concerned, the whole thing is extraneous.  

Concerning election rigging, there has been an attempt to think that election rigging is simple but it is not. This is because no individual knows the total number of votes in a district except the returning officer at district level. About hon. Musumba’s proposal, I find that it is a reasonable one if carried out at constituency level. At this level you can send representatives to tally all the votes for that constituency and then verify the figures announced for the constituency with your own record. However, this is very difficult to do at district level. It is even more difficult at national level in the information office. I am talking from my personal experience.

The entry point for staff to ballot boxes and the rigging of tallies is usually done at sub-county level yet a good number of people do not care what happens at that level. A good number also do not concern themselves with what happens at district level. We have tried to follow this up and I believe that this should be understood as we seek to introduce mechanisms to control this. However, personally if this cannot be done here I know the level at which I will apply my own system to control this in my constituency since I have done sufficient research and established this fact.

On page 4 the committee states that the issue of location of polling stations also arose. The chairperson goes further to say that the committee noted that there might be a situation contrary to the above and that this should be addressed in the law. However, I have not seen this reflected as an amendment in the report. Since I have just picked this report, if it is to be addressed, I suggest that this be done.

Concerning page 6, I think that the Electoral Commission should not encourage practices that might lead to vote rigging such as the abrupt creation of polling stations and voting in hospitals. I took the trouble to submit this to the committee and I suggested areas of concern to restrain the Electoral Commission from contributing to the rigging of the elections either knowingly or unknowingly. I beg their indulgence to go back and review my submissions, which I hope I did not submit in vain as I had checked them out first. 

What is the use of setting up a polling station in places without people or in places where one cannot ascertain the actual number of voters? If these polling stations are announced suddenly, most candidates particularly the presidential ones may not have time to appoint polling agents to those polling stations. As a result, one may not know what is happening in such polling stations. I hope that my suggestions will be accommodated within the law or within the regulations, as we need to do something in that area. 

I may not be here when the committee is sitting but I request the committee and the honourable minister to look at these suggestions, as they are genuine. It will also save the Electoral Commission from being accused of being agents of rigging. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.46
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you may realize, there is nothing we can do about qualifications. The best we can do is to find a way to manage the vetting of people’s qualifications. I think it is necessary to define the “equivalent” talked about. I seem to recall, when we were preparing the interim parliamentary elections statute of 1995 that brought into force the elections in 1996, we attempted to define the word “equivalent”. I think it is important to try and define it. Perhaps when we come to committee stage we may have to refer to those old papers and see whether that definition can be borrowed for purposes of this particular bill.

On whether we should employ the services of UNEB or those of the National Council for Higher Education, in my view UNEB is the right institution for this task. By virtue of the fact that UNEB has had a lot of problems, it has also gained a lot of experience. They have actually accumulated information on various qualifications from different parts of the world, such as the Commonwealth and America and they have tried very hard to see how these relate to our qualifications here. 

It will be a pity if that responsibility is taken away and given to another organisation because this experience will no longer be available for use and this new organisation will have to start from scratch. In my view, therefore, we need to maintain UNEB for purposes of verification of qualifications, as the more important and serious problem is that of forgery of certificates. This problem is very difficult to handle but UNEB has worked out a way of determining the authenticity of these qualifications. Furthermore, they have collaborated with local and overseas institutions in an attempt to establish the genuineness of these qualifications. In view of all this, it would be a mistake to try and take this role away from UNEB.  

I know that the issue of special interest groups will be addressed when the minister comes with his resolution. Nevertheless, I hope that he will take the advice of the committee particularly that concerning petitions that were received with regard to the presence of UPDF in Parliament. In light of the multiparty system, this matter should be addressed very seriously. The UPDF must be non-partisan and should not be tempted by being allowed in a Parliament that is partisan. If this is not done, problems may arise in the event of certain decisions being made that may involve people with whom government may have a problem. I believe that they served their role when Parliament was still under the movement system but since this system does not exist anymore, they should not be represented.

Concerning the appointment of election constables, I believe that this system is being used to help the Police manage polling stations. However, the provision for presiding officers to be the ones to recruit election constables has a lot of shortcomings. 

I have also heard that this time round, the Police together with the Electoral Commission are going to deploy prison officers in an attempt to boost the Police and eliminate the possibility of involving the Army in the elections. I hope this will be achieved irrespective of the changes that have occurred in the Police. It is important that we involve people like prison officers so as to strengthen Police manpower and carry on with the elections without the involvement of the Army.  

I also have a few comments to make concerning this Bill. My first comment is on the election of special interest groups. I hope that when the minister makes his regulations he will arrange for special interest groups to be elected prior to the general elections of Members of Parliament and the President. This is necessary because as colleagues have already said, there is a tendency for people to lose interest in this category of elections after the main elections have taken place because of election fatigue. There may also be situations where a lot of interference may occur if these elections are held afterwards.

I seem to recall from previous election laws that there was a provision under polling procedures for assisting people with disabilities, pregnant mothers and the elderly to vote before other people. However, when I read clause 33(3) it says: “On the polling day, all voters intending to vote shall form one line commencing backwards from a point at least 20 meters away from the table at which each voter is to place the authorized mark of the choice on the ballot paper.” 

Nothing is mentioned to the effect that in the event of the presiding officer noticing disabled people, the elderly or pregnant women these should be given the first opportunity to vote so that they do not have to stand in long queues for hours before they vote. I hope we can include this in the law.

I am astonished with regard to clause 37(3), which reads: “Where a person does not have a voter’s card but is able to prove to the presiding officer or polling assistant that his or her name or photograph or both is or are on the voters’ register the presiding officer or polling assistant shall issue him or her with a ballot paper.” 

This means that one does not have to go with a voting card to the polling station as long as they can prove that either their name or photograph appears in the register. This might cause a situation where people will not carry their voter’s cards to vote. This is a very serious matter as it is likely to give rise to a situation where even those who should not be voting such as non-citizens or people who may not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you consider the context of this provision? Say if somebody has travelled from Jinja to Kabale with the belief that he has his voter’s card only to check on the voting day and find that he does not have it. For such a situation, since this person knows that he is on the register, he can go and explain the circumstances under which he failed to produce his voter’s card. If he is registered there is bound to be someone who can support his claim. I think this is not to encourage people to leave behind their voter’s cards since it involves begging the indulgence of others. That is my understanding. 

CAPT. BABU: Sir, thank you very much. Whilst your explanation is for the good and honest people of this country, we have a lot of dishonest people as well. These people get the register and look for the names of people who are not available or pictures of people who look like them and in this way they go and vote from one station to another. In fact, in my town there are people who are very good at doing this. Therefore, we need to come up with other limitations or seek for more proof. I think in urban centres where we have all sorts of –(Interruption)- I would like us to put more restrictions like say a letter from the Police. Thank you.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that in Arua Municipality, we had a loophole during the registration process in the 2001 elections. What happened was that most people who went to pick their voters’ cards found that other people had already picked them and that according to the register they had already voted. Therefore, giving room for the registrars to allow people to vote against names without clear proof is going to confuse this electoral process. I would rather that all voters be required to go to polling stations with their voters’ cards to avoid any probleMs Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I rise to inform the honourable member that we should not assume that the world is 100 percent perfect. Somebody may lose his card but if it can be proved at the polling station that this person resides in zone X and he has his identity card with him then that person should be allowed to vote. I do not see why such a person should be turned away. 

The argument being raised that this will cause loopholes is not justifiable. If anything would that stop someone from going to a polling station and pretending to be someone he simply looks like in the register? Would it stop one from using someone’s card and voting in his or her place? We must assume that in the event that somebody does not have a voter’s card –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The law for registering a voter requires that you register where you were born or where you reside. This means that you must be a local. As a result, when you go to vote other people around must know you. It is not a matter of me going to Entebbe and saying I am going to vote here. I must go to my village where I was born and where I am known.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Rwamirama. Are the registers going to have pictures of voters?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, that is precisely what I wanted to say. As government we made this provision because we knew there would be pictures of the voters on the registers. Is it likely that in your village there will be a man who resembles hon. Bikwasizehi and that the people there will be unable to identify that person as an impostor? I believe the provision we made in the bill is a reasonable one. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I am raising this issue from my experience with the Select Committee on Election Violence. As a matter of fact, during the previous elections there were a lot of problems with cards. The Electoral Commission kept on announcing that everybody must have a card. When they realized that the system had broken down and that not everybody had a card, they started announcing that even if you do not have a card you can go and prove yourself at the polling station. This brought about a lot of confusion.

I have given this example for the simple purpose of trying to see how we can best control the situation. Hon. Bwambale gave us an example of Mauritius where before voting each person is called out publicly for all to ascertain that he is the one. However, I must add that in some urban areas where people live in wall fences this may be difficult. For instance, next door to my house the residents have been changing all the time so much so that right now I do not know who resides there and I would not be in position to verify that person as my neighbour. Nevertheless, we must be careful and I would like to suggest that we could improve on this by considering hon. Bwambale’s contribution so that at least somebody knows the person going to vote.

I do not know why the minister does not want to amend Schedule 1 under clause 78, which schedule is only one sentence. A currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000. I do not understand why it is necessary for the minister to vary the value of the currency point midway. Clause 98 states that, “The minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of the Cabinet, amend the First Schedule to this Act and the first schedule currency points”. Since we are all aware that a currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000 I do not see what would cause the minister to revisit the value of a currency point?
 
THE SPEAKER: No, he changes it because of the change in value of the currency.

MR MWANDHA: But, Mr Speaker, if that were the case, you know we have passed a lot of laws with Shs 20,000 equivalent to one currency point. If the minister is to vary this particular currency point, I do not know what will be the effect on the so many other laws that we have passed? 

THE SPEAKER: It has to be, because if the value has changed, the currency points have to change in all other laws. That is why I think the Cabinet comes in so that they look at the implication and agree.

6.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the issue of currency reform, that is a Ministry of Finance issue. So the Ministry of Justice has no authority over a currency reform. So that one should not be big issue and it should not even have appeared here. Maybe at a later stage we may have to delete it.  

Mr Speaker, I want to make one correction to my colleague, hon. James Mwandha that on clause 36, the issue of the pregnant women and the disabled has been taken care of, so he should not get worried.  It is there in clause 36(2).  

Members have talked about photographing people for registration in the villages. Where I come from, all the cameras are dead and all the people there are saying, “What is the problem?” I think this needs to be looked at very seriously. 

The second point, it is not right for the LC I chairman to keep voters’ lists. I think these lists should be displayed on the wall so that I come, check whether my name is there or not there. The issue of keeping lists under key and lock is allowing even the dead and young to remain on the list, which is not right. I think that all the lists should be displayed and not to be kept by an individual in his room.

Having said that, I want to know from the minister, under clause 4(3) about the public officers and local government, why is he bringing this when it is already in the Constitution and also it is in the – because it says, “ They will resign their office before assuming the office of Member of Parliament.” By the time he goes to stand, somebody has already resigned, so it is not right to put it here because –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, if hon. Nandala has cared to read the clause in detail, it refers to the Movement political system.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Okay, if it is a Movement system, I thought this law we are making it for the multi-party system because the tree was cut and the Movement system broke the house.

THE SPEAKER: No, they are making a law that can operate whether it is a Movement system or not so that we do not have to revisit the matter.

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  My next issue is about clause 14(7). It talks about a convoy; that in a convoy, a candidate must not have more than two cars. What does this mean? Already a convoy and not more than two cars; unless the law is saying a candidate must specifically have two cars? Because the moment the convoy is there, I do not know what you are trying to cure here bwana minister? And two cars do not make a convoy. So, I am failing to understand!

THE SPEAKER: At the Committee Stage you will change the language.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come to the issue of the presiding officer having the authority to appoint. I think we should be clear. If we say the presiding officer will have the authority to appoint anybody, again we are going to somehow appoint people who may militarise our politics. I am worried that yet it should be clear. It is either the Police who are the ones there, and short of the Police, the Police should be the ones to look for other people, but not the Army.

Why am I bringing this? Under clause 45 the minister is clearly saying, no person armed should be near the polling station; he should be far from it by one kilometer. Then at the end he goes and says: “Where he or she is entitled, unless called upon or to do so by lawful authority or where he or she is ordinarily entitled by virtue of his or her office to carry arMs” This is quite dangerous. An RDC will come at a station with army men with guns and this is quite dangerous. This is already intimidation of the people at the polling stations.  In the 2001 elections in Tororo, one person was entitled to carry a gun and they indeed killed the person. So it is quite dangerous on that day for people to move with guns. And I can see my colleague Dr Mallinga wants to get up, he is one of those fond of pulling guns in public places -(Laughter)- and he could also be very dangerous –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I have never carried a gun in public at the alleged time. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to mislead the House to think that I am a person who is irresponsible, who carries a gun in public when I am an extremely, highly regarded officer in this country? I served this country diligently; I have an impeccable military record and he is, therefore, damaging my reputation. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you said so. Are you referring to his past activities when he was a serving officer or you are talking about currently?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, recently it was clearly alleged –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It was what?

MR NANDALA: It was clearly alleged –(Interjections)- that during the time when they were debating the issue of a certain district, my colleague there was annoyed and pulled a gun. So I assumed that since he has never denied - because this was in the media, which is read by everybody. I assumed he is fond of doing it. That is the reason why I am referring to it.

THE SPEAKER: So, you have no evidence of your own? You are merely referring to allegations?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I have never seen him but I have the evidence –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You withdraw, please and we proceed.

MR NANDALA: I withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed then.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, apologies are very expensive -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Information.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable on the Floor that it is not only firearms that can kill. There are so many instruments you can use to harm a person and I want to assure you that people who are authorised to carry guns are people who are tested. So, if you have fear then fear somebody harming anybody with a spear, a desk, a car for that matter - so, I do not know the justification he is pushing for stopping authorised people from carrying their weapons to defend themselves.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I think you can see if somebody carried a gun at the polling station, are you expecting war at the polling station? I believe on that day nobody should be entitled to move near the polling station with a gun.

THE SPEAKER: Even the constable, even the policeman who has come to keep law and order also should be disarmed?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thought the elections are always for people to vote, people do not come to fight.

THE SPEAKER: But you mean there should not be any kind – is that what you are saying?

MR NANDALA: But Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, you have already demonstrated to the honourable member that yes, there are people who can and will carry firearms within the precincts of polling station for purposes of maintaining law and order. But I am asking the honourable member to tell this House whether even His Excellency, the President or Vice-President will leave their security a kilometer away before they go to vote.

MR NANDALA: I think that is not bad it will be in good faith, what do they fear? They should also come and vote but what I am trying to put up, Mr Speaker, for the police constables, I do not have any ill motives but the whole problem –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, it is not practical. This police constable has come to keep peace because there could be violence, somebody could come and snatch the ballot box and run away with it. Are they going to use their fingers or stones to stop him? That is why you have this policeman to do that.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, in the case of the police constable there is no problem. But in case of somebody coming at the polling station with army people or whoever is coming to check, I think it is not right.

THE SPEAKER: You will make the necessary adjustments in amendment, point taken.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have seen probleMs We are talking about government officers under clause 28 leaving resources when they are going for elective offices. But there are people who are using government resources and are campaigning for specific people but not for themselves and the law is not talking about them. Like presidential advisors are busy campaigning not for themselves but for others and are using government resources. In such cases what should be the law? Suppose I have somebody campaigning for me, and he is using government resources? 

Mr Speaker, I am bringing this because we have RDCs, ISO and the Army, I think in our process this time we should be clear that if you are using a government resource, a vehicle or whatever, you should not take part in campaigns because this is really making other people disadvantaged. You get a person like the political assistant to the President, Moses Byaruhanga, going around with a government car plus army men busy campaigning.

THE SPEAKER: The law we are making is mainly for candidates and their agents and electoral officers but we cannot use it to deal with a private person because you are flouting regulations of public service. I think the Public Service should make a different law to deal with them. You may not be able to bring them under this law, which is the problem. A medical superintendent is your friend. He is entitled to his vehicle and wants to go and campaign for you, how will this law affect him? This is the problem of implementation of what you want by this law.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I would not mind maybe if your medical assistant or whatever your friend is campaigning but not going from stage to stage with the government vehicle saying, “Do this, do that.” I think this is really participating in politics of the day and that means that we should put in here that even people who are using government resources, since first of all we have said they should not be members, they should not participate in the campaigning processes -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are there no laws in their calling that will control them? Doesn’t the supervisor of this medical superintendent have regulations that he should follow to discipline him?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, the laws are there but sometimes these laws by the time they catch up with them, they have already committed crimes. So enforcement is a big issue.  

The issue of polling stations should be clear. The number of polling stations in every particular place must be declared early enough and the places known. There is no reason three weeks to elections to tell us that there is another polling station to be in such a place. That is not right. In fact, polling stations must be known maybe even six months in advance so that everybody who is standing knows how he will take care of that polling station. Because this issue of bringing polling stations at short notice is the one, which is causing us probleMs It is where you will hear that some polling stations have 10,000 people even when they do not have a single person. 

I will give an example of Bugisu, Mbale. There is a polling station deep in the forest and it has 6,000 voters. But if you go there, there is no single house yet that is the biggest polling station and I want all of you to do it -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House about the polling station in the forest at Mbale? First of all, there are houses for workers in that forest; over 200 workers live there. Soldiers from the barracks and workers at the railway station vote from there. So, what do you mean by saying that there are no people? Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that personally I have no knowledge of what is happening there. I may not be able to contradict him, but I think you have got information from the honourable that there are houses there.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I grew up in Mbale, I know it and the forest I am talking about. The railway station you are talking about is down in Maluku. The polling station I am talking about is near the main road to Tororo and what it has is a nursery bed for trees and you tell me a nursery bed has 200 workers? I think that is being unfortunate.  

You recall very well, for information of the House, that during the by-elections in Mbale where that colleague of mine was the chief campaign manager of one candidate, he was one of those who supervised that polling station and the polling station got six votes. If you are saying that there are 200 people, why did six people vote? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to say is that those are some of the dangerous places and it is very good that at this time we get to know the polling stations in advance.  

We have an issue of the Army. I think as we are making this law you allow us to make some amendments. The issue of Kalangala Action Plan (KAP), I know the majority of the Members of Parliament here have subscribed to it, but Kalangala Action Plan participating in the election process is going to bring more violence and I think government should take this in a good heart and if possible, warn that person in charge of Kalangala Action Plan. Because you are not going to beat people and they keep quiet. We were beaten in 1986 and in 2001. I think we are becoming used and now in 2006, you bring Kalangala Action Plan to beat people it is going to be another story. I would ask the Government that Kalangala Action Plan should leave our politics of the day.

Finally, qualifications: this issue of qualifications and the equivalent, I think is a very dangerous thing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it has been conceded, this is a constitutional matter. While dealing with this bill, we are not in position to handle, to remove or to improve on it.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I know it is a constitutional matter but senior six should be senior six. If there is a problem with your papers, I think it is up to you to tell. Because we have discovered somebody goes on the streets gets a piece of paper and comes and says I have the equivalent. I have seen it is a constitutional thing but I believe people who are going to stand should be able to declare the universities they went to early enough. But that is not a big issue –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not waste time on this. We have said it is a constitutional matter, we cannot change it; let us deal with other issues.  

6.30
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Excuse me if I repeat what my colleagues have said. But let me invite government and the Electoral Commission to use today’s Hansard in the completion of the Bill under consideration because I think most of the points aired by my colleagues are very valid in the improvement of the forthcoming elections.

Mr Speaker, I just want to emphasise one point, which has also been referred to by my colleagues and that is the polling stations. In my constituency, I have a polling station, which is 14 kilometres from another one. I think this has got a big impact on the voters. The voters who are physically disabled, elderly and pregnant walking 14 kilometres away to vote, is almost impossible for them.  

So, I have a special request to the Electoral Commission to evaluate the locations of the polling stations that we had in the previous elections and see where we can make improvements. But we have a big problem that a lot of polling stations are far apart from one another and I am making this appeal. I would also like –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am sorry to interrupt the honourable member but I thought that after every election any problems that are encountered are given in the reports of the various returning officers. For example, even the location of polling stations is reported upon and if honourable members of Parliament had recognised these anomalies, it would have been much better –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Order!

PROF. KAGONYERA: Order, what wrong have I done?

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you for the information, if he is informing me. I am wondering whether government is in order. Government has never given us a report about what transpired in the previous elections, to give us a criterion it used to set up those polling stations and to tell us what collective measures it has taken now because elections are any time? Have you given us a report to tell us where you have made improvements? How are we going to know what you have done? Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the honourable minister is in order.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the position is this. Even in this Bill it provides for appointment of a day and polling stations and the important part of it is that these polling stations are gazetted. The purpose of gazetting is to pass to you information that in constituency so and so, these are the polling stations established by the commission.  

When they are gazetted and you think that the choice of the polling station is not good for this reason or the other, then you write to the commission and say, you have gazetted this polling station, it is very far and it is catering for more than say 1,000 people or 700 or the distance is so big. Taking into account your complaint then the Electoral Commission can consider and then set another polling station or change the polling station. The bill here is providing for that.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because I have moved through my constituency, that is why I am giving this report. Many polling stations, especially in Bukakata near the lake, are about 14 kilometres away from one another and I am appealing to government to reconsider this location –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you do since you know the geography of your constituency and the problems faced, you write to the Electoral Commission or the district registrar complaining about Bukakata so that while taking into consideration the reports received from various parts of the country, the Electoral Commission will be in position to adjust.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will oblige but I thought that this problem is not only in Masaka but also in many areas. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague, for giving way. The information I wanted to give is that in the month September this year, the Electoral Commission carried out an announcement for two weeks in the media calling for proposals for review of polling stations throughout the country. So if the member did not take advantage of this that is why there are problems in her constituency.

THE SPEAKER: It is not too late. You can do it. 

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a few issues particularly for clarification such that we can save time during the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you have finished, honourable member?

MS NAMAGGWA: No, thank you, Mr Speaker, I did not finish.

THE SPEAKER: Let her finish then you come in.

MS NAMAGGWA: If this is the Minister of Local Government coming to tell me, can I get a report of that information? Can the minister communicate that information to this House so that actually it is easy for us to take it to our people? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What I can tell you is that today I talked to the Chairman of the Electoral Commission and I drew his attention to complaints raised about this exercise of registering and he said - I think the minister has approached him and he also told him that they are going to deal with polling stations.
  
When they gazette them and you are not satisfied, you take that opportunity to raise the complaint.  But even now before they do, if you have such a complaint you can as a Member of Parliament or as a citizen write about inadequacies of polling stations in your constituency and that definitely will be taken into account.

6.37
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the chairperson for the report and for the courtesy they continue to extend to me, as the Legal and Parliamentary Committee, whenever I appear there.  

Clause 8 provides for the Attorney-General to make petitions regarding the determination of membership or a Member of Parliament under Article 86. It proceeds in 8(4) to say: “Upon application to the Attorney General, 50 registered voters can request the Attorney General to petition the high court on their behalf in a matter of determination of membership.”  

I start by saying that I really want to be educated. I am wondering why the Attorney-General, who would not be a voter or a candidate in that particular election, should be the one taking up the responsibility to petition on behalf of certain voters. Then the question that I also ask myself, Mr Speaker is, assuming the Electoral Commission is the respondent in a matter of determination of the membership, would the Attorney-General represent both the petitioners and Electoral Commission? I would be of the view that in matters of determination of membership let the concerned voters or people who are candidates be the ones to petition. Otherwise, this provision could be misused if you want to make it difficult for a certain political party. The Attorney-General could be used by - not this government - some other government could misuse this opportunity to make it difficult for Members of Parliament from other political parties.  

The other point I would like to raise regards clause 32. It talks about the possibility of polling stations being located in large premises of convenient access. I think this is a departure from the principle of openness that we have cultivated over the years. I would wonder why we would wish to have elections take place in a premise. This for me I thought can easily be a premise for vote stealing. 

The Bill in clause 37(5) is proposing that the presiding officer or polling assistant shall write the name of the polling station in the space provided on the top of ballot paper. We have had a lot of reports, Mr Speaker, of polling officers in certain parts of this country ticking ballot papers before they give them to voters, especially, those who cannot read and write. If you give a polling assistant the privilege to write, he could use that to tick the ballot and the public that is watching would take it that he is doing the duty assigned to him under the law.
  
Finally, clause 39 is talking about where two voters appear under the same name. That is where a person presents himself or herself to be a particular voter and applies for a ballot paper after another person has voted in that person’s name, then the second person shall be entitled to vote. I think the reason we have introduced photographs on the register is to ensure that the properly registered person is the one who votes. You may have the same name but I take it that it is very rare that people have the same name and they look alike. So, I still see this as a problem, and it comes back to the question that was raised by hon. Mwandha of people voting without voters’ cards.

He raised a very good point but if you try to balance the evil and the good, you find that the evil that would arise out of the clause of people voting without their voters’ cards supersedes the good and I would really be inclined to strongly propose to this House that we delete that clause or modify it in a substantial way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.43
CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. All I want to talk about was clause 11, which talks about the district woman representative. Kampala by the constitutional amendment will soon have capital city status and if it does, we will lose one seat. Therefore, I wanted to request that the chairman of the committee and the minister later on when they have time to look at this. I know this might not happen right now because we have not yet made the law to make Kampala a capital city. But somewhere in the law I would have liked to request that whilst they are talking about the district, that they could put a provision to say that the capital city will also have a woman representative or any other city created thereafter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable members, we have come to the end and tomorrow the minister will make his contribution and wind up and the chairman will wind up. I appeal to hon. Kagonyera that in view of the importance of these Bills, you may find time for your Cabinet because I am adjourning the House to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. so that we continue with this and we handle the Presidential Bill again. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 October 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

