

Wednesday, 3 October 2018

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today morning, I looked at the publication in the newspapers and I saw The New Vision at page six, publish how the vote was conducted yesterday on the Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2018. I was listed among the people who voted “No”. (Laugher) 

I also saw names of Members who were not in the House but The New Vision reported that they voted “No”. They include that hon. Oryem Okello and hon. Makmot Otto. I am saying this because their names are closer to my name in the directory and so, I could see that they were not in the House.
	
This morning at about 9.49 a.m., I got a phone call from The New Vision, Mr John Kakande called me together with a lady called Mary Karugaba. They said that the list they published is not correct and apologised to me because they know that I do not vote and I did not vote. They said that it was a mistake and reported that there were other names which were not properly correlated in the way the vote was conducted. They promised that they will publish another list tomorrow and run an apology to Parliament.
	
I have to say this because Members who have been affected in one way or the other have already come to me to raise this matter as a matter of concern. Therefore, I would like to request Members to treat what appeared on the half a page of The New Vision of today as something that is going to be corrected.

I would like to also urge the public to ignore that list because it is not correct. The New Vision will publish another list tomorrow which will show a true picture of how the vote was conducted yesterday. 

Honourable members, when I looked at how the voting was reported by The Daily Monitor, I was not able to go through everything but I think it was more accurate than what was published in The New Vision. So, I thought I should communicate this so that Members do not become anxious that they have been put in the wrong category – Some voted “No” but The New Vision published that they voted “Yes” and vice versa. Even some Members were not present at all but they were indicated to have voted in one way or the other. This will be corrected tomorrow with an apology from The New Vision. 

Honourable members, Makerere University School of Law will be celebrating 50 years of existence. It was established in 1968 and it has brought into this country a lot of people in the legal profession. The theme will be “50 Years of Success and Building for the Future”. Building for the future is the motto of Makerere University. Those of us who studied in Makerere University know that we build for the future and we continue doing that even when we are outside the university.
	
Honourable members, the commemoration will be on the 12 October 2018, at Hotel Africana, starting at 6.00 p.m. So, all those who are part of this fraternity, alumni from Makerere University School of Law and those married to them could join them on the 12th of October at Hotel Africana at 6.00.p.m.

The Chief Justice, Bart Katureebe will be the Chief Guest in the function. Please join Makerere University School of law in celebrating 50 years of success and bringing products into this country that have shaped the legal standing in this country.   This invitation also extends to staff of Parliament. I think the Department of Legal and Legislative Counsel is the most resourced by Makerere University School of law. Please be part of this event, participate and show solidarity to the fraternity and the history that has made you what you are today. Thank you.

There are matters of national importance from the honourable member for Soroti Municipality but I do not see him here. There is also another matter from Member for Bulambuli County.

2.10
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here on a matter of national importance. On Friday last week, the people of Bulambuli were attacked by a heavy storm.  As a result, about 81 were affected, 30 gardens of cassava were totally destroyed and 22 people were admitted in Muyembe Health Center IV but they were discharged yesterday.

Mr Speaker, I am not happy at all. Last year, in May, we had the same problem and I raised the matter on the Floor of Parliament but no assistance was given to my people. I am getting very worried that every now and then when we get disaster and we report to the Government, nothing is done. 

Mr Speaker, should we continue lamenting? Our people see us raise these matters on the Floor of Parliament and yet nothing is done to help them. We have a full Government and the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness - May I allow hon. Mutonyi to give information?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you kindly finish your matter?

MR BURUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought she would give me some information. My prayer is that I request the Government through the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to rescue my people. Otherwise, the condition is very alarming.

If anyone here watched NTV-UG news, the matter was very serious. In fact, there was an old lame man whose house had been totally destroyed and he has nowhere to go. So, if Government cannot help, then what can a Member of Parliament do? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that our fellow citizens have gone through this very trying period. It is indeed very sad.

On behalf of Government, allow me to express our most sincere sympathies which the honourable Member of Parliament can convey to the people of Bulambuli. I will get in touch with the minister responsible and we shall try to do as best as we can.

I hope the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) has already made an estimate of the damage so that then we can be able to know the type of resources that we would want to help our people who are in that kind of position.

If it has not been done –(Interjection)– Yes, the RDC is the one supposed to assess - (Interjections) – Sorry, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). I beg your pardon. I am confusing it. Please excuse me. If the CAO has not done so, hon. Burundo, please let us know and then we do what is necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, that office is called the office of the CAO. When you say CAO, it does not sound right. (Laughter)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to speak. I would like to give information to the minister, that the people of Manafwa District who were affected by the landslides about six months ago are still living in classrooms.

During the day, they come out of the classrooms. During the night, they get back to the classrooms. I do not know. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is aware but they have been promising to relocate these people to Bulambuli. Up to now, nothing has been done.

When I went to them, the commissioner told me that the finance ministry has refused to release money. Therefore, honourable minister, there is a big problem and people are wondering whether they have a Government and people who care for them or not. That is the information I would like to give you. Maybe you are not aware but as you deal with Bulambuli, Manafwa people are still living in classrooms without tents and no food. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about Bundibugyo and other places? Those matters have been raised here.

MR KASAIJA: Yes, Sir. Let me promise one thing. We will do whatever it takes to help to relieve the pain and suffering our people are going through because the job is big. As you remember, virtually the whole of Teso sub-region got submerged. A few months ago, I flew over the place and could see people were really under water. The job is big but whether it is big or not, the lives of the people are the most important thing that we must save.

We shall try to do whatever we can to send relief. I will report to the Prime Minister himself, who is directly responsible for this sub-sector of disaster preparedness. I am sure that something will come, sooner than later.

2.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we concluded the issue of mobile money tax. However, while I was reflecting and going through the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development last night, there was something that was very pertinent which the committee raised; that we do not have a law to regulate mobile money in this country.

I thought yesterday the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would have told us when they are bringing the law to regulate mobile money in this country. If today, God forbid, I died in an accident with five million shillings on my phone, it would be very difficult for my next of kin to get this money. I thought that yesterday, the minister would ask for one month. The law regulating mobile money is going to come. 

That is why we stopped the toll fees on the Entebbe Expressway. They had wanted to start charging money before the law is enacted. We said no. There is no way you are going to charge Ugandans for this road until the law is enacted. Therefore, we are waiting for the Minister of Work and Transport also before they start charging.

We cannot continue in this way of legalising the illegalities. If it is the weakness or the incompetence within the ministry of finance, let us be told today that they are so incompetent. We need a team that can be able. There are very competent people there who can be appointed to the ministry of finance who can handle this matter expeditiously. We cannot continue like this. Can we have a law to regulate mobile money in this country before the year comes to an end? It is so embarrassing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR OKUPA: Is the minister procedurally right to continue sitting comfortably in this Parliament – (Laughter)– without addressing the matter of bringing the law to regulate mobile money services, even after passing the Bill yesterday to collect money from poor people like those in Kasilo who do not even have a bank? The whole district does not have a bank. 

Therefore, is he procedurally right to be seated comfortably and smiling as if nothing has happened to proceed without the law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You know, it is the responsibility of the Speaker to ensure that Members sit comfortably in this House. (Laughter) So, if the honourable member is sitting comfortably, I am very happy because it means I am doing a good job of looking after the comfort of the Members. (Laughter)

However, I think there is a valid point that you should take time and reflect on and see what can be moved ahead.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I admire the mood of hon. Elijah Okupa this afternoon. However, the point which has been raised is, one, is mobile money regulated as we speak now? Yes. Do we need to strengthen the regulations? Yes. What are we doing about it as Government? We are bringing a National Payment System by the end of this month to the House.

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A SECTORAL COMMITTEE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Kipterit Christopher Akorikimoi, Member for Upe County, was on 25 July 2018 designated to the Committee on Education and Sports. He reapplied to the Speaker and was allowed to be moved from the Committee of Education and Sports to another committee.

I now designate hon. Kipterit Christopher Akorikimoi, MP Upe County, to serve on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, this 3rd day of October, 2018. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE WORLD TEACHERS’ DAY CELEBRATIONS

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present a statement to Parliament on the World Teachers’ Day celebrations.

Mr Speaker, World Teachers’ Day is celebrated worldwide on 5th October each year, to recognise the pivotal role teachers play in shaping the lives of our young generation. It is an international observance day that was created by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) to show appreciation for the vital contribution that teachers make to education and development of nations. 

It was created in 1994 to commemorate the signing of the 1966 UNESCO and International Labour Organisation (ILO) Recommendation concerning the status of teachers, which is a standard-setting instrument that addresses the status and situations of teachers around the world. 

This day is dedicated to raise public awareness on teacher issues to enable recognition of their special value in our lives. Teachers constitute our nation's most precious national resource and we look to them to guide our children in their quest for knowledge, truth and in their capacity to lead a life of dignity and self-respect. 

Teachers are front-line participants in educational reform and are therefore critical to successful quality schooling worldwide. They, therefore, deserve to be recognised and valued. We, therefore, commend all Ugandan teachers for the devotion to provide hope in our children for the future of this nation. The nation is because teachers are. Our Government is committed to provide quality education to all and teachers are critical ingredients in this process.

Sustainable Development Goal 4 requires us, as a nation, to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all targets. We rely on our teachers to move this agenda forward as we ensure that every child in this country has the opportunity to exercise his or her right to access affordable education of equitable quality.

The Ministry of Education and Sports, in collaboration with UNATU leadership, are organising the day’s celebrations nationally on Friday, 5 October 2018 and the theme of this year’s teachers’ day is, “The Right to Quality Education means the Right to a Quality Teacher.” 

The celebrations will be held at two levels. The first level is the national celebration, which will be held at St Leo’s College Kyegobe Playground, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole District. It will be presided over by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda as the chief guest. The second level is at the districts where the celebrations will be held in every district and municipality in this country, as has always been the case each year on the 5th October. 

It should be noted that all teachers, both public and private, will be celebrating. The general public is therefore informed that teachers countrywide will be celebrating their day on Friday, 5 October 2018 and therefore, they will not be expected at the schools. A circular has already been sent to Chief Administrative Officers and schools to this effect.

The purpose of this brief, Mr Speaker, is to inform members of Parliament about the day and to invite you to join our teachers in this celebration. I beg to inform the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is not a ministerial statement. This is information and an invitation for you to go to Kabarole for this national celebration. Even the Member of Parliament for Kumi Municipality should prepare to go to Kabarole for this celebration. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, your colleague made a statement here the other day about students who must be allowed to sit their exams and not be sent away. Apart from that communication from here, the schools have not received any formal communication from the ministry. Have you done anything about this because these matters are touching? I do not want them raised again and form a debate. 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I confirm that these were not candidates because the picture that had been created was that these were candidates registered with UNEB. 

Secondly, we agreed with the Member of Parliament, hon. Okin P.P., that he was going to collect all the information and give it to me so that I make a formal communication to two other schools that are going to accommodate the students who were in those schools.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the avoidance of doubt, honourable minister, just in case some of the candidates are affected without us knowing, can you give a formal communication? This is because there was an issue of chasing away students who have not paid fees. Can you give a general communication covering that?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have written a circular reminding head teachers not to send away candidates registered with UNEB or any other national examination body just because they have not been able to pay school fees and I expect compliance. 

Secondly, we are trying to get information about the schools that have closed. These were not Government schools. Parents set up their own schools and they were expecting Government to take them over. Government has a plan to take over these schools but for the students who were in schools that have been forced to close because of financial difficulties, Government is going to make arrangements to resettle them in other registered secondary schools in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

PETITION BY THE UGANDA NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF THE DEAF AND THE INITIATIVE FOR SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS

2.29
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interruption) 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I am raising anchors on rule 81 of our Rules of Procedure about our dress code, which requires us to dress in a specified dignified manner. Is hon. Ismael Orot, who had formerly been nominated to be a minister and who has been telling us of his presidential ambition, in order to dress casually like someone visiting a malwa joint? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to explain the rule?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Rule 81 specifies the dress code and states: (1) “A Member shall dress in a dignified manner that is to say –
(a) 	a suit, a pair of long trousers, jacket, shirt and tie; a kanzu and jacket or a Safari Suit for male Members;
(b) 	a suit, a jacket, blouse and skirt or dress for lady Members;
(c)	decent traditional wear;
(d)	military attire for Members of the Armed Forces.”

(2) “A Member shall put on dignified shoes, save that a Member may, with leave of the Speaker, put on foot wear which may not necessarily be described as shoes”.

This is what the rule explains and in my observation, hon. Ismael Orot, the future presidential candidate, does not, in any way, fit in the provision of our rules. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, hon. Ismael Orot is dressed in an African wear and he is decent. It is a borderline situation but I will exercise the discretion in his favour for today. Next time, please avoid that kind of situation. (Laughter)

MS HELLEN ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda moved under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition of the members of the Uganda National Association of the Deaf (UNAD) and the Initiative for Social and Cultural Rights (ISER); represented by hon. Hellen Grace Asamo, PWD Representative (Eastern).

“Your humble petitioners are- 
1. 	Members of the Uganda National Association of the Deaf a Non-Governmental Organisation that promotes and advocates for access to social services including education and health by persons with disabilities; members of the Initiative for Social and Cultural Rights (ISER), a Non-Governmental Organisation established to promote the effective understanding, monitoring, implementation, accountability and ensuring the full realisation of social and economic rights in Uganda including the right to education;
 
2. 	Your petitioners monitor and document human rights issues in the delivery of education services in Uganda; particularly, the barriers to access to quality education for children with disabilities in Uganda;

3. 	Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to education and Objective 18 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins the State to promote free and compulsory basic education and take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard possible;

4. 	The Education Pre-Primary, Primary and Post Primary Act of 2008, and the Persons with Disability Act, 2006, emphasise the right of children with disabilities to free, compulsory and universal education;

5. 	The fundamental right to education is also affirmed by a number of international and regional instruments that Uganda has ratified including the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, the UN Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child;

6. 	The Government of Uganda has mode commitments in the National Development Plan II and Sustainable Development Gaols Agenda 2030 under the theme: "Leave no one behind" where specifically SDG 4 seeks to ensure the provision of free, quality, equitable and inclusive education for all;

7. 	Government has taken measures to ensure access to education for all through both Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes that have increased access to education by millions of children from poor backgrounds;

However, despite this breakthrough, access to quality education by deaf children continues to be hindered by various barriers and absence of reasonable accommodation in education institutions;

Your humble petitioners further note;

    a. That at the primary level, there are only eleven schools which focus solely on the provision of education to deaf persons and of which six are Government schools while the other five are privately owned. These schools are complimented by more 45 deaf units which are attached to the main stream primary schools and five inclusive schools across the country, where deaf children learn. 

Further, that the situation is even worse at secondary school level where there are only three Government schools for the deaf in the entire country; one privately owned school which has a special unit for the deaf and four other inclusive schools of which only one is government owned;

Compared to the need, these facilities are not sufficient to absorb all the deaf children in Uganda and thus in many areas, children are enrolled in mainstream schools only to drop out due to communication barriers and high cost of hiring sign language interpreters;

Your petitioners are aware that education is a right and a public good and it is the duty of Government to ensure that every citizen accesses education on equal basis without discrimination.

NOW, THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray that:

a) 	Parliament directs the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that the Education sector budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 complies with section 5(j) of the Persons with Disabilities Act of the 10 per cent of the sector budget allocation towards the education needs of persons with disabilities.

b) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Curriculum Development Centre incorporates sign language as a subject in the secondary school curriculum just as other languages like Luganda to provide on opportunely for those learners who would like to take it on as a language to extend the pool of people who can communicate in sign language.

c)	The Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Council for Higher Education to ensure that all Primary Teachers’ Colleges and University Faculties and Colleges of Education in Uganda offer a component of sign language to ensure that there is an adequate number of teachers with sign language training around the country.

d) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports ensures that at the secondary level, schools have the necessary infrastructure to accommodate deaf students and institutions of higher learning employ sign language interpreters such that deaf students enrol for programmes of their choice in institutions of higher learning without the burden of additional costs.

e) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports collects and keeps data on access to education by persons with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, and your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.”

Thereto appended are your humble petitioners' signatures as attached.

Mr Speaker, I would like to beg that I lay the entire document and the petition at the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable members. That petition stands referred to the appropriate committee responsible for the sector and that is the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Honourable members, these petitions come because citizens have nowhere else to go; they have come here. Therefore, the committees must act on them quickly because those matters are pressing to them.

The committee must act on them quickly and come back to the House so that the People who have petitioned this Parliament can have responses to the issues they have raised. Therefore, please follow the timelines so that we get this done.

Honourable members, in the public galley this afternoon, we have students of Uganda Martyrs University in Mpigi District; represented by hon. John Bosco Lubyayi and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them; you are welcome. (Applause)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER 

QUESTION TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

2.41
MR CHARLES ILLUKOR, (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): “Can the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries explain the stalled operationalisation of the Soroti Fruit Factory, leading to wastage of fruits being harvested?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This question has been there for three days now; yesterday it was there. Where is the minister? Who is the Government Chief Whip?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues; being an elder is a very difficult situation. On a serious note the ministry - although that is not a good excuse - are busy in the annual review meeting.

However, I promise this House to apprise my colleague to come tomorrow and answer this question by all means.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.  

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 142

2.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to move a motion for the reconsideration of the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 as returned by His Excellency the President for reconsideration by this Parliament and I wish to lay the returned law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the rules are very specific on this matter because Parliament has already discussed it. 

It has gone to the committee and Parliament passed it; that is why the rules say that we give the committee only two weeks to come back on the issues that have been raised by His Excellency the President so that it can be handled and sent back to the President for his assent. The National Bio-Safety Bill is not a good example; it has taken months and yet it was required to take two weeks.

Chairperson of this committee, I expect that this particular Bill that has been returned should not exceed the two weeks granted by the law. Examine the concerns of His Excellency the President and come back to this House. It is accordingly referred to the Committee on Finance to handle it expeditiously. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 142

2.44
MR FRED KYAKULAGA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Mr Speaker, the minister is not here to move the motion but the committee is ready. You will recall that the report of the committee was presented here and it is only pending debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had the minister already moved the motion? The report of the committee could not have been discussed without the motion having been moved. That means we proceed with the debate if it is necessary and if it does not require debate, we delve with the amendment -

MR BUTURO: Point of procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules require that you rise and raise your point of procedure. The rules are also that you do not access the microphone before I have allowed you - (Laughter) - Proceed.

MR BUTURO: Mr Speaker, on 9th April this year, my colleagues and I proposed amendments on this Bill. The Speaker directed that we harmonise with the committee responsible for this Bill. The Speaker’s letter was written on 30 May 2018.

The chairperson who stood before this House a short while ago has a copy of this proposal by the Speaker that we harmonise our amendments with what they have but that has not been done.

I am surprised to see the chairperson standing before the House to indicate that he is ready to debate when we clearly have not done what the Speaker proposed that time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is some kind of understanding that might not be correct about how we process Bills returned by the President. The rules are fairly clear. 

For example rule 142 (4) states; “The debate on the motion under this rule shall be confined to consideration of matters referred to in the message of the President or to any suggestion relevant to the subject matter of the amendment recommended by the President.”

If your amendment is sourced outside what the President has sent back, it is not sustainable because that would amount to reopening something that we have finished without following the proper procedure. It would mean that you are reopening other provisions of the Bill without following the proper procedure.

If the matter was still before the House, the procedure would have been that you move that a particular clause be reconsidered, in which case we would have gone back to committee stage and reconsidered the proposed amendment.

However, in this particular case, we are only restricted to reconsider issues referred back to Parliament by the President and not to reconsider the whole Bill. So, where does your amendment fall?

MR BUTURO: Our amendments are based on exactly what the President indicated should be attended to by this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we are ready to proceed if it falls within what the President has proposed but where is the minister - any minister with the grips to handle this Bill? This matter has been with us for a long time and I would like to proceed with it and conclude it.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, it is true that this Bill started with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and some of you who were in the Ninth Parliament will recall that I championed it. However, when the ministry responsible for innovation was created, we transferred the responsibility to them.

As I speak, the ministry of finance is not on top of the situation and I would hate to champion something that I am not very firmly in charge of. On that premise, I will alert my colleague to be here in Parliament in order to give due reconsideration to this Bill. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whom are you making this suggestion to?

MR KASAIJA: I am suggesting to the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not suggest to the Speaker, you move the Speaker.

MR KASAIJA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker, for using non-parliamentary language. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will handle this matter tomorrow. The chairperson should coordinate with the minister responsible for this matter so that we finish it tomorrow. This is not a good example of how we handle business in this House. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 117, Certificate of Financial Implications; “(1) Every Bill introduced in the House shall be accompanied by a Certificate Of Financial Implications issued by the minister responsible for finance. 

2) The Certificate of Financial Implications, issued under sub-rule (1), shall indicate the instrument of revenue and expenditure of the period not less than two years…” – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what matter are you proceeding with? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I am proceeding on the Bill, which was forwarded two years ago – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The Bio-Safety Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Certificate of Financial Implications was given then. This Bill has now been returned by the President so that rule does not apply. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I wish the Speaker could read sub-rule (2). It reads, “The Certificate of Financial Implications issued under sub-rule (1) shall indicate the estimates, revenue and expenditure of the period not less than two years.” Is that certificate still worthy to that Bill because two and a half years have passed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Bill was already passed. It has only been sent for reconsideration for some aspects by the President, which means whatever was necessary to implement the Bill, must have already been ready by the time the Bill was passed. That is the presumption. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for West Budama North, Member for Tororo County South, Member for Bukoto South and Member for Ngora County. Honourable minister, these are matters of Cabinet so I am not going to proceed with your secondment. Honourable minister, speak to your motion. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this Parliament appropriated a budget to the Executive for implementation during the Financial Year 2015/2016. During implementation, we received a number of emergency situations and some requirements that we could not avoid. We did apply the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 to raise supplementary expenditure for those items.

We reported to the House, according to the law - which was within four months - and where we needed to seek prior approval, we did that. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is upon that that we are processing this Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017. 
I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the Bill was brought to this House and as the rules required, it was forwarded to our Committee on Budget, which is responsible for these matters. Therefore, I propose the question for your debate that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read the second time. To start off the debate, I ask the chairperson of the committee to report. 

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget committee on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017. 

During the implementation of the Budget for the Financial Year 2015/2016, Government sought additional resources to meet its expenditure requirements. The requests were laid before Parliament in two separate Supplementary Expenditure Schedules -schedules No. 1 and No. 2 of the financial year 2015/2016, in accordance with the provisions of Article 156 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 25 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. The two schedules were considered by the Budget Committee and subsequently presented and approved by Parliament. Therefore, the figures were supplied. 

Methodology

    1. The committee examined the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017 and compared it with the approved supplementary expenditure schedules, as were passed by the whole House.
    2. The committee also interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Observations

The committee observed that the Supplementary Appropriation Bi11, 2017 consists of two schedules namely; 

i. 	Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 amounting to Shs 870,089,284,415, of which Shs 504,838,695,513 is recurrent expenditure and Shs 365,250,588,902, is development expenditure.

ii. 	Supplementary Schedule No.2 amounting to Shs 18,771,170,867 for recurrent expenditure incurred for payment of wages and salaries. 

Thus, the total Supplementary Appropriation Bi1l, 20l7 provides for a total sum of Shs 888,860,455,282, of which Shs 522,605,866,380 is recurrent expenditure and Shs 365,250,588,902 is development expenditure.

We shall be proposing some amendments at the appropriate time, Mr Speaker. 

In conclusion, the figures in the Bill reflect exactly those supplied by Parliament during consideration of the respective Budget committee reports on Schedules 1 and 2 respectively. 

The committee therefore confirms that the provisions of funds, as contained in the Supplementary Appropriation Bi1l, 2017, is correct and requests that the House adopts the Budget committee report and passes the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2017 into law.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, that is the report of the committee and it is clear that the committee has proposed some alterations and will be proposing some amendments. 

In one amendment, we will do the correction; these are issues that we have already dealt with. When the matters came to the Floor of this House, the schedules were brought and we handled them. Do we need to discuss the principles? I think they are obvious; they are for supplementary appropriation. It is a principle that cannot be debated unless there are other issues. 

Can I put the question to this and thereafter, we can go to the next stage because there is no minority report on this one. Honourable members, I now put the question that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda clearly states that the quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all members of Parliament entitled to vote. I can see how disappointed my colleague is but those are the rules.

Sub-rule (2) says the quorum prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your indulgence on this matter; that our honourable colleagues on that side and this side realised that we cannot escape the command of this rule. The quorum in this House is not as required by law. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” and made no amendments. (Laughter) 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is suspended for 15 minutes. Ring the bell so that Members come and we handle this matter.

(The House was suspended at 3.07 p.m.)
	 
(On resumption at 3.17 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First, we need to establish whether we are properly constituted to take decisions. We need 154 Members. Honourable members in the lobby, please come in, we need to establish quorum. Honourable members, could you please resume your seats and we see how to proceed with this matter? Can we proceed with item No. 12. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR LIBERALSATION BILL, 2011

 3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are proposing to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 because we still have a number of issues to reconcile with the sector. This Bill touches one of the sectors that protect the contributions of workers – the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). During the formulation, we put this together with the NSSF law and we think that it is important that we do consult the workers and come back to the House when we are properly organised and harmonised with the workers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to move a motion seeking leave to withdraw the Bill? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I would like to formally move a motion seeking leave to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Members for Kampala Central, Erute North, Erute South, Ngora County and the Workers’ Representative. Does this motion need justification? Can I now propose the question? 

Honourable members, the motion is that the honourable minister be granted leave to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011. I now put the question to the motion that the minister be granted leave to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill withdrawn.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION ON THE PENDING EVICTION OF TRADERS, LOCK-UP OWNERS, SPECIAL HIRE OPERATORS AND TAXI OWNERS FROM MUKONO TAXI PARK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could we have the chairperson or a Member that is conversant with the content of this report? This is one of those matters that give confidence to the citizens who petition this House. Could we have a Member presenting this report? Is there any member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government? Please, proceed. 

3.26
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The report is ready. The chair and vice-chairperson are not in the House but I am ready to proceed if I can get a copy of the report. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have a copy on the iPads? Honourable member, please proceed.

MR PETER OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

On 26 September 2017, hon. Bakireke Nambooze Betty, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality, presented a petition on the pending eviction of traders, lock-up owners, special hire operators and taxi owners from Mukono Taxi Park. The petition was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in accordance with rule 30 (5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The committee has considered the petition and now presents its report.

Prayers of the Petitioners
The petitioners had two prayers, namely that Parliament intervenes in this matter and investigates the conduct of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and Mukono Municipality. Secondly, that Parliament halts the process pending the disposal of this petition.

In the process of considering the petition, the committee met and held discussions with the following stakeholders:

    a) Hon. Bakireke Nambooze Betty, Member for Mukono Municipality;
    b) Hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga, Member for Mukono East;
    c) The political leadership of Mukono Municipality;
    d) The technical officers of Mukono Municipality;
    e) Traders, lock-up owners, special hire operators and taxi owners (the petitioners).

Findings and Observations

During discussions with the stakeholders, the committee noted the following:

1. 	Most of the traffic congestion in Mukono Town was a result of narrow roads and absence of modern junctions and traffic lights. This prolongs travel times and increases the cost of doing business, hence making the town unattractive for investment compared to other towns.

2. 	The lock-ups in the contested areas are within the 15-metre yellow line in the road reserve. A road reserve, according to the colonial-era Road Act 1949, is an area bounded by imaginary lines parallel to and distant not more than 5O feet, which is about 15 metres, from the centre line of any road.

3. 	Uganda National Roads Authority had planned to modify or upgrade the existing roundabout into signalled junctions, fitted with traffic sensors to ascertain traffic load in a given direction, so as to give the route time for flow into the heart of Mukono Town.

4. 	Uganda National Roads Authority had committed itself to compensate the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). It had been agreed amongst the PAPs that the compensation fund be deposited on their association account. See the attached letters indicating willingness to be compensated.

5. 	Uganda National Roads Authority decided to construct the road using a changed design to avoid misplacement of traders. This was mainly done to avoid any delays in settling this matter, which would be costly to the Government of Uganda in terms of compensation to the contractor and delayed development of the municipality. As a result, there was no issue of contestation.

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations:

1. 	Government should develop an urban transport policy and strategy for the greater Mukono Town that would help enforce planning and bring about traffic management and development in the rapidly growing area.

2. 	Authorities in Mukono Municipality should start planning to construct a modern shopping mall or a one-stop shopping centre which offers convenience, choice and comfort and beautifies the outlook of the town.

Conclusion
The petition has since been overtaken by events. The committee therefore found no reason to continue with further investigations. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, do you have the minutes?

MR PETER OKOT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and the minutes of the committee meetings, where this was considered. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. 

Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. The motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition on the pending eviction of traders, lock-up owners, special hire operators and taxi owners from Mukono Taxi Park be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now, each Member taking three minutes.

COL KULAYIGYE: Mr Speaker, we have been informed that the committee lost interest in the matter because it was overtaken by events. Therefore, are we proceeding well to debate a matter that has been overtaken by events?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Instead of casting the burden to the Speaker, move a motion. 

3.35
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I move a motion that the debate on this matter be closed since it was overtaken by events.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report is based on a petition and this petition is specific to Mukono Municipality. However, the committee has said that all these matters have already been overtaken by events and so, there is no need to go on with this matter. Honourable members, what would be there to debate? Can I put the question to this matter so that we conclude? The motion had been moved that the question be put. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition on the pending eviction of traders, lock-up owners, special hire operators and taxi owners from Mukono Taxi Park be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member for Tochi County, for standing in the gap. That should be the spirit. We do not have to wait for the chairperson or the vice-chairperson; they could both be committed. Any member of the committee should be able to present work of the committee. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, looking at the constitution of the House, we are unable to process the pending business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 3.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 October 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

