Thursday, 11 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this sitting this afternoon. I received communication from the Opposition Chief Whip in relation to designation of members to parliamentary committees. The communication reads, 

“I am writing in accordance with rule 14 sub rule 10(c) of the Rules of Procedure to designate the following Members of the Opposition to serve on the mentioned standing and sectoral committees of the House:

1. 	Hon. Mathias Nsubuga, DP, Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and also the Sectoral Committee of Physical Infrastructure.

2. 	Hon. Kivumbi Muwanga, DP, Standing Committee on Local Government Accounts and Sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

3. 	Hon. Kiiza Winfred, FDC, Sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.”

It is accordingly announced. Do we have to approve these names to the committees? Should I put the question to these names? I put the question that the members go on the committees as reported.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished gallery today we have a delegation from the National Assembly of Ghana, Committee of Finance: 

•	Hon. James Avedzi, Chairman of the Finance Committee 
•	Hon. Alfred Abayateye, the Vice-Chairman of the Finance Committee 
•	Hon. Dr Akoto Oseyi, Ranking Member 
•	Hon. Samuel Atta Akyea, Member 
•	Mr Louis Boyiche, Assistant Clerk, 
•	Mr Emmanuel Fodjo, liaison officer, Ministry of Finance, Ghana. 

They have come to observe the proceedings of our House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

2.41
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present the humble petition of the cattle keepers of Kiruhura District over the outbreak of the East Coast Fever presented by myself.

For the last two years, the petitioners have persistently been hit by the East Coast fever. Since the outbreak, the cattle keepers made efforts to reach out to different relevant government bodies like the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the districts but no assistance has been availed.

The petitioners over the years were using acaricides and other drugs to treat the same diseases effectively but the last outbreak has become resistant to the drugs, which makes them believe that the drugs could be adulterated.

The petitioners suspect that the disease could be spread by straying animals from Lake Mburo National Park, which move as far as 50 kilometres away from the national park to various places. The spread of the disease has also been worsened by the lack of veterinary personnel since the few available staff has been absorbed as extension staff in other programmes such as NAADS.

To date, 18 sub counties namely Kiruhura Town Council, Kenshunga, Kinoni, Nyakashashara, Kashongi, Kitura, Kikatsi, Kanyaryeru, Sanga Town Council, Kazo, Rwemikoma, Burunga, Nkungu, Buremba, Kanoni and Engari have lost 5,608 cattle. As a result of the East Coast fever outbreak, many people’s health has been adversely affected due to over use of drugs through spraying. Further, the petitioners’ income has also been dwindled given that cattle keeping is the main source of income.

Mr Speaker, it is the humble petition of the petitioners that Government: 

1. 	Immediately carries out a vaccination programme for the East Coast fever throughout the whole district.

2. 	Carries out an investigation into the acaricides and other drugs available on the market to curb the selling of adulterated drugs.

3. 	Carries out a sensitisation programme about the disease and ways to contain it.

4. 	Recruits the necessary veterinary staff at the districts so that farmers can be helped.

5. 	Addresses the problem of straying animals from Lake Mburo National Park by fencing it off.

6. 	Streamlines the operations of Nshara and Ruhenje government ranches to ensure that cattle kept on those ranches are well looked after to curb the spread of the disease.

7. 	Establishes veterinary laboratories at the district in order to be able to make a diagnosis of such outbreaks early enough.

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With the signatures? Let the records capture it as such. Honourable members, that petition stands referred to the appropriate committee, the Committee on Agriculture, to work on it expeditiously. These matters are urgent and we do not have to wait for the 45-day rule because these farmers need to be helped. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION 

2.47
MRS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This petition is presented under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. The subject is, “Eviction of residents of Got Apwoyo village in Nwoya District”.  

The humble petition of these residents states that the petitioners are residents of Got Apwoyo village in Nwoya District, comprising over 1000 families which have been occupying approximately five square miles of land, originally under Aswa-Lolim Game Reserve. Now this land has been allocated to a private investor – Amida Investments – without their consent or compensation. 

This land was de-gazetted by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda for the community to settle where your humble petitioners have lived until they were displaced by the Lord’s Resistance Army war. After the resettlement of the internally displaced persons in 2006, your humble petitioners returned to the land and have lived there without any interference from anybody.

During this year, however, they discovered that the land had been allocated by the Uganda Land Commission together with the Ministry of Agriculture to a private investor – Amida Investments – who had started fencing it off and disrupting the petitioners. Your humble petitioners approached the Nwoya District Local Government for help but they denied any involvement in the allocation process. 

Further, the petitioners feel that the land allocation is an attempt to deny the community opportunity to benefit from the on-going oil exploration as oil company Total, in a community meeting, announced that they would start exploration outside the national park. 

This land lies within the Albertine Graben and the petitioners are aware that there is a ban on the issuing of land titles in all the Albertine Graben. They wonder whether Nwoya District does not fall within the area where the issuing of land titles is banned.

Your petitioners are aggrieved by the pending eviction from the land because it will deny them a source of livelihood, render them homeless and aggravate poverty levels in the community.

Whereof by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that an investigation into the legality of the allocation of the community land be instituted. The petitioners should not be evicted from the land until adequate and timely compensation has been paid to them or until they have been re-settled in an alternative area. In the meantime, Amida Investments should be advised to halt any activities upon the land until Parliament completes its investigation and makes necessary recommendations.

I beg to lay on the Table the list of the petitioners from Got Apwoyo village and a copy of the title that the petitioners think was not properly issued to Amida Investments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay both the petition and the attendant documents. Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle it urgently. If there is a pending eviction, then that matter should be resolved quickly so that we can see how to move forward and also take care of the interests of the people who are being threatened with eviction.

MS ALASO: Thank  you, Mr Speaker. In keeping with rule 29(8) of our Rules of Procedure, it provides for a petition referred to a committee to be disposed of within 45 days from the date the petition is referred to it. However, it must be over 120 days ago when I presented a petition to this House by the pharmacists of Uganda who had not yet been admitted to practice and you referred it to the social services committee. I have not heard anything from that committee since then and I am wondering what could have happened. Moreover they have not even reverted to the House to say if they are too busy to handle our petition. I would like to have your guidance on this matter.

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is coming to three years since I joined this Parliament and I have brought several petitions from Mukono and none of those has been disposed of. I do not know what we are – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable  member, you can only include the period from May 2011.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, since May 2011, I have brought here three petitions from my constituency. I would like to be guided on what becomes of these matters. I brought a petition by parents and leaders in Mukono, Goma Division, on Kiwanga Primary School. The second one was a petition by residents and leaders of Kiira Town Council in Kyadondo East, and the third one was a petition by the traders of Mukono Municipality. 

The committees have not invited me; we do not know what becomes of a petition before Parliament that is being investigated, especially when it touches the eviction of people. Does the eviction go on, or is it supposed to be stayed until Parliament disposes of the petition? That is the guidance I am seeking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the last issue you raised, on when there are pending evictions, it is up to the committee to act quickly. There has been a situation where a petition was presented to this House and the next day the committee moved to forestall an eviction. So, it is really up to the committee to take up the action because the whole House cannot take action; it is the committee to make directives, engage with the ministers and people involved before taking an interim decision on how to proceed. The powers are with the committee.

Honourable members, the reason people come to this House with petitions is because the other avenues of accessing Parliament available in our Rules of Procedure do not deal with that specific matter conclusively. That is why they seek petitions. It is also because they have confidence in this House that it can help them deal with problems. The more we delay in handling those petitions, the more desperate the people will become and begin losing the confidence they initially had in this Parliament. 

I urge committee chairpersons and their members to act on their petitions expeditiously in order to restore the confidence people have in us. I know of petitions that have been acted on expeditiously and the results have been out and the people are happy. Now, for those which have delayed, I urge you, honourable members, to find time and deal with them and get back to this House with your recommendations so that the House makes a pronouncement on those issues. For professionals like the pharmacists who have not been registered, for example, there is no reason why this matter should take this long, and so many other matters that have been brought to this House by petition. 

So, honourable members and chairpersons, each time the petition is presented, I urge you not to follow the 45-day rule. Petitions are shorter, more focussed issues which can be handled more expeditiously. So we should be handling petitions quickly.

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yes, it is extremely important that members come to the House with matters over which they are seeking solutions. However, I also want to assure the House that as ministers, our offices are wide open and we are prepared to deal with some of those matters even before they get to the House. I thank you. 

2.57
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that very important guidance. Can I request that we give a timeframe, at least for all the pending petitions to have a report? I am saying this because there are some petitions which have been overtaken by events. It would even require two days for the committee to report that this matter has since been handled.

In line with what hon. Migereko, the Minister for Lands, has said, in the last Parliament, in one of the closing Business Committee meetings, we came to an agreement because we had too many petitions. It was agreed that because people come to Parliament after they have failed to use the usual process through the Executive and other avenues, it should be between the Speaker’s office and the committee leadership to seek redress and remedies without committing it here. If the business can be resolved before committing it to the Floor, that would be better. You can call a minister and he gives the response. What is not possible is for them to go to the minister because they have already failed to get remedy through the minister. However, using the Speaker’s office and the committee, some administrative remedy can be provided. 

2.59
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mable): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad because I presented my petitions when you were in the chair and you directed that these issues be handled - the petition of Bugisu Cooperative Union and the one on land grabbing. I went and saw the Minister of Lands, we talked about it but the issue is still pending and the grabbing of land is continuing. 

So, I would request that your office reminds, as you have guided, the chairpersons of these committees to take up these issues. Our electorate think we are here seated and we do not address their issues. This is just to remind the chairmen of those committees where the petitions on BCU and land grabbing in Mbale fall that please, take up these issues because my people are up in arms against land grabbing in Mbale District. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAER: Thank you for reinforcing the Speaker’s guidance. 

3.00 
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About one month ago, hon. Ssekikubo and I raised the issue which has been tabled by Col Fred Mwesigye of Nyabushozi, the issue of epidemics hitting cattle in Ankole. The Minister for Agriculture came with a statement and even gave assurances to this House but the mere fact that one month later, the residents of Nyabushozi are bringing a petition, it means the assurances given by the minister were not worked on. There is a problem. 

I just wanted to request you, Mr Speaker; this matter which was raised by Col Mwesigye is a matter of life and death for the cattle in the area. The people’s livelihoods and economy depend on cattle. I want to request that in addition to the committee expeditiously handling the petition, either the Ministry of Agriculture or the Prime Minister should tell this House what is being done there- (Interruption)

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform you that it is not only the case of the disease in the area of my colleague which is still pending. Despite the fact that the minister came and assured the House, we also have a pending issue of the nodding syndrome in Northern Uganda where up to now, we do not have any response despite the fact that the committee was handling it. That is how sad it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you finished?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the information. Maybe we would request that - My issue was that Government should again assure us on the issue of the East Coast fever and other epidemics hitting the cattle in Ankole and other areas, because we may not wait for the period when the petition is concluded. So, Government should assure us that something is being done. 

Maybe on the issue of petitions, the Clerk should compile all the petitions which have been presented to this House since the beginning of this Parliament and then the chairpersons of the committees should abide by our rules and make sure that all the petitions are concluded in time. The population comes to us as a last resort; if we frustrate the people, then they will have nowhere to go. So, I think his is a reminder to all chairpersons and members of committees that that they should be working on petitions expeditiously. I thank you.

MR CYRUS AMODOI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to give information in reaction to what the honourable Minister of Lands, hon. Migereko, said. He said that before a Member comes to bring a petition here, he or she must first visit the respective-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not what he said. 

MR AMODOI: Should first seek-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No he did not even say that. He said their doors are also still open and Members could still seek their interventions even before they come to the House. 

MR AMODOI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise correction.  The point I want to bring out here is that in most cases, Members bring petitions here after failing to get an answer from the respective department. A case in point was in the last Parliament of a petition which I brought to this House – (Interjections) -  I brought a petition here of land in Angitta and the minister visited that area and they presented to him the problem. The minister informed the people that in two days he was going to offer an answer. Up to today, no answer has been offered. That is why we come here, Mr Speaker, to bring such petitions where we think that we trust this House and a solution will be provided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely that is the point I have made. 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have guided well on matters of petitions, but there are also questions for oral answer. Members have always been frustrated by the answers from the ministers which discourage participation of members in asking the responsible ministers pertinent questions, some of which need immediate answers. I also would like to implore you to guide the House on how these answers should be given and on the timelines for the ministers to give these answers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliamentary questions are another avenue where Members bring issues to the House. In their judgment and in consultation with the Speaker, they do not have any other method of bringing these particular issues, so they raise specific questions to ministers responsible for the sector or for that matter and a timeframe is given in the rules. Actually, the minister is supposed to be served instantly and responses should come within three days.

However, I must apologise for two specific questions that were on the Order Paper that we were not able to handle last week and also today. There were supposed to be some questions coming up today but because of the business that we are supposed to handle today, we thought if we started with questions a lot of time would go before we have dealt with the real business. So some two questions are ready with their answers and ministers are supposed to make these replies in writing and serve the member who asked the questions and give a copy of the response to the Clerk ready for distribution to the members.
 
This is one way of dealing with these issues, and Parliament is also assessed at the end of the sitting through how many questions we have been able to handle - how many questions were asked and how many were responded to. It is important for the House that these matters are dealt with. 

So, honourable ministers, those of you who have questions, before we closed the last session I had made some directives about questions that were pending and they were only honoured in part. Many of you did not respond to my call that these matters should be dealt with. We would not have carried forward these matters that came from the last session of Parliament. However, let us deal with the questions the same way we deal with these - when they come, they are urgent and they should be dealt with so that the confidence in the working relationship is restored and Parliament can make progress on the work before the House.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petition brought here by our colleague from Kiruhura, hon. Mwesigye, is of utmost importance. I think the committee can handle those areas regarding prevention. But now that the cows have already been attacked by this disease, this needs urgent attention. Can the Prime Minister direct something to be done urgently if we are to save the cattle? 

The committee handling it will take time to start working, maybe next week, and the cows are dying. Can the Prime Minister tell the nation and the people of Kiruhura what is going to be done tomorrow. After all, it is not the first time this matter is coming here. A month ago, this matter was raised and assurance was given by the Minister of Agriculture. So, what has it done? The Prime Minister should say something. We have even passed the budget-(Mr Kakooza rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now the Prime Minister? (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Okupa. I was clear; I asked to give supplementary information. I think we are taking the epidemic as a simple case but this is a growing industry and really, it is being tampered with. If people reason economically, the country is in jeopardy because agriculture is where we think we can put much effort. 

I have heard what the honourable member from Nyabushozi was saying; within three months, they lost about 600. What are we doing? It is not a simple case because what is happening is that the drugs which are used are fake; they are not diagnosing the disease and treating the animals. The ministry should take measures and say that we should import the drugs ourselves and supply them to the farmers so that the farmers are sure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we now debating a petition? I received the petition myself from the farmers from these areas. They could not fit in my boardroom; I had to come up here. There were many farmers who came and they presented this petition. It has been some time now before the petition has been brought to this House. By now, some remedial measures should have been taken by the government to deal with these issues. We cannot wait for the report of the committee when matters are urgent. The committee can come with short term and even long term recommendations on how we can deal with these things but the short term issues should be responded to quickly.

3.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and colleagues, obviously this is a very serious matter and I rise to inform this House and the public. I had asked the presenter of the petition, hon. Fred Mwesigye, and he has told me that this is a problem that has been persistent and to the best of his knowledge, Government response has been either little or nonexistent. I, therefore, rose to inform this House and the country that I will take up the matter myself with the relevant department to find out why or what response there has been, what constraints they have faced, with the view to finding a solution and arresting this situation in time before it becomes worse. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are dealing with life and death. I do respect the liberal position taken by the Prime Minister that he handles it and he will find out what is happening; he is the head of Government in this House. However, I want to seek whether it would not be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for this House, through you, to direct that the minister in charge provides a statement on what they have so far done. 

From the way we are moving, the investigation will take time. If we need supplementary expenditure and we need to come to this House in order for us to provide it, we need to deal with it. We are just a House that is dilly-dallying and yet we are dealing with an issue of life and death. May I ask you, Mr Speaker, to invoke your powers and direct Government to provide a statement, preferably maybe when we have the next sitting? In that way, we can see what has been done, what is missing and what should be done immediately for us to be of relevance to the farmers of this country. 

There are other issues which are related with this, which have been considered in this House. The decentralisation of disease management in the country is going to wipe out the animal sector. These are issues we have dealt with and Government must give us a firm position. So, would you want to invoke your powers and direct Government that next week, they provide a statement to enable us to debate this issue through a ministerial statement?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of guidance. The issue we are debating now is not new. Year in, year out on the Floor of this august House a matter is raised. I vividly remember that this issue was an emergency. A colleague raised the matter as an emergency. The minister in charge of animal husbandry and livestock-(Laughter) - I am raising the matter because I want to be very accurate. 

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, with due respect, has said he wants to find out. This august House debated the statement which came from the minister. This august House made recommendations and resolutions and in that statement, I recall the minister stating that the drugs which are on the market were very expensive for farmers to afford and that some of them were not standard. I stand to be corrected but that is what happened. 

If this august House can ask the same question and we want the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, with due respect, to go back and find out and we are expecting another statement, are we not cycling ourselves? (Interjections) Isn’t it high time –(Interjections) - Cycling ourselves - resorting left and right - (Laughter)- Why are we cycling the issues instead of taking a decision? We are cycling like a bicycle, going round, round, round –(Laughter)- Why? Isn’t it high time that we took a decision now and demanded that Government puts into effect immediate measures? This concern is not only in Kiruhura, Ssembabule but the whole Cattle Corridor area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the guidance?

MS BANGIRANA: The guidance I am seeking is; won’t it be good enough for this august House to move a motion to demand Government to handle this as a matter of urgency? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these issues are important but I must also recognise the young people who are observing how we proceed in this House. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils from Namirembe Parents Primary School, Rubaga North. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and the hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. 

We also have teachers and pupils from St. John Baptist Primary School located in Kabalagala, Makindye East. They are represented by the hon. John Ssimbwa and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have also come to observe the proceedings of the House. Join me in welcoming them. 

Honourable members, the matter which has come now is a petition. In order to proceed in an orderly manner, we should treat it as a petition because the subject of this petition was brought by an earlier statement as correctly reported by the Member from Ssembabule. The minister made a statement here. Actually, the statement took a few days and it was debated, responses were made and undertakings were made by the minister to continually update Parliament on processes. The people are not satisfied. That is why they have petitioned this House. 

Since there is a petition now, this matter should come formally from the committee, even tomorrow, whatever day. This matter now needs this kind of action so that we can debate it and take a decision in an organised manner. We cannot just start moving in a way which cannot help process matters which have come through the Rules of Procedure. Let us respect the Rules of Procedure. The matter has been referred to the committee but I would like the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to know that this matter is not new to the House. 

I was chairing when the hon. Bright Rwamirama, the minister, came and made statements, made those pleas, made those requests even to the House, plus questions of funding and related matters. He said that there is a shortage in supply of drugs and that drugs are too expensive. Those matters were articulated here. If you are going to prepare to make a statement before the committee comes out with something, it should be something more action-based than words to the House. That is what I propose. 

But substantially, the matter is before the committee. The committee can make a preliminary report on what this Parliament should decide on. If they want to proceed by motion, that would be okay. Whatever they want to do, they can come and recommend to the House and we proceed in that manner so that at least, we respect our Rules of Procedure and we stop cycling – (Laughter) - as the honourable member for Ssembabule has said. 

3.23
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I rise under rule 39 on a matter of urgent and national importance. Masaka Road is being constructed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I said that those matters come at the end of the sitting but you had told me you had an urgent question which could not wait. If you want to raise an urgent question under rule 39, I will allow you, but if you are talking about urgent matters, those ones will come at the end of the sitting.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: It is an urgent question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you ask the question directly then. 

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to direct this question to the Minister of Works. The people on Masaka Road, which is being constructed, are being robbed by the ministry officials. I have a form indicating that people have been compensated certain amounts of money –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you use words like “been robbed”, you need to substantiate them. Why don’t you put a question and state the facts properly? It is because you might attract unnecessary debate on the words “been robbed”.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I am going to justify. There is a form which was signed by officials of the Ministry of Works. It states that they had compensated certain amounts of money to the residents when they were being displaced. Some of the houses have been demolished and people are left homeless. I want to ask the minister why the officials have indicated that payments have been made to the residents on Masaka Road when money has not been given to them. 

I want to lay on the Table the form so that the minister can look at the form. The payment details are given. It is an indication that money was paid by EFT to the people whose names have been indicated on the form, and the banks have also been indicated. However, when we checked the banks, there is no money which has been paid to anybody. I would like to lay it on the Table so that the minister can answer. (Mr Byabagambi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let the honourable member first lay the documents on the Table. 

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, this is payment of approved compensation to project-affected persons, serial No. 1227. Payment details: payment made to Merida Ntanda; amount, 3,877,000; payment was made by Raymond Ondoga and received by Merida Ntanda. The bank is Post Bank, Masaka. It was done by EFT. The date is 30 July 2012. I beg to lay this document on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there an account number on the form?

MS NAMAYANJA: Account No. 1030015002209. I beg to lay it on the Table. There is another one to Nsibambi Joseph; payment made by Raymond Ondoga; account No. 4020036677, Centenary Bank. The amount is Shs 12,466,690. The date is 31 July 2012. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Do those documents bare any stamps?

MS NAMAYANJA: There is a stamp and another stamp. Because of the photocopy, it is not very clear.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the member for bringing up the issue. First and foremost, I want to register my appreciation to the honourable member of Mityana District, hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya,  because she met the same scenario on Mityana Road – (Interjection) – You may say similar but it is the same; it does not matter. 

After hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya and I informed the public, I went with the officials and we explained to them why we are using this methodology. The former methodology was to take the cash or cheques, but this time we are using EFT. In other words, you first sign and then money is transferred to the account. We explained to the people in Mityana and as I talk now, they have confirmed to me that they received their money on their bank accounts.  The reason we do this is because we cannot carry money or cheques any more. So, want the consultant does, he goes with that form and you sign it and indicate your bank account. He does not go back. So, it is not robbery. 

Honourable member, what you should have done – (Interjections) – You are my good friend, we have worked together and we have been in KCCA. You would have come to me and said, “This is the problem we have”. I would have explained to you how the system is working. I would have explained to you and you would not have to come to Parliament to bring up such a matter. Otherwise, there is no robbery; I do not have robbers in Ministry of Works and Transport.(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether it is in order for the honourable minister, first and foremost who knew that there were challenges with that system, and who tried to solve that matter before, to come here and try to blame a member for coming to the House with that information? He knew he was working on another road and he was bound to meet the same challenges. 

Secondly, is it in order for the minister to derail us? The issue is that there is no money on those accounts; three months down the road, there is no money. Is the minister, therefore, in order to come and justify air supply to Ugandans who have been affected by road works?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as to whether the minister has supplied air, I cannot rule on that. But as to the facts before the House, some forms were signed, which forms were signed in July this year, which indicates that money will be transferred by EFT to those respective accounts. The statement from the honourable member is that there is no money on those accounts. Initially, she actually said they are being robbed because they are forced to sign and then there is no money as a result. Honourable minister, I think you would have served us better if you dealt with how you are specifically going to deal with this issue, so that we can get an answer to it.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, you see we have been dealing with compensation. Ministry of Works compensates thousands of people. The new methodology, which the Ministry of Finance is using now, is the EFT system. You first prepare a voucher, the voucher is then signed and then the data is captured. After capturing that data, the money comes in quarterly. When it comes in, it is automatically transferred to the respective bank accounts. The confirmation of payment from UNRA is then sent to the respective people that EFT has been dispatched to your bank account. So, it follows later. That is the system. 

We are compensating thousands of people; it cannot be true that we want to rob only two people. It is the system. Let us move together, I go to your constituency and I explain to these people how the system is working. (Interruptions)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am very sure that the minister is aware of the constitutional provisions governing compensation; it should be adequate and prior compensation. This man is now telling me that those things do not work in engineering! – (Interjections) – Sorry, I withdraw the reference to the term “man”. I will never use it without evidence – (Interjections) – I have withdrawn it with an apology that I will never refer to him as a man without evidence. (Laughter)

The point I am making is that it should be prior and prompt compensations. We are talking about houses that have been broken down and he is telling us that they will make the payments. So, is the minister in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me rule on this point of order. Honourable members, the Constitution is clear on this subject. It does not even say “prompt”; it says “prior and adequate” The issue of “adequate” is not in issue here because nobody has said they were paid less money, but the issue of “prior” is the issue. 

Honourable minister, the procedure you have adopted does not amount to prior compensation. Houses have been demolished; when do you consider this person paid? When is the person paid, honourable Attorney-General? I would like to hear from the learned Attorney-General. When is a person deemed to have been paid compensation? 

3.37
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, I am sorry I came a bit late. I was just following the argument. I will request the Deputy Attorney-General to respond. (Mr Okupa rose_)
 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now the Attorney-General, Member from Kasilo? (Laughter)

3.38
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, Article 26, in respect of protection from deprivation of property, is a paradigm shift from the 1967 Constitution. In the 1967 Constitution, although the same provision provided for adequate and prompt compensation, it did not provide for prior payment. So, this is a paradigm shift. When we tell you that the NRM Government has made tremendous progress in constitutionalism -(Interjections)- The provision speaks for itself. The NRM Government is in charge of this government. 

The provision speaks for itself. When it says, “prior”, it certainly means upfront before final and effective acquisition. It cannot mean anything else. It means, give me what you have and I give you what I have to offer for it. What more can I say? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is the Constitution. These monies should be paid before. You want me to read it? Let us agree that the procedure that has been adopted by the ministry does not properly conform to the requirement of the Constitution. If it does not, the ministry should therefore go back and revisit the methods they are using so that people are paid according to what the Constitution says so that these issues do not come up again. You put the arrangements in place; if you are sure that the EFT has not yet gone, you do not take over the property and you do not knock down people’s buildings. If you are sure that the EFT and the certificate has already been received by that person and served, then you can proceed with your work so that there are no issues of this nature.

MR BYABAGAMBI:	Mr Speaker, I agree with your ruling. We shall follow that. However, the road she is talking about and the road which I was talking about, that is, Mityana-Busega, are not new roads; we are not building a new road. We are only compensating for the structures of those people who built on our road reserve. The money is usually released by the Ministry of Finance on a quarterly basis. That is why the information was captured in July and we had no money to pay because the budget was not yet passed. Now that we have passed the budget, we are going to pay them promptly. (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You rightly ruled – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As always. 

MR KYAMADIDI: You rightly ruled, as always, that the Constitutional provision, specifically Article 26(2)(b)(i) says, “prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property”.  I think the honourable minister could have heard that. Is he, therefore, in order to insist that he is doing the right thing even when he knows that he is doing something that is unconstitutional?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister conceded, except that he is not a very good loser. (Laughter) But he accepted that they are going to make sure that the procedures they are going to adopt will conform to the Constitution. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL POSTAL POLICY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Information and Communication Technology? 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were issues that required consultation and there should have been common positions taken so that we can move quickly with this Bill. However, I am advised that there has been no proper harmonisation. I have three sets of amendments, which would give me more than a headache to process at committee stage. I have the amendments from the committee, which is 32 pages, and I have the amendments from hon. Ssekikubo – (Interjection) –Yes, from the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas, and it has several amendments running through six pages. I also have the amendments from hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, running through nine pages, and an additional amendment is submitted in handwriting. 

All those amendments have not been processed by the committee. There is going to be chaos. The shadow minister is also here; I am sure she might have some amendments also, but I have not received your amendments. So, it is not going to be easy, honourable members, to go into committee stage with all these amendments. I am therefore going to ask that the chairperson of the committee liaises with those people with amendments and they see which ones they agree to and which ones we have to bring back to the Floor for the members to approve. 

It would not be proper for us to go and – like we spent on one clause, I do not know how long it was. So, that is my position. In the circumstances, I want to say that we stand over this matter until there is some agreement on how many amendments we want to move. Next item, please.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the last time we had debate on this issue we agreed that since the issues that the members were putting up concerned the entire sector, it would not be necessary to segment the debate, especially on the principles of the Bill. We agreed to debate all of them at the same time, which was done. I now want to propose that we also move the same Bill to committee stage so that we can be able to handle them at that level.

I now put a question to the motion that a Bill entitled “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) BILL, 2012,” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the same principles should apply because these Bills follow each other. This Bill regulates what they call the midstream aspect of the oil and gas sector. The first Bill deals with upstream aspects. So, we need to finish with the upstream and then we go to the midstream before we go to the downstream. The process should be in that order. So, accordingly, we will make the necessary amendments in the programming so that we can deal with this first Bill, go to committee stage, move amendments and then have the third reading and then we come to the next Bill and process it accordingly. I think that is proper. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to seek guidance on whether the principle of conveying the amendments to the chair will apply to the other amendments that have not yet been submitted as well as those that can erupt any time while the Bill is still on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear, that amendments should be processed. The amendments that you bring up at committee stage when nobody has looked at them are the ones that throw spanners in the works. This is because we have to start thinking about something that has not been thought of. 

So, if you have an amendment, let it be shared so that we all understand where we are and what amendments are coming on what provisions. Actually, you can even be advised how best to present it so that when we start the process, they all come out properly. We will get to know, for example, that in clause 5 there is an amendment from the honourable member for Serere District or that the honourable member for Lwemiyaga has such and such an amendment. This will help us get to know how many members are going to move amendments to enable us deal with them in the order.

So, if you have amendments to specific provisions of this Bill, please submit them so that they can be circulated for ease of understanding by the members. That will save us from suffering the military situations of ambushes and things like that.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Chair on whether at this stage it would be proper for the Committee on Natural Resources and that of finance, which also has a pending Bill called the Finance Bill, but which has the component of oil revenue management, to work together to ensure there are no contradictions at the final stages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee on Finance, how far have you gone with the Public Finance Bill? Yes, chairperson of the committee.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, the chairman of the committee is not around, but I want to say that the Bill was referred to us as a committee but we have not yet started handling it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have been with that Bill for more than three months.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, we have been consulting with the Ministry of Finance on this Bill. The position of the Minister of Finance is that they first want to sensitise the members on it and that should be done before we start working on it. In the circumstances, we cannot proceed because we are still waiting for Ministry of Finance to do that. That is the position as of now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that the interactions with the energy ministry were very instructive; I attended them. I do not know how many other members attended and what their assessment of that meeting was, but it certainly helped. There were professionals who came to guide the members on what the law was all about and how it should be shaped. A lot of them were actually critical of the Bill. So, that might also be helpful, only that that process in this case has taken quite some time now; it has taken too long.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Rose Akol for bringing this matter back to the House. You will recall that when the two Bills were presented here initially, I made a similar request. As you rightly put it, we benefitted from the Ministry of Energy presentations to the whole House before the committee proceeded. 

In the absence of a similar presentation from the Ministry of Finance, I had made an earlier appeal that it would make a lot of sense if Ministry of Finance at least presented to Parliament the principles embedded in the Public Finance Act. This would help because when dealing with the upstream and midstream Bills, we would understand and take care of the challenges in the downstream Bill, which also has a component of revenue sharing. So, now that you have ruled that we should put all the amendments together to harmonise the situation, is it possible for us to now accommodate the Ministry of Finance to make that presentation before we come back? 

I am saying this because I am aware that there was an earlier proposal that clashed with our budget appropriation date. So,  is it possible for the Ministry of Finance, before we come back, to help us at least get a bird’s eye view of the downstream so that we do not make mistakes in the upstream and midstream legislations because we will not know what is provided for at the lower level? I thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural point in regard to the information that was given by hon. Rose Akol. We have timeframes in this Parliament on how long Bills should be with committees. When a member says that they are waiting for Ministry of Finance to sensitise Parliament before they start handling a Bill, I do not think that is procedurally right. Even when the Minister of Energy organised that sensitisation seminar, the committee on Natural Resources was already dealing with these Bills. 

I think the committee should start looking at this Bill and then if Ministry of Finance so feels that we should have more information, they can come and sensitise us. If they do not, we shall meet on this Floor as we debate the reports of the committee. We cannot subject the committee reports to the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a procedural point; I do not know whether any of you wants to rule on it. (Laughter) Let me deal with it. It is true that we have 45 days within which to present Bills and there was absolutely no reason why the Committee on Finance did not start dealing with the Bill. There is no reason because the first brief on the principles of the Bill should have been given to the committee by the minister. It should have been done to the committee so that even when they come to give sensitisation to all the members, the committee is a bit ahead of the rest of the members. 

It is certainly proper that the committee, if had not started attending to this Bill, should start immediately without waiting for Ministry of Finance to brief the whole House. It should start dealing with the Bill as a committee. Call the Minister of Finance, call the technical people, have your discussions. If the ministry comes with this bigger thing of inviting members, we will all go there and we will be party to that. So, please let us proceed that way so that we do not cause any further delays in this matter.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I believe all members are aware that we have just concluded with the budget process and you rightly guided that we first deal with the budget process and perhaps set aside any other work. However, it may also be important for the House to know that as a committee we looked at that Bill and it has technical issues. The Bill has the Finance Bill, it has the oil revenue management and also the Budget Act and it seeks to repeal the current Budget Act and also to repeal the current Public Finance Act.

Those are the issues that we had brought up and then the minister said that since there is now a problem coming up, it is very important that they sensitise not only members of the committee but also members of the whole House on the Bill. That is the reason we have; otherwise, the chairperson of the committee would just come here to throw out the Bill because it is repealing two important laws.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, you have made a ruling on a procedural point, which was raised by my sister from Bujenje, that it is not procedurally correct for us to be derailed and delayed by the ministry. Now, having made that ruling, is the member proceeding well in her submission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Definitely, the member is not proceeding well. I had guided on the matter and that the committee should start. If a committee has a preliminary objection to the Bill, it should come here and report accordingly, that we cannot proceed with the Bill because of this technical difficulty. That will be enough for us to deal with the issue.

MR OKUPA: I speak on this matter as a member of the Committee of Finance but also as a commissioner. You have guided well, Mr Speaker. I think that has been a technical problem we have been facing. Now that you have said that if we have those issues we can present the report, we are going to get back and present the report and bring those technical issues here, which we have identified. This will end up in throwing away the whole Bill because it is totally messed up.

We also had a hitch when our chairperson was appointed a minister. I think the other side should look into replacing him very fast. Also, we do remember that the Minister of Finance had already communicated that they wanted to hold this workshop or seminar the week ending 28th. But through consultation with the Commission and the Speaker, it was found that this was clashing with the Parliamentary Week for the celebration of 50 years. So, a proposal was given that we should hold this seminar from Sunday up to Tuesday but we have not got a reply from the Ministry of Finance. I wish they were here, they would respond. As you have ruled, for us as committee we are going to bring that report because it has those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think we have agreed on the specific matters that we need to move with on the issue of the Finance Bill. We have agreed that the committee should start and if they are not able to proceed for technical reasons, they should report to the House that way. That will be enough for us to move on the basis of that. This will not be the first time that Bills are sent to committee and they do not come for second reading because technical hitches are recognised and accepted by the minister on the proposals of the committee and they are withdrawn. It has happened many times. I will allow the honourable member for Ibanda North - he is not here.

4.04
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have about two or three issues to raise and this is to do with a meeting for the African Caribbean Pacific and EU Parliamentary Assembly that took place in Brussels between 21st to 24th of September. In that meeting, there were quite some urgent matters that I wanted to bring before the House.

The first is the amended Cotonou Agreement. In that meeting, it was reported that only 23 out of 79 ACP countries have ratified the amended Cotonou Agreement. Uganda is not among the 23 and yet this agreement is the one that is the basis for the relationship between the ACP countries and the EU especially on matters of funding and others. 

Sometime in the Eighth Parliament, the Minister of Finance laid on the Table here the amended Cotonou Agreement. In July, Mr Speaker, you personally wrote to the Ministry of Finance inquiring as to whether the ministry has ratified this amended Cotonou Agreement.

In September, we were informed that Uganda is one of those countries that have not yet signed this amended Cotonou Agreement or ratified it for that matter. This is October and the deadline for ratifying that amended Cotonou Agreement is this month of October. So, I would like to know whether, as we speak now, Government has taken any steps to ratify this amended Cotonou Agreement that is very important for our relationship as one of the ACP countries and the EU that are one of our major development partners.

Secondly, I am also raising the issue on the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) that has been on table in the ACP/EU Assembly for the last ten years. This EPA is also supposed to be signed by us when we conclude a full EPA with the EU. We are reliably informed that at the EAC level, negotiations are about to conclude.

As one of the members who is on the committee, the issue was raised that it is high time Members of Parliament of the various ACP countries are also involved in discussing issues especially the contentious issues in the EPA before it is concluded. I am now seeking that Government comes with a debatable statement to Parliament informing Parliament of how far they have gone with this EPA so that Parliament will also be informed on the outstanding issues before this EPA is signed.

Thirdly, in the upcoming meeting in Suriname, Paramaribo, the delegation that will be going there will be required to present the country’s position on the EDF 10 before the EDF 11 is signed and implemented from 2014 to 2020. It is also important that the Ministry of Finance brings to this House a statement on the current position on the EDF 10 funding - the projects that have been funded, any other outstanding projects and the intended areas of funding for the EDF 11 before such an agreement is also concluded. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The issues raised by the honourable member for Bukedea are certainly important. That particular delegation has prepared reports that have been submitted to this House. Many of those issues have been raised and I think the best way to handle this is to bring those debates forward so that specific responses are made. 

On the issue of ratification, certainly I think the people in charge, the learned Attorney-General and the Leader of Government Business, could follow up on the issue of ratification of the Cotonou amended agreement so that we are together with the rest of the countries in dealing with this. However, I think the specific detailed issues could be raised when we debate substantially on the issue. 

So, I need you to take it up and pursue this matter so that by the time they meet next, these matters are resolved so that Uganda is not among the countries that are lagging behind again. That would be a good thing to do.

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have teachers and pupils from Nkozi Nusurat Islamic School, Mawokota South, Mpigi District. They are represented by hon. Kiyingi Joseph Bbosa and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Can you rise for the House to see you. (Applause)

4.12
MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, there was a report presented to this Parliament by the Committee on Agriculture in response to a petition on tobacco. I remember hon. Baryomunsi did raise a pertinent matter. He said that actually the company which had been petitioned against, Continental Tobacco, had already been issued with a licence by the Ministry of Trade even before the matters were concluded. The Speaker did direct the Minister of Trade to come to this Parliament with a statement the next week regarding the status of the licence and the operation of this company.

Last week was the time given to the minister to raise the matter again. The Deputy Leader of Government Business promised that since the minister was not in the House then, he would cause the ministry to act. This week is ending and the company is still venting havoc on the farmers in the field again.

Now that I can see the Minister of Trade around, can we be given the status? Farmers are suffering down there at the hands of a company, which has a licence yet the conditions it was supposed to have been given have never been met.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister in charge of the sector here?

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that my ministry had prepared a comprehensive report on this issue but as a ministry, we decided to call a stakeholders’ meeting with other key players in the sector, which is taking place next week on the 15th. We shall then give you a broader picture. We do have a ministerial report but we thought it would be better -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you invited the honourable member who raised these issues of the petition for that meeting on the 15th?

MR MUTENDE: I will check on the invitations, Mr Speaker, but I know that a meeting has been called on the 15th and any time after that, we shall give you a more comprehensive report. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The tobacco farmers in Kibaale petitioned this House in November last year complaining about a company, which was fleecing them. The committee processed the petition and brought the report here. 

The issue is that Ministry of Trade renews licences every year and the matter was that even when the ministry knew that farmers were not happy with the company, they went ahead and issued a licence. It was a matter for debate and the minister was supposed to come back and clarify whether it was true that a licence had been issued even when there were those complaints and if so, that it should be revoked.

So while we agree that you can have a stakeholders’ meeting, there is something specific about issuing a licence when there are complaints and when the people being served are not happy. Could you clarify on that very matter of issuing a licence as you handle the other issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the matter is smaller than the stakeholders’ meeting. Was the licence renewed?

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you completely that the licence is smaller than the legal issue and that is why it is better for us to receive the comprehensive report, which will obviously include the licences too. I request that you allow us bring the comprehensive report. Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, the Executive is taking this Parliament for granted. (Laughter) I was in this House when we debated that report and actually the report recommended - for your information, almost half of my constituency grows tobacco and these complaints have always been there. The committee recommended that Government should report back on the recommendations within 30 days. 

On the issue of the licence, even the Minister of Trade, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, committed herself to come and report on that specific issue. The stakeholders’ and staff meeting were for the other recommendations. So, for the minister to come and tell us that even concerning the licences, they are still consulting the stakeholders! A licence is either given or it is not. They should come and inform this Parliament in no uncertain terms what is happening. The Executive should not take Parliament for granted especially when they have committed themselves. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, was this licence renewed; yes or no?

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I completely sympathise with the members’ concerns. The answer you want is either “Yes” or “No” but I want to say that as far as I know and to the best of my knowledge, which of course is subject to confirmation, I do not think it was renewed. However, as I said, we shall come with a comprehensive report which will answer all the questions.

Mr Speaker, the person they are talking about is not even here but we are going to meet all of them and we shall come with a very comprehensive report which will help sort out all these issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter is specific and I think the minister should at the earliest opportunity make this clarification. What he is saying is that he does not know whether it has been renewed or not. We can excuse him because it does not fall directly under his docket. 

4.20
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to raise this matter of national importance. Whereas Uganda has been rated as the number one destination for tourism in 2012, I am surprised that one of the tourist sites of Uganda, the Butiaba Port, has been erased from the map of Uganda by RVR and Uganda Railways Corporation. Those of you who read geography and those who have Googled the tourist sites in Uganda, you will realise that Butiaba Port is still shown as one of the tourist attractions. 

The only connection by then from Lake Victoria through Namasagali to Masindi Port, to Nimule in Sudan and to DRC through Kasenyi and Kyomia was Butiaba. Even when it has already been guided that Butiaba Port is going to be central for the offshore drilling in Lake Albert, without shame Uganda Railways Corporation has sold the mighty SS Robert Coryndon ship as scrap and completely erased it from the history of Uganda and yet that vessel was still in good shape, for those who know about water transport. Not only is it the Coryndon which the Bunyoro Kingdom was proud of, even the port itself has been vandalised and sold off as scrap. So, we have lost a jewel, a tourist site, even when we are saying in the Vision 2040 that tourism is the second most important area after oil and gas.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Transport – the encyclopaedia who is talking across – to help Parliament and bring a comprehensive report of what assets of Uganda Railways we still possess. In my work with the Committee on National Economy, we went to Packwach and found that the whole port and the vessel had also been sold off as scrap. We went to Mubende and Mityana when visiting CAIIP roads and even found the whole railway line to Kamwenge and Kasese had been vandalised. Now it is being sold to Steel Rolling Mills whose gates are manned by the Uganda Police. 

Let us have a comprehensive report from the Uganda Railways of how much of the assets still exist. If they have a policy of selling, how much money has been raised from these very important facilities of the country which have been sold as scrap and why they are they selling them? 

Let us also get a report from the Ministry of Tourism; do we still keep a record of the tourist sites of Uganda? During CHOGM, Butiaba Port was being shown as one of the tourist sites but now people are disappointed whenever they go there and find nothing. Please, make an announcement and say, “We have sold off the Coryndon and Butiaba Port as scrap”, so that tourists do not waste their money to go to Butiaba and find nothing. 

I was actually wondering while speaking to the Speaker this morning whether the line from Gulu and Packwach still exists. I am not sure about it. I am told the Busoga line is no more. Can we get these details? Who is doing this and why are the Police also an accomplice? These vehicles are very big and cannot move from Butiaba up to Jinja without the Police intercepting them. So, who is in this business? Can we get this report? If we do not get a comprehensive report, somebody should be censured for this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, was it now a tourist attraction or was it still an active port?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, it was both. Interestingly, some other organs of Government, including the oil companies, have been visiting Butiaba with an intention of making it a hub for the offshore drilling and those who visit that area. But another arm of Government is selling them as scrap. So it is  very uncoordinated movement of troops which can cause us a problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need this matter comprehensively handled. I think it now goes to two ministers; because if it was a tourist site while under works, those are two different departments of Government. We need them to liaise and come up with a statement to the House on this. Honourable member, are we going to be able to get anything right now on this? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A member has raised a matter of guidance but he has raised very pertinent issues. Lwemiyaga County had a railway line that was going through the constituency. What hon. Mukitale is raising needs to be put into perspective - the question of state properties and assets being either left to neglect or wantonly being disposed of, to the extent of vandalising the assets that cost taxpayers of this country billions and billions to put up. 

I understand there is a programme by Government to rehabilitate the railway system but considering that even ports are being sold in bits and pieces, considering that the assets of this country are being sold off, who is selling the properties and assets of this country?  Is there a policy in Government where even ports, ships and ferries are being sold off? Is there Police in this country? Is Government aware - (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I have heard from the Member holding the Floor, hon. Ssekikubo from Lwemiyaga - where he had a railway and a port - saying that we are selling the ferries and the ships without substantiating which ship we have sold or which ferry we have sold – (Interjection) - Mr Speaker, if you can protect me from hon. Katuntu who has just come in, a potato grower. 

Mr Speaker, even human beings grow old. The member had raised a pertinent issue and I am ready to bring a report about that. But is the honourable member right to say that we are selling ships and ferries without substantiating which ships and which ferries we have sold? Is he in order to deceive this Parliament?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in 1993 this House passed the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute which is now an Act of Parliament where Government was authorised to sell things. So, the member is right to say that things are being sold because there is a law that is already in place. But the question they are asking now is different. The question is now to the next level of accountability. 

The question on those ports which had been conserved like the one of Butiaba is a different issue now, but the Member certainly raises a fundamental point that it is being sold. Is it being sold? Should he state which ones are being sold? If you want to know, just go to the schedules of that law and you will find everything that was supposed to be sold or divested. So, please let us finish. Hon. Ssekikubo please, can we move and conclude this matter? Let us contribute in an orderly way so that we can conclude properly.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling and the protection from the overly anxious minister who just shot up to defend his turf. The issue really is that such items are being sold in broad daylight - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the point is made.   

MR SSEKIKUBO: I rest my case and I do expect to have the matter properly brought to Parliament and properly debated.

4.31
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. In line with rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to raise a matter of public importance. 

Whereas on Tuesday we will be celebrating 50 years of independence, some of my voters are in a bad state because of what befell them. On 25th September, the people of Kashangura Sub-county in my constituency received rain which was not only heavy but was also associated with a hailstorm and hailstones. These caused havoc. People lost their properties and lost all the crops. The gardens that had been planted, which had been growing, are now like a field which has been harvested. 

Kashangura Sub-county has four parishes and among these, Kyeikucu, Kashangura and Mashure were badly affected. All the banana plantations were affected and the roads were washed away including bridges. Mr Speaker, when you gave me the chance I had gone to pick some printouts that would show this.

I wrote to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness on Friday and perhaps I thought maybe by around this time a team would have been sent to find out what exactly happened, but in vain. So, I am putting it to the minister to find out how far he has gone. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table some of the printouts showing the bridges that were washed away and the cassava plantations which look dry despite the fact that it is a rainy season. The cassava plants are leafless. They also show the banana plantations and some of the residents who were actually laying their hands before me in anticipation of assistance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, disaster has struck the people of Ibanda North. Appropriate responses are required and you need to take some action.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, with your permission I beg to lay the content of what I have already submitted on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Rt Hon. Prime Minister those matters are current. I do not know whether you want to make some statement on it. 

4.34
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is handling disasters in the country. Maybe the Members of Parliament would like to know the procedure since all of us do not know the programme of disaster. Should disaster occur in your area, the first thing you must do is to get in touch with your CAO. The CAO is the chairman of the district disaster management committee. 

That committee in the district will be the one to go first, on behalf of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, holding its fort, to make a comprehensive report which will be sent here.  It is only after that report that the ministry will work. So, if our colleague - he has said he has written to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. After here, he should go back to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and follow up what is happening. What is very important is that you cannot tell whether even after his report, another disaster will not befall these people. So, there is no matter of urgency in issues of disaster which you do not have control over. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils from Kamuli Boys Boarding Primary School, Kamuli District, represented by the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and hon. Andrew Allen. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.37
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Moslems around the world in the month of October make take the Hajj to the Holy City of Mecca and Medina. Equally, the Moslems of Uganda have been preparing to make their Hajj to Mecca and Medina. Can the Minister of Foreign Affairs come and tell the Parliament of Uganda and the whole country at large whether the Government of Saudi Arabia still maintains the issue of not issuing visas to Ugandans because of Ebola? In this country, as far as we are concerned, Ebola was wiped out but still the Government of Saudi Arabia is not issuing visas to our Moslem brothers and sisters to go to Mecca.

Secondly, sometime back, Her Majesty’s Police were investigating our mission in London because of some illegal trade that was taking place in the mission. Can the Minister of Foreign Affairs come and tell Ugandans what happened? Was the diplomatic immunity waived for the police to go to the High Commission and investigate or not? We want the minister to clarify these issues to the people of Uganda. Thank you.

4.39
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugwere County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, for raising this quite pertinent point.
 
Before somebody goes on that pilgrimage to Mecca, he pays money in advance to book the facilities in Saudi Arabia which he is going to use. Companies here have already charged and paid on behalf of the intended pilgrims all the charges. So, if the visas are denied, all those intended pilgrims are going to lose almost all the money they have already paid. This is money which cannot even be refunded because it books food, hotels, transportation and everything which has already been paid in advance. 

So, will the Leader of Government Business, Alhaji General honourable counsel Moses Ali try to explain what the government’s position is on this matter because many Muslims are bound to lose a lot of money?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, at the cost of being misunderstood, I want to give information that the person to whom the plea is addressed, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, is in two issues - the investigations at the UK is himself and here is being investigated and he is in the dock. So, for you to inquire from a troubled man - (Laughter)- I do not think there is much information we can get from that. On the other issue of the Ebola, maybe the minister can raise it but apparently, it is asking too much.

4.42
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): The conflict in Sembabule is not part of my problems. I am not going to talk about that because I think we are not involved. 

People being stopped from going for the Hajj this year is a matter which has been in the air for some time now, and I think it was related to Ebola previously. According to the World Health Organisation, for a country to be declared Ebola-free or free from whatever disease, it must take 42 days within which such similar diseases should not occur. Indeed, for Uganda to declare that there was no more Ebola, it took 42 days, and that is when the Minister of Health came out on the air to say that there was no more Ebola and even the President, I think. You people heard it.
 
We have not got formal information from the embassy either here or our embassy in Saudi Arabia. But what everybody has seen in the papers this morning is that these people have been rejected - “People for Hajj from Uganda will not go to Saudi Arabia”. If this is the information you are asking for, then we need time to find out the truth and the position of the Embassy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

It is not true that the pending people who will go for the Hajj having paid their money will lose it. They will not lose because that money you paid was to book space for you and if you have not followed the money for its use, then who will have used it? (Mr Katuntu rose_) Honourable Shadow Attorney-General, with due respect, I will take your information later.
So, it is not good to mislead the House that these people will lose their money. They will not. If they are not going at all this time then they will go next time and that money will be there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, the issue has been in the media - on radios and in print media - that the people of Uganda are being denied visa entry to Saudi Arabia. Is it true or not? If it is true, what is Government doing about it to make sure that the people who want to go can go?

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is what I am saying, Mr Speaker. I am saying that we have not got formal information yet and we need a bit of time to find out. I am not saying different things really – (Interjections) - How long is not a very important question because even whether I tell you “in two minutes”, will you agree? What is important really is, I have to go and find out the truth but not just depend on newspapers or something like that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is taken that issues have been raised about denial of visas to Ugandans going to Saudi Arabia. That issue has been raised in the media and it has been raised in the House. Government should take responsibility immediately and find out what is going on and find a way of facilitating our people to go if they want to go. It is as simple as that. So, take action. 

This information is already in the media. It is in the public domain and the people need to be assured that they will travel or they need to know that they will not travel so that they can know the remedial steps they can take. I think that responsibility should rest in the hands of Government. 

4.47
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On the nights of 2nd, 3rd and 4th of October, the Police did a swoop in the areas of Kireka, Bweyogerere, Kasangati and Kawempe. Following their swoops of those nights, the following people and a number of others were arrested: Fred Ndiwalana, Samuel Mawanda, Simon Nyombi, Richard Kato, Sulaiman Kasule, Michael Muyanja, Ronald Kyeswa, Ramathan Ssebuuma. Up to today, these people have not been produced before courts of law. 

We are very concerned first of all about their location because reports from where they were rounded up indicate that they were taken by the Police. I think it is within the requirements of the law that these people should have been produced before court within 48 hours. The 3rd of October to-date is more than seven days. I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to account for these people and to tell this country whether these people and others whom I have not read are still alive or safe. Where are they being kept? 

Government has persistently denied the existence of torture houses. We have approached the Police, we have approached the Metropolitan Commander, Mr Kaweesi, and he has said he does not have these people. So, is there another agency arresting Ugandans while the Police are watching and they put on Police uniform and the Police do not know? Is that what they would like us to believe? 

Mr Speaker, I seek that explanation but I think that in this Uganda at 50, this should not be happening, the merits of why they are under detention notwithstanding. It is important that they are prosecuted and the law will take its course. 

Secondly, my district of Serere is flooded. It flooded in 2007, it flooded last year and it has flooded again. In 2007, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, came to Serere and Soroti then and promised that he would start rain water harvesting so that the people of Serere will no longer be tormented by water and cycles of drought. Last year, I made a similar report to the Office of the Prime Minister in writing. Nothing was done for the people of Serere. This year, the same thing has happened. May I know from the Leader of Government Business, why, in spite of my earlier communication, the ministry – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Last month, on the 27th, I submitted a comprehensive report from the CAO of Serere District to the minister responsible for disaster preparedness. Nothing has happened up to-date. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for that information. I would like to add the fact that Serere District, which the three of us represent in this House, is so low lying. The whole of it is a swamp on the peninsula of Lake Kyoga. So when we talk about a submerged district, all the sub-counties in Serere are affected. Latrines have sunk. Schools are operating - for instance, in Kateta where the latrines have sunk and faecal matter is oozing out, our children are in those schools. I wrote to the Ministry of Water to try and help us and they did nothing. If you want to see a population of mosquitoes in their thousands which will terrorise a human being, you need to go to Kadungulu Sub-county. 

I am dismayed that through and through, the Government of Uganda has never responded to the plight of the people of Serere. They have not honoured the pledges of the President. I thought the President is a fountain of honour. He should tell the truth. Does he want us to begin thinking that he did not mean his words or what? Can the Leader of Government Business help the people of Serere? Thank you.

4.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I do not think it is fair to judge the President of Uganda on a disaster-prone area like Serere. (Laughter) Serere will ever be flooded today, tomorrow, even next year. So, that one is not a problem of anybody. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I said that the President made a pledge to the people of Serere, which included rain water harvesting. Of course, I did not say that the Agu Bridge is almost cut off again; but the President had gone to Agu as well that day. In my view, I was not judging the President in a matter of his performance elsewhere. You know I hold strong views about his performance, anyway. I was taking the President on what his pledge was to the people of Serere, that he would help with rain water harvesting so that the people of Serere do not go through a cycle of floods in October, August, September and then drought and then famine. That is what the President pledged.

Is the Rt. Hon. Leader of Government Business in order to come here and try to mislead this House that I was judging the President on a disaster-prone area like Serere when I was just reminding the President to be honourable in his pledges? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, now you have the correct information.
 
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I want to tell the truth to our honourable member from Serere that according to our records, Serere is one of the parts of Uganda which are disaster-prone. It will be flooded today, tomorrow and even next year! (Laughter)

Secondly, the President made a pledge in good faith to harvest the water. That pledge was not given a time limit so it still stands even today and tomorrow. Time will come when that pledge will be fulfilled. So, the honourable member should be patient.

However, I want to say also that Government has a wide range of plans to help disaster-prone areas all over the country. Some are prone to floods, some to drought and others like these ones from Mt Elgon are being buried by landslides. So, we have intentions to relocate some. Should we fail to solve this problem of Serere, we might have to relocate them – (Interjections) – Relocating them might be a permanent solution. (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, with pain I rise on a point of order. Is the Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in order to be insensitive to the people of Serere by saying we are disaster-prone? Would we be in order not to be sensitive to the Prime Minister and say, given his weight, he is prone to pressure and diabetes and so we should not be concerned about his health? Is he in order to be that insensitive instead of addressing the matter as the President had promised to address it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in all fairness, I have listened to the speech made by the Deputy Leader of Government Business. He said that Serere is flood-prone, so it will happen today and next year. He said there are also other places like those where people suffer from landslides and things like that and those are disaster areas. He also said that in future, if those problems cannot be solved, Government might be required to relocate these people. That is what I heard. 

So, the statement did not violet any order. But there is a pending question which I would like the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs to deal with, the issue of the people who were arrested and have been in detention. 

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, with regard to the statement made by hon. Alaso on arrests, I wish to state the following: 

One, the Police, in the exercise of its duties under the Constitution and under the Police Act, on the question of arrest have in most cases brought those they have arrested to charge even before the end of 48 hours. We are on record for that.

Secondly, this Government has past the era of extra-judicial killings. So, the question of whether these people are alive or not does not arise in this Government. 

Thirdly, she says that she contacted the Commandant of the Kampala Metropolitan Police, Mr Kaweesi, who assured her that these people are not under police custody. I would like to believe Mr Kaweesi in that statement. Thank you, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is adjourned to 30th October this year.

(The House rose at 5.04 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 30 October 2012)
