PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10361Thursday, 5 October 2023MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF UGANDA’S 61ST INDEPENDENCE ANNIVERSARYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have 10 minutes. There is a point of procedure, honourable minister. Wait a bit. Take your seat. 2.19MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit concerned about the level of absenteeism from the Front Bench and Members on the Opposition side. We are all Members of this House and to have a formidable debate, we need to have both sides of the House. Could the acting Leader of the Opposition inform us why there is a great number of absenteeism on his side? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, he does not need to inform us as the acting LoP because he is the Chief Opposition Whip. He should be whipping his members. Honourable member, I need your Front Bench.2.20THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is common knowledge that you have allowed free sitting. (Laughter)  It is possible, therefore, that most of the Members from this side could be sitting on the other side. (Applause)IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 3RD SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Yesterday, we had a comprehensive debate for over an hour regarding World Teachers’ Day and their contribution. We continue to celebrate our teachers and wish them happy celebrations. I expect the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs to come, as she had requested yesterday, to update the House. I will also allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to update us on the issue, which was raised by Hon. Agnes Apea regarding ferry crossings for animals from Amolatar and the surrounding areas. After that, I will be handling issues of national importance together with the Prime Minister’s Time. I am very glad that Hon. Kasaija is here; some of the issues, which were brought to my attention today are about him. Therefore, together with Hon. Musasizi, if he comes, I request that you be here until late so that you listen to these issues, which are extremely critical. Next item.10362PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chief Opposition Whip has put it on record that the Opposition has crossed to the Government side. (Laughter)  I am waiting for him to cross and conclude the matter, and then, we will have one side in this House.On a serious note, I would like to appreciate you because you usually whip your Members. However, always remind them, especially the shadow cabinet because it is recognised in our rules and laws and we usually want – That is why, usually, when a minister speaks, I give the shadow minister a chance to respond so that we get an alternative view. I encourage you to continue calling upon your colleagues to join us in the House. Thank you. Honourable minister?2.21THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Mariam Dhoka Babalanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to make a statement on the forthcoming 61st Independence Day anniversary celebrations, which will take place on 9 October 2023 in Kitgum District.On this special occasion, all Ugandans, irrespective of their religious, political or tribal differences, come together to celebrate our freedom from colonial bondage. It is on this day that Uganda attained her independence after 70 years of British rule.The theme for this year’s celebrations is: “Sustaining a United and Progressive Nation: Taking Charge of Our Future as a Free Nation”. The theme recognises our nation’s history and the compatriots who patriotically provided and sustained the leadership, ideology and momentum towards self-rule. It is rooted in the ideals of our independence founding fathers who visualised a country based on the rule of law, democracy, socio-economic transformation and good governance.This time round, the celebrations will take place in Kitgum District at the Kitgum Farm Institute, Kitgum Municipality. The Chief Guest will be His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda. He will be joined by all Ugandans and other high-profile foreign dignitaries.Mr Speaker, many activities to celebrate this day have been lined up, among which will be honouring 41 individuals with national medals for the extraordinary roles they have performed in uplifting our motherland, Uganda by His Excellency the President.The Office of the President, working jointly with a German international Non-Government Organisation called Bazungu-e.v, together with the Prince Kimbugwe Foundation have offered free eye surgical services for people with eye challenges in the Acholi Subregion. Over 1,163 patients were screened and out of these, 153 underwent eye surgeries and 557 were provided with eyeglasses, while others received treatment.All Ugandans have been invited to attend these celebrations. There are only a few guests, numbering 800, who will sit near His Excellency the President and they will be required to undergo COVID-19 tests. The tests will start on Friday, 6 October 2023 at the Kitgum Hospital for people in the Acholi Subregion and in Kampala, two testing sites have been provided: at the Office of the President and the State House Directorate of Land Matters Offices on Plot 58, Lumumba Avenue. Testing starts at 9.00 a.m.  Mr Speaker, this means that the sitting arrangement has provided for both categories; those who will test for COVID-19 and those who will not. Therefore, I would like to assure Parliament that the public is not restricted from attending this function on account of the lack of a COVID-19 test.As is our tradition, a National Prayer breakfast has been organised at State House, Entebbe on Sunday, 8 October 2023 starting at 7.30 a.m. Additionally, prayers shall be held throughout the country to commemorate this important occasion. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10363THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker and honourable members, you are encouraged to attend these prayers in your respective places of worship and/or to preside over these functions in your respective districts on the designated dates as follows:1. Friday, 6 October 2023 - prayers in all mosques2. Saturday, 7 October 2023 - prayers in all Seventh-day Adventist churches, and3. Sunday, 8 October 2023 - National Prayer Breakfast at Entebbe State House and in all other churches. I wish to inform Parliament that security agencies will put in place the necessary security measures to secure the venue of the celebrations. The Uganda Police Force will be responsible for overall security at the venue in Kitgum District and across Acholi Subregion and the entire greater North. However, they shall be boosted with specialised units like the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Internal Security Organisation, External Security Organisation, as well as the Special Forces Command. Mr Speaker, I wish to inform you that in all these preparations, the National Organising Committee (NOC) has been working hand in hand with the District Organising Committee (DOC) in Kitgum. Joint meetings of the NOC and Kitgum District Organising Committee have been held to bring the district leadership as well as the area Members of Parliament on board for purposes of proper coordination, mobilisation of the masses and harmonisation of the planned activities. Thank you for your kind attention, I beg to submit. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the clear statement. Honourable colleagues, I will pick 10 Members and the criteria used will be six Members from the National Resistance Movement (NRM) side, two from the Opposition and two from the Independents. Those from the Opposition side will include the LoP. Therefore, I will pick the LoP and the Member of Parliament from Jonam. I will pick three Independent Members of Parliament because they have tried to attend: Hon. Nsereko, Prof. Mushemeza and Hon. Otuke. On the NRM side, I will pick the Commissioner, Hon. Silwany, Hon. Chemaswet, Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Member of Parliament from Iganga, Hon. Aisha Agaba who made a special request earlier that she wants to submit on this matter and Hon. Martin Muzaale. Honourable colleagues, we have other matters where I will pick you. Let us start right away, use two minutes each because we have other business to handle. Hon. Ebwalu, I will pick you on the next item. I know that you are a strong character on every topic. 2.30MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. This day is not totally new; it is known and we will participate. However, I request the minister to also guide because in spite of the national day being celebrated in Kitgum, the different districts may also want to celebrate, including municipalities and cities.It may not be on the same day, but what are you giving the districts or the other entities? Many times, celebrations like this come and the authorities in the local governments run to us, the Members of Parliament. It is not that we do not want to contribute, but we want to be sure that there is something from Government and then we can know how much to give. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 2.31MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister for your submission. Of course, our Independence Day celebrations should not be mere celebrations per se , but a true reflection of the journey our country has undertaken for the past 61 years. 10364PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEIn areas where we were not independent, our people are now striving to attain independence economically, socially and culturally. Regarding the education systems that we adopted from our colonial masters, we should reflect and ask ourselves whether it is time to carry on with the same colonial education system that we have or move forward with a better education system. Regarding medical independence, have we strived to be medically dependent or when someone falls sick, we fly them out of the country in order to get medical help? This is the time to reflect on our journey socially, economically, infrastructure-wise and in other ways. We should box ourselves into different cocoons in our districts and talk about our journeys as districts, as regions, as people of Uganda, but also as a nation to see whether we are still dependent or not economically, infrastructure-wise, intelligence-wise and whether we are striving for the independence that our forefathers fought for. I am still waiting for the theme of this year’s independence journey from the honourable minister, Hon. Babalanda. Thank you for your submission, but tell us about the journey and how far we have to go. As a country, what should the people expect? Thank you. 2.33PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement as it sets the ball rolling for a debate. I have observed that usually before such celebrations, the debate in the media rais -es questions like Hon. Nsereko has pointed out; what have we achieved? For us who have engaged in studies of self-determination, I can say without any contradiction that there is nothing sweeter than freedom and I think independence brought freedom to us. (Applause)  There is evidence of this. I have also done studies on forced migration. Some time back, Uganda was the greatest generator of refugees, but today, it is a host. There is stability and peace and that is the reason why the NRM Government has become very critical. Look at the new education curriculum. I was listening to my son who is in secondary school and he was talking of research. His language has changed to that of a university student because the reform is very critical and it is challenging the colonial type of education. I will conclude by saying it was worth having independence, it is worth celebrating and it is worthy for this House to pay tribute to our forefathers, mothers and to the minister who has brought a very good statement. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Professor. Honourable colleagues, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have the Procurement Management Committee – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need an orderly House as the Leader of Government Business. In Parliament, we only speak through the microphone not on side – Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have the Procurement Management Committee staff from the National Council of Namibia. They are here on a benchmarking visit to share experiences and practices and they have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  2.36MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to, first of all, congratulate His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, the Opposition side and honourable members upon the 61st independence celebrations that we have achieved as Uganda.[Mr Nsereko] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10365THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023As we celebrate the 61st independence, we should remember that at the time when we were getting independence, Uganda had a very small population. Today, it boasts of over 45 million people; the population has tremendously increased. The NRM Government has come up with policies that are continuously restoring hope, economic independence and freedom to Ugandans. The Parish Development Model is a recently enrolled program where at the grassroots, local women like my mother and aunts in the local areas are enabled to get resources from Government to do business. We should continuously support –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I set the rules and when it is time, it is time. So, plan how to utilise your time effectively. 2.38MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also appreciate the minister for the statement concerning the Independence Day celebrations. I have picked only one statement from the minister. I am known in my district as a doctor, but I am not. However, when you talked about a medical camp, I was going to carry my people to Kitgum for the eye medical camp. Now that my people have not benefited from this one, I am requesting your ministry, which is the President’s ministry with a lot of money, to do this countrywide. Otuke has suffered a lot and we do not have clean water. Our people have a lot of problems with their eyes. When you are doing something, do it uniformly so that everyone benefits from what Government is giving. Thank you. 2.39MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we celebrate the 61st independence of Uganda, we need to understand that the development of Uganda is based on three premises: hard work of Ugandans, security and infrastructure. On the question of hard work, it is well known that the people of Uganda are hard-working and that is why they have been able to develop their country, specifically the Sabinys. The second is on the question of security that we have achieved through our President who has put a lot of resources into securing our country. However, there are areas where security has collapsed, especially in the Soi constituency where we need to combat some elements that are causing insecurity in that particular area. On the question of infrastructure, I would like to appreciate the President for the achievement that we have gotten as the people of Sebei by having a good road from Kapchorwa to Suam. It is one of the best roads in East and Central Africa. We can now connect with our brothers across.  I would like to thank the Government of NRM for doing the best for our people and we believe that NRM will also be in the next Government. Thank you. 2.41MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have three issues to raise. First of all, I would like to congratulate the President, his Government, the Parliament and Ugandans for having gone through 61 years of good independence. 61 years is not short and it is not very long. However, within those 60 years, if you do not have anything to celebrate then you have a problem. If you cannot appreciate yourself, do not expect anybody to appreciate you. We must know where we came from and where we are today. If you, as a Ugandan, cannot see that there are some achievements then something must be done about it. There is tremendous improvement in almost all our sectors. True, we still have a lot to do, but we have achieved quite a lot and we must put it on a record that yes, we are okay. 10366PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWhen God was creating the earth, He had nobody to thank Him, but He had time to say, look here, I have created this thing, it is beautiful and I appreciate it. You must always remember, know and learn how to appreciate yourselves. We have achieved a lot in these 61 years and I would like to thank Government.My major concern is about the arrangements being made by either the minister concerned or Parliament to ensure that my colleagues and I attend this important function in Kitgum. Are there any arrangements being made? If none, what can we do to make sure that we all attend?I have attended a host of functions, especially national functions, where the host members are sometimes ignored, not involved and even fail to be recognised. Yes –(Member timed out.)  2.43MS SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the minister for the presentation she has made. I congratulate all Ugandans upon the independence celebrations. However, as we celebrate, I would like us to come and work together to fight for the Ugandans who are working abroad so that they can also feel the Independence celebrations because they are treated as slaves. As we celebrate, honourable minister, I would like Iganga to be part of these celebrations. Let us improve the health sector, for example, and elevate our hospital. In that way, we shall also feel very happy as we are celebrating our independence. Thank you. 2.45MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion regarding the 61st anniversary of a hard-fought independence. It is important to pay respects to the brave souls who sacrificed so much for us to get this freedom.One of our colleagues said, it is better to see where we came from in 1962 and where we are now so that people outside there can appreciate how far we have come. We may be speaking from inside the Parliament while people outside are not getting the information well. Since we have the media, let us use it to show people where we have come from since 1962.I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for the 61st independence anniversary where Uganda has an open-minded democracy and where people have flourished. Today, we heard people saying that Bobi Wine had been kidnapped. Fortunately, we saw Bobi Wine at his home enjoying. That shows that people -(Member rose_) -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, the rules are very clear; you do not access the microphone without my permission.MS AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection. I appreciate the democracy that we have in Uganda today and the high quality healthcare centres that we have. I request the minister to also think about my constituency of Bugangaizi East that lacks a health centre IV . I also need my people to benefit. Since you are taking health camps to Kitgum District, my people in Kakumiro would also want to benefit –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Members rose_) I have already chosen the Members to speak; we concluded that. On the issue of medical camps, I have just been informed by the Chairperson of the Committee on Health that recently, the Association of Surgeons of Uganda, working with the Ministry of Health, conducted a week-long medical camp in Lango subregion and over 1,000 surgeries were done as part of this celebration. Last year, they were in Bukedi and in 2024, they will be in Ankole. They will keep going to all regions, working with the Ministry of Health. Hon. Martin Muzaale -[Mr Byarugaba] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10367THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 20232.48MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move to support the motion by my honourable minister, Milly Babalanda. Today, we are talking about the independence of this country. Mr Speaker, our forefathers managed to achieve this independence because there was unity. We should use this day to call upon Ugandans to unite to safeguard our economy, give freedom to each and every one and to make sure that we fight some of these impunities that we see in our country like corruption.On this day, we should remind ourselves about what the intentions of our forefathers were. They wanted a beautiful country and a country that would develop itself. It is bad that we have a budget, but when it comes to real performance, there are many issues. Mr Speaker, we shall celebrate this day and enjoy it, holding our heads high as leaders while we put in place what is supposed to be done. I call upon leaders who are here and those who are out of this place –(Interjections)MR MARTIN MUGABI: Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected from the Prime Minister. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are protected.MR MARTIN MUGABI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, please, add me some more time - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, thank you. Honourable Leader of the Opposition -2.50THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. A statement like this commemorating the independence of the Republic of Uganda should be about stocktaking. One of the fundamental questions should be about whether we have achieved the principles of good governance 61 years down the road.Mr Speaker, with all due respect, the good professor alluded to independence bringing freedom and that should be the fundamental question. Has Independence, 61 years down the road, brought freedom?One of the Members, who had to be put on order, alluded to my party president, Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, who, as we talk, is under house arrest. His home – (Interjections) – I have just come from there –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, focus on your submission. MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, I need your protection.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please.MR NAMBESHE:  Thank you. The truth of the matter is that I have just come from there and the whole place is full of teargas. The home is literally a barracks of sorts. (Interjections)  There are UPDF officers, the police are all over the place. Would that, Mr Speaker, translate into freedom? (Member rose)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order?MS NABBANJA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to deceive the country when, in actual sense, the president of NUP was given free transport to his home? He was also given free security to his home. In order not to disrupt the businesses along the Entebbe-Kampala road - Government could not accept to see people get engulfed in confusion. Therefore, he was given free and befitting security up to his home. Is the Member in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I have been busy; it takes me a lot of time to prepare for a session and I do not know what you are talking about. I am not privy to the issues that you are talking about so, there is no way I can give my opinion on whether he is telling the truth or whether she is.  10368PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWe are discussing the independence of the country; let us focus on that. Let us avoid provocative statements – and Hon. Aisa, you started this. Let us just focus on the freedom we have to speak, especially in this House.MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, most obliged. However –(Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the LoP finish his submission.MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, allow me to report to this House - I will not respond to what the Prime Minister has arrogantly brought to the Floor. (Interjections)  Mr Speaker, you know me very well for being a bishop and recently, I was promoted to the position of presiding Apostle. (Laughter)Why on earth would she use very inappropriate language to say that I was telling lies? I have come from the home of Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu a few minutes ago –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Listen, honourable colleagues. Please. I told you that I do not know where you are coming from. I came from my home and went to the office to prepare for the session. I do not know what has been going on.To prepare for a session, I do not use one hour. Even the little time I had, you occupied me. Now, you expect me to know who is telling the truth. It is your word against the others. I do not know what is going on with you people. So, please, do not take me into that business.MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, one of our own, Hon. Charles Matovu, was detained last evening, together with the six others, over the preparations to receive their party president. I would like to inform you so that you dissect whether, indeed, the Opposition parties are given freedom. Mr Speaker, it is you to assess and pass judgment.This Government, particularly President Museveni, is in a very unique position to fight corruption. These 61 years down the road, we see corruption becoming endemic and systemic. The unique position that he occupies would have demanded political will on his part. We saw political will in the brief five-year presidential term of the late John Pombe Magufuli in Tanzania. Indeed, we saw the economy being elevated to middle-income status, courtesy of his efforts to fight corruption. But here, we see perpetuation of impunity. This is why I did not want to be aggressive to the response of my good friend, the Leader of Government Business.Mr Speaker, the then Prime Minister of United Kingdom, Winston Churchill one time coined Uganda as the “Pearl of Africa” because of the good climate and arable fertile soils, but 61 years down, the roads, issues of food security - Recently, we were an embarrassment on the continent that our brothers and sisters in Karamoja could starve to death yet we have arable soils and good climate, moreover in the Pearl of Africa. Would this speak to good leadership, 61 years down the road? I would like to conclude by saying that Uganda is yearning to see a smooth peaceful transfer of power from one President to another, 61 years down the road. It has never seen it except at Independence. It is only Uganda in the neighbourhood - Kenya did not receive her independence on a silver platter; they fought. They had uprisings like the Mau Mau , Mzungu  Arudi Ulaya Mwafrika Apate Uhuru. In Tanzania, there were rebellions; the  Maji Maji. Here, it was a peaceful transfer from the colonialists to Ugandans and we are yet to see a smooth transfer of power from one President to another. In fact, it would be this regime –(Mr Norbert Mao rose_) (Laughter)Mr Speaker, information not allowed. I am very informed. With due respect to - As I conclude, we have very many universities, but the education system is still a relic of the colonial times. You should be wondering, with the good professor here -(Member timed out.)[The Deputy Speaker]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10369THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: LoP, please, conclude.MR NAMBESHE:  I am concluding.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You promised to conclude; so, do so.  MR NAMBESHE:  Thank you. We have many universities now and these universities are churning out many graduates, but recently, with the advent of a pandemic, we were consuming vaccines courtesy of other universities, 61 years down the road.In Uganda, we have research institutes that are funded by tax payers. The one-million-dollar question is: 61 years down the road, are we going to maintain this system of education, which is a relic of the colonial times and cannot address issues of health care? In fact, our healthcare is provided by the neighbourhood. You have heard many of our high profile people seeking medical healthcare in Nairobi. This is a fact. Should I mention the 17 names? I will begin with the recent one of my good friend. Of course, the Speaker is requesting me to tone down and I will comply.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us respect the privacy of individuals.MR NAMBESHE: I will not mention names, but the truth of the matter is that soon after independence, Mulago National Referral Hospital was able to treat a high profile figure; the former President of Uganda, the late Obote, who had been shot in the mouth. Today, is it possible for any high profile person including you, Members of Parliament, to go to Mulago for treatment? That would be suicidal. None of you can seek healthcare from Mulago, 61 years down the road. I beg to rest my case.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nambeshe, the other day, Hon.  Ssemujju Nganda gave a testimony of how his relative - I think his father or mother - was saved at Mulago. Members, I get treated at Mulago. If you go to Mulago, they will tell you that two weeks ago, my own father was operated on there. I have the capacity to take him anywhere in the world. Do you think it is because I do not love him? No, it is because Mulago has the capacity.Honourable colleagues, we may have different opinions on how independent we are, but the fact is, we are an independent country and we celebrate our independence. All of us worked for it; our forefathers and parents. The rest can be opinions, but Ugandans are celebrating independence. Therefore, I would like to congratulate Ugandans. Honourable colleagues, Uganda is our country so even when you want to take over in future, take over a country you can be proud of. I request that when it comes to matters concerning Uganda, let us be one. On how individuals have behaved, we can have our opinions. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE ALLEGED FRAUD AT UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, when I see you debating your nationality, it surprises me. It is as we have another country. Honourable minister -3.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was ordered to bring the statement today and I think the statement was uploaded.Yesterday, the Member for Rubanda, Hon. Moses Kamuntu, raised a matter of national importance regarding suspected fraud in using the gorilla and chimpanzee permit booking system at Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). Mr Speaker, UWA is a Statutory agency under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities (MTWA) mandated to manage wildlife within and outside protected areas. The tourism ministry has the legal mandate and obligation of providing overall oversight and supervision of UWA as enshrined under 10370PRIME MINISTER’S TIMESections 4 and 5(4) of the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019. Therefore, as a supervisory entity, the ministry is greatly concerned about the alleged fraud and the negative publicity this has generated.I would like to inform the House that the alleged fraud was detected internally by UWA. Consequently, the Executive Director commissioned an internal audit and the audits covered the period of June to August 2023 and generated important insights and preliminary findings pointing to possible fraud orchestrated by some staff from the departments of reservations, finance and information technology at head office, with possible connivance of some field staff. Following the findings, UWA commissioned a second detailed investigation comprising members of staff from the investigative units and the Uganda Police Force. Investigations are still ongoing and the findings will inform the next course of action.Mr Speaker, according to the findings, about Shs 500 million could have been lost in the three months. 14 UWA staff have been identified as suspects and some tour companies might have been involved in the reported fraud. Further investigations are ongoing to identify their role in the suspected fraud. The implicated staff and tour companies will be prosecuted in the courts of law. The action we have so far taken: 14 UWA suspected staff have been suspended to pave the way for investigations. The ministry has further requested the Office of the Auditor-General to undertake a comprehensive forensic audit covering the period July 2020 – September 2023. The audit will cover gorilla and chimpanzee bookings at Bwindi-Bugahinga, Kibaale National Parks as well as the Kyambura Gorge in Queen Elizabeth National Park.The Auditor-General’s findings will be submitted to the ministry. We will certainly work with the relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies as well as Parliament to execute the investigation and audits. We have also started the rollout of the new Booking and Revenue Collection System by UWA to replace the abused Gorilla and Chimpanzee Permit Booking System. I, therefore, appeal to members of the public and Members of Parliament to provide any relevant information regarding this investigation to the ministry, the Police and the Auditor-General. Your information will be treated with uttermost confidence as we strive to rid UWA and the entire tourism industry of fraudsters.In conclusion, once the investigations have been concluded, the implicated staff shall be subjected to both disciplinary and legal proceedings including suspension, expulsion and prosecution. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Did you have a procedural matter, Hon. Begumisa?MS BEGUMISA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his submission. Allow me to tell the minister that we are not proceeding well in – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are not the one to determine. Raise your matter and I will determine.MS BEGUMISA:  Allow me to tell the minister that he was not proceeding right.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, do not carry out a coup.MS BEGUMISA:  Okay, are we proceeding right when the minister is missing out on two issues? Allow me to give him information from the tourism fraternity, as he stated in one of his points. Bearing in mind that investigations are still ongoing, he rightly stated that the tourism fraternity is still battered by post Covid-19 effects and a poor road network. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife, and Antiquities should bear in mind that there is still a lot of overbooking for gorilla and chimpanzee permits from UWA. [Mr Mugarra] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10371THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Please, involve the Uganda Tour Operators in your meeting as soon as you can. Your investigations will be complete when you call all these investors in the tourism industry. My prayer –  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is a procedural matter.MS BEGUMISA:  Okay. Finally, work with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs such that these notices that are put out in the media –(Interruptions)–  Protect me, Mr Speaker. I was trying to tell him that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should work together so that this does not go public before investigations are concluded because it tarnishes our tourism image. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is a matter under investigation and the investigations are not yet complete. Any debate here - A colleague rose on point of procedure – Hon. Kazini, when you raise a finger like that at me - Is that how you ask for time to speak? Get another style. Sometimes it is not good when you keep raising a finger at someone. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, the investigations are still going on and the moment you allow debate on such a matter, you may jeopardise it. Honourable minister, you can tell us when you think you will be able to give us another update. I am glad you are the one who requested to bring this update.MR MUGARRA:  Mr Speaker, we requested the Auditor-General and he agreed that within a month, he would have concluded these investigations. That will be the right time to give a conclusive report. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Next item. Colleagues, before the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development comes in, we have two short ministerial statements which I wanted us to consider because the ministers were supposed to give us feedback. They are from the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs and the Minister for Internal Affairs. Since they are not substantive items on the Order Paper, but part of my communication, I call the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs.3.12THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Misi Kabanda):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I took note of the concerns raised by Hon. Sarah Opendi on the Floor of Parliament concerning the improper disposal of waste in Kabowa, particularly St Kizito and St Ann Secondary Schools. As directed by the House, an investigative inspection was carried out by the technical officials from both KCCA and the Ministry of Education and Sports on 4 October 2023 in the above-mentioned schools, specifically the alleged discharge of wastewater and sewerage into the community located in Rubaga South, Kabowa Parish. The findings:  It was confirmed that wastewater from the kitchens and the surface run-off was channelled outside the schools via pipes and channels from the schools.Both schools had septic tanks and soak pits for sewerage. However, excess rainwater released outside the school equally causes discomfort and harm to the community.  There were also leakages from waste water pipes at St Kizito Secondary School evidenced by flies around the pipes. The following recommendations were made: 1. Stop releasing any water outside the school during the rainy season.2. We advised harvesting most of the rain water.3. School cooks should stop discharging wastewater and solid waste into waste channels.10372PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4. The use of pipes to channel all the water into the main water channel. 5. Work with neighbours to channel the entire surface run-off into the channels.6. Implementation notices were issued to deal with the above problems within one week. It was also noticed that the area residents also release waste and rain water into the community channel and I have directed the executive director to engage the Division Town Clerk to sensitise and encourage them to work together and solve the problem. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sarah Opendi who was on ground?  3.15MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was on ground with the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports and two other Members. It is true that there is a big problem in that area from St Kizito Primary School. It is also true that St Anne Primary School discharged water that comes from the bathrooms – there are some leakages - into the drainage. What we also found is that Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) has huge drainage channels that pass through – and some of them are in people’s compounds – and then discharges - The people living in those other areas told us that the channel comes all the way from Najjanankumbi. Some people are using those channels as an outlet for their waste and the pipes were actually visible; they were opposite St Anne Primary School. The St Anne Primary School administration also complained about KCCA. There is generally a big problem of disposal of waste water and waste. We even saw some houses which have no latrines so it seems these people use buveera and throw them in a nearby swamp.KCCA needs to do more in terms of moving around to ensure that people actually dispose of waste in a proper manner. Otherwise, if there is no regular inspection, the situation could get out of hand. The schools were also complaining of the huge flats which they said have issues.My appeal is to KCCA and the Ministry of Education and Sports because we found them on the ground and they acknowledged that there is a problem. I also appeal to the teams – we found students sleeping in very squeezed dormitories. That is also another problem. Although it was not my original problem, I had to veer into -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, let us conclude. MS OPENDI:  Yes, Mr Speaker. I thank you for your leadership, and I thank the minister and the team for the inspection. I hope they can continue and ensure that those recommendations are implemented. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is not a matter I need to open up because the minister has given clear action taken. Member of Parliament for Kampala, you may conclude on it as the area Member of Parliament You have two minutes.  3.19MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been here grappling with the entire infrastructure of the city and I can see that everyone’s face is not happy. Whenever I walk into this Parliament, people ask me about potholes. I turn my face and look towards the finance minister. I can see him smiling because he knows the endemic infrastructural problem that we have facing our nation and especially the capital city. It is actually quite embarrassing, Mr Speaker, and I know we all face the same. The guests that [Ms Kabanda] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10373THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023visit this country have told you the same. It does not only start with drainage. That is one of the weak points that we have.We are now called the city of potholes. It is a shame, but it is partly due to our funding, planning, etcetera. Therefore, as the honourable Member talks about the disposal of solid and non-solid waste, it is one of the problems that have not been addressed in the master plan of the capital city for waste disposal. Kampala has one landfill for solid waste catering for over seven million dwellers in the city and that is Kiteezi. For non-solid waste, we have an open sewer. It means that there is no way we shall avoid the stench. We are one of the few capital cities that have an open sewer of drainage, from the primary channels to the subsidiary and the secondary channels, whether it is Lubigi or Nakivubo Channels. Let me end with this because the question will keep coming back. As a House, we sat and appropriated monies for infrastructure in the budget, to give the capital city an additional Shs 33 billion from the Road Fund collection, but that money was never delivered. This is because people said that was the work of Parliament, but we do not have it here. It enjoins all of us. As we are celebrating and chest-thumping, talking about hosting the Non-Aligned Movement and the G77, in what capital city are you going to bring foreign Heads of State from UAE and Qatar with potholes, poor drainage and street children? I have seen letters being delivered. It is a shame to us. We must do something as the august House. We should box ourselves into a caucus and see that we build the face of this country and make it better.I presented a proposal from my people. I even asked them, “Are you willing to pay an extra fee from the fuel levy, ring-fenced for infrastructure of Kampala and metropolitan areas?” They said, “Yes”. Our people are willing to pay an extra fee. Look at the Entebbe Express Highway. Ugandans want good things like better roads and they are willing to pay more, but no one is willing to listen to our proposals. Let us box ourselves in a room, in a bipartisan manner, and see how to improve the infrastructure of our capital city. Otherwise, it is the worst capital city in the entire East African Federation. We are all embarrassed. No matter what party we come from, we must do more to change the face of our capital city. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I think that as a House, we have worked with the Executive to do our part. We have given KCCA nearly Shs 3 trillion under the African Development Bank (ADB) loan. Recently, we passed a loan of around Shs 680 million for the Kampala Metropolitan Area in this House. There is the one of ADB which we passed in the 10th Parliament, but it has not been implemented. It was over US$ 200 million which is over Shs 3 trillion. Money has been provided.The issue is implementation. So, honourable minister, go and do a good job on implementation. The committee in charge of Kampala; the Committee on Presidential Affairs, do a good job on this. Otherwise, it will be difficult for us to keep saying that we should give money to Kampala and yet you are not absorbing what we have given you. Whether the money you get is in the form of a loan or not, we shall ask why it is not disbursed. This is because loan money; money from ADB and World Bank is assured. So, let us go and do the job. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE TEMPORARY PROHIBITION OF LIVESTOCK MOVEMENT FROM NAKASONGOLA TO NAMASALE BY FERRY AND BOATS3.24THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, at the First Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session 10374PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEof the 11th Parliament held on Tuesday, 3 October 2023, Dr Agnes Atim Apea, Woman Representative, Amolatar, raised the following concern:The banned movement of livestock by ferry from Nakasongola to Namasale is causing problems yet livestock movement by ferry from Amolatar to Nakasongola is permitted. The Ministry for Internal Affairs responds as follows:Nakasongola District has lately suffered a spell of rampant livestock theft and one of the identified quick and easy conduits for stolen livestock out of the district was the ferry and boats at night to Namasale. The main route through Kafu to the North and through Kakooge to the south was left open because it was easier to verify livestock movement along these routes. The racket of those involved comprised elements operating within Nakasongola and from across. In its wisdom, the Nakasongola District Security Committee made a decision to provisionally halt the movement of livestock by ferry out of the district, pending a meeting of the membership of the district security committees of all the neighbouring districts of Amolatar, Apac and Kaberamaido. This meeting is due on 13 October 2023; this coming week and will be held in Nakasongola. Before closure, Mr Speaker, Nakasongola was losing between 100 to 200 animals per week. After this measure was put in place, only three to five cattle are lost per week which is a vindication of the action taken. During the planned meeting, a review will be undertaken of the situation and firm measures agreed upon to stem the menace of livestock theft in a more elaborate and comprehensive way in all these districts without disrupting legitimate business. Mr Speaker, this inconvenience is temporary, but necessary. It will end as soon as the agreed measures on better regulated livestock movement in these areas are instituted after the joint meeting that I have talked about. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Agnes Apea, who raised the matter, is indisposed. Kindly help her with the microphone, but she is getting better. 3.27MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister for the response which is not very convincing. It does not augur well for the livelihood and economic activity of our people. The issue of the ferry crossing at night needs to be underscored. The ferry has a schedule and the last one leaves Nakasongola at 5.30 p.m. In addition, at the ferry, we have a whole Marine Brigade. For the district to say that they are curbing theft due to the ferry crossing is sleeping on the job. We have many security agencies in place that have better ways of managing theft other than stopping the crossing of the ferry. Mr Speaker, the Nakasongola district meeting that the minister is talking about was requested for by our district security committees more than six months ago. Last week, I attended a security meeting in Namasale where the Nakasongola district security team did not respond. I think our people would want to hear a more proactive action other than the ping-pong of meetings. People have lost their property to loans, their markets have closed and we are losing local revenue. I think we need to be mindful of the livelihood of the cattle traders, not only in Amolatar but the entire subregion. Mr Speaker, to travel by ferry to Amolatar, you have to go through Lira or through Apac which is about 50 kilometres. I think we need to be fair to our people and allow them to exercise their right of movement. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. This confuses me. Please, are you putting MINISTERIAL STATEMENT [Gen. Muhoozi]10375THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023the Speaker to order? Because I am the one speaking? No, order can only come -MR HILLARY LOKWANG:  Mr Speaker, allow me. My colleague is putting on a T-shirt or a sweater. That is not a parliamentary dress code. That is why I am putting him on order.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that looks like a blouse -(Laughter) - but I think it is African wear designed like a blouse. I see he has confirmed that it was designed like a blouse. (Laughter)Honourable minister, I thought – Colleagues, please. If the cattle stolen are taken via a ferry, it would be the easiest for you to control. Why not put security on a ferry so that one has to prove it is his cattle. It is as simple as that, instead of stopping the ferry completely. If you are telling me you closed all roads - if they were roads and gateways - Hon. Sekyanzi, the problem is that you panic so much. You come here and cause chaos and panic within yourself. Please, always settle. I know that when such a matter comes, the area MP is given a chance. Therefore, you do not need to panic. Now you can talk. (Laughter)3.31MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To support my colleague, the information that has been given to the House is not convincing. In my constituency, so far eight families have lost their animals at night. The thieves use trucks and lorries. The ferry does not move at night. Therefore, that is a lie to the country and to the august House. I request the security agencies to allow the movement of animals from Nakasongola to Amolatar and other areas because what has been presented is a lie. Thank you, Mr Speaker.3.32MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I find it very disturbing for a district council to pass a resolution stopping the movement of livestock and yet that is the mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.I think the Attorney-General and all the ministers should explain to this Parliament whether Dokolo and Lira Districts can pass a resolution that animals should not cross their districts. It is not allowed and it is only the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that can ban the movement of cattle or any other animals for health reasons –(Interjection)- like quarantine. It is in the law. Therefore, it is very difficult for me to agree with the people of Nakasongola or even the minister because I do not think this is the position of the people of Nakasongola District. It is the position of a few who think they should thrive on stealing animals from the district and they use lorries, not even the ferry. We work very well with the people of Nakasongola and cattle always moves by ferry and we buy from Lira, Dokolo and Amolatar without any problem at all. Honourable minister, I think you should get clear information. I agree with the area Member of Parliament when he said that the information you are giving is misleading the House. Mr Speaker, we should allow the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come up with a statement because that is their mandate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let us not take this far. The minister, in his statement said, they have a meeting on 13 October, which is next week.Honourable minister, I request you to invite the MPs from Nakasongola and the affected districts to attend this meeting. Put it to these people that if the ferry is not moving at night and you said you stopped it so that it does not ferry cows stolen at night, then what was the basis? You will come back and update this House. Next item.10376PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON REMAND HOMES IN UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson of the committee.3.34THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on remand homes in Uganda. The minutes and the copy of the report are here in the file. I beg to lay them for record.I will not take long. I can only highlight to the House that the importance of children to the survival and development of any society cannot be overstated. Uganda’s Supreme Law, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, places great emphasis on the protection of children. Under Article 17(1)(c), for example, it places on all citizens the duty to protect children and vulnerable persons against any form of abuse, harassment or ill-treatment. Under Article 31(4), it places on parents the duty to care for and bring up their children. Article 31(5) provides that children may not be separated from their families or the persons entitled to bring them up against the will of the families of those persons, except in accordance with the law.Mr Speaker, on page four, we have the findings and observations in summary. Our observation on the few and yet overcrowded remand homes. In page five, we have provided the numbers that are being hosted in these remand homes and how they exceed what is intended for the capacity of the remand homes.The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, should build more remand homes in all the regions of the country and expand the existing ones in light of the increased population in the country.On page eight, we have another observation on the failure to make use of the diversion which, if employed, results in fewer children ending up in remand homes, especially for pretty offences.The committee recommends that: 1. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should: (i) carry out sensitisation of all stakeholders on the laws relating to children to ensure adequate implementation and compliance;(ii) train all stakeholders in juvenile justice centres regarding the diversion of minor offences by children. (iii) the National Identification and Registration Authority should: (a) scale up efforts to ensure the registration of all Ugandans and make the registration process quicker, easier and shorter;(b) register all persons in Uganda and create a social registry accessible to all institutions charged with the administration of justice;(c) issue birth certificates with National Identification Numbers at birth so that registration is instant. (d) The Ministry of Health should strengthen Village Health Teams (VHTs) to ensure registration of all new born children, including those born outside health facilities.The Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) and juvenile justice The committee recommends that: 1. The Justice, Law, and Order Sector institutions should carry out continuous training of judicial officers and law enforcement officers on the concept of child friendly justice;SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10377THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 20232. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Local Government, and the Judiciary should put in place a mechanism to ensure that there is a close working relationship with Probation and Social Welfare Officers with judicial officers where cases involving children are concerned.On the observation of the inadequate budgets and supplies, we have a table on page 12 spilling into page 13 that shows how budgets have been flowing and the deficiencies in the last column for almost every area of the budget. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should: 1. Increase the budget for food and other supplies commensurate with the population of the respective institutions;2. Change the procurement policy and implement a system that enables the remand homes and other institutions to procure food items locally where it is cheap and not centralised procurement which makes it expensive.3. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should put in place a mechanism to implement all its programmes in all the institutions run by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development like farms for food, tractors and other agricultural inputs like seed.On the overstay of children in remand homes, page 16 shows the amount of time that children are spending in remand homes against the mandatory time that they should spend there. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate more resources to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to: 1. Construct more facilities in remand homes to reduce overcrowding;2. Procure and/or repair vehicles at the institutions to ensure the transportation of children to the courts of law; and 3. Attain adequate supply of fuel for the vehicles to ease transport to courts and resettlement for children. Dilapidated infrastructure The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate funds to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for infrastructure construction and renovation of staff quarters at all remand homes and the tooling of the security staff.Education servicesMr Speaker, the committee observes the lack of education services for these children who are remanded. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should budget for and provide education services at all remand homes and other rehabilitation institutions for youth and children in Uganda to continue with education even when they are on remand.The need to address the causes of juvenile delinquency was one of our observations. The committee recommends that:(a) the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and other institutions within the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) should carry out sensitisation about parental responsibility and increase measures to address gender-based violence, especially in regions with a high prevalence of child delinquency;(b) the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should: (i) design programmes aimed at addressing gender based violence targeting both sexes; girls and boys;10378PRIME MINISTER’S TIME(ii) popularise the parenting guidelines(c) the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that senior male teachers actively support boys in schools with life skills and protection.Staffing and staff structureOn page 22, we have provided a table on how the staffing is and the inadequacy in staffing at all the remand homes.The committee recommends that:a. the Ministry of Public Service recruits more staff to fill the staffing gaps in the remand homes; b. the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should: i. carry out regular staff training for all staff in remand homes;c. develop and implement a volunteer recruitment policy to streamline the recruitment of volunteers.Resettlement of childrenOn the resettlement of children, the committee recommends that: a) local governments should increase the budgets for social services to support Probation and Social Welfare officers to keep families in touch with their children and ensure that the Probation and Social Welfare officers continuously engage with parents, guardians and caregivers on matters pertaining to resettlement of their children.In conclusion, Mr Speaker, access to justice is an important right for all citizens, not the least children. As a member of the United Nations, Uganda has an obligation to adhere to the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). SGD 16 calls upon all countries to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.There is an urgent need to ensure that the requisite resources are provided to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to ensure that programmes relating to access to justice for children are implemented. Given that Uganda’s population is overwhelmingly young, the failure to invest in the children could be detrimental to the country’s future. The committee notes that in order to have sustainable development, it is important to ensure protection of the most vulnerable in society, especially the children. It is crucial to improve the conditions of the remand homes, ensure that their number is increased to reflect increase in population and ensure that the requisite funding is provided. There is need to strengthen the funding for social services, especially at local governments, to ensure that probation and social welfare officers are facilitated to play their roles. The importance of the Justice, Law and Order Sector institutions is one area that requires urgent attention, if some of the bottlenecks identified by the committee are to be addressed. Because in the opinion of the committee, without addressing them, the law does not mean much. I beg to move. I wish the teachers a happy Teachers’ Day and I wish you, honourable members, a blessed 61st Independence Day commemoration. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Colleagues, at 4.00 p.m., we shall have Prime Minister’s Time. After that, we shall continue with Members’ time because I am invoking the provision of Rule 149, where we are supposed to give Members time to raise issues to do with the people they represent.We have not been appointing that time specifically on the Order Paper; so, now, I would like us to use Thursdays to do that for at least a minimum of one hour, on top of the Prime Minister’s Time. (Applause)  So, we shall have 15 minutes of debate on this issue [Ms Kabahenda] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10379THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023and close it because the issues raised are straightforward. Before that, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the Guild Council from the Medical Laboratory Training School in North Division, Jinja City. They are represented by Hon. David Isabirye Aga and Hon. Manjeri Kyebakutika. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you for coming. So, I will start with Hon. Midius Natukunda, Hajjat Melissa Avako, Hon. Okeyoh, Hon. Stella Atyang, Hon. Tinkasiimire, Member for Mbale, Hon. Kabasharira, Hon. Namanya and Hon. Lagen. Let us speak for two minutes each. 3.47MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for the report he has given on the Floor. When I read through, most of the concerns have been mentioned, but I did not hear the health facilities or medical services in the remand homes. As she said, most of these remand homes are overcrowded, yet there are no health centres or sick bays where these children can be taken, in case of serious issues. I would like to know what is happening – just like in prisons, they have got health centres, which is not the case in remand homes. So, what happens in case of health emergencies? Are these children taken to external facilities? Do we have health practitioners coming inside the remand homes? What exactly is happening, in regard to the health and medical services provided for these children in the remand homes?Thank you.3.48MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and the entire Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the comprehensive report. The committee made some observations and as representatives of our areas, we normally pay courtesy calls to these institutions. I, therefore, agree with the committee on the observation of overcrowded remand homes; it is so alarming. We all know that our children are precious to us and when they are in conflict with the law, the best place to protect them and for rehabilitation is a remand home. I, therefore, fully support the committee on the recommendation that Government should build more remand homes across the country. Thank you. 3.49MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM,  Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. The committee points out the position of the probation officers in the district. However, in most districts, some probation officers even lack a mere motorcycle to facilitate their movement. Many do not even have offices. And the committee clearly recommends that something should be done like an increase in funding to probation officers because these people are always at the forefront. The committee also points out inadequate food and other facilities in these remand homes. I appeal to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to critically look at the budget of these remand homes. I remember one time in this House, when the House – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, it is free sitting. MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this House, the committee clearly indicated that more money should be given to the ministry in charge of the youth that looks after these remand homes. 10380PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThe committee points out the issue of education in these remand homes; though these people may be in conflict with the law, there is a need for them to continue acquiring education and skills that will enable them to grow into useful citizens. Thank you. 3.31MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give thanks to the committee for the report, which has been quite useful.In reference to the report, I would like to comment on the issue of the remand homes. As earlier mentioned by the committee, there are remand homes with many children that need to be decongested. In their recommendation, they also made mention of expanding and building more remand homes in different places.Mr Speaker, the issue of children is very critical. Given the fact that children come from families, we need to focus on building traditional institutions, more than building remand homes. In my experience working with children, especially those who are in remand homes, some of these then come back when they are not transformed. They even come back worse than before.The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development must focus on building and strengthening the traditional structures for these children to be rehabilitated and supported effectively. This will reduce incidents of children getting into conflict with the law and then having to be taken to remand homes, yet it takes a long time for their cases to be heard by the courts. So, I urge the ministry to take this issue seriously.My experience also shows that most of these children taken to the remand homes do not have access to education.  Some of the children who were taken to the remand home take spend a long time there and Government does not have the provision – (Member timed out.)3.53MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for that good report.Regarding overcrowding, Government plans to have remand homes at subregional level to have these juveniles placed in the right place of detention centres, without the question of distance arising. In the plan by Government, to have these remand homes at subregional level, Moroto District was one of the districts that benefitted from that. It was given a remand home which started in 2020 and was supposed to be completed in 2022. However, up to date, the remand home has not been completed and it is stalled. I wonder when this remand home will be completed. On the lack of food, the inadequacy of food in remand homes is an issue that has to be taken seriously. Earlier this year, over 300 juveniles, who included Karamojong, were starved in Gulu Remand Home. They were actually released at an acute malnutrition stage, where many of them were skinny; some were not even able to walk and some ended up being hospitalised. Mr Speaker, the issue of food is key because it is a right to people to be provided with food. These remand homes must be centres to shape character in these children and youth, but not centres of mistreatment. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Tinkasiimire and, then, the Member for Rubabo. Bungokho, I will be coming back. 3.55MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good job they have done. They raised a number of issues, one of which was that they referred to regions with high delinquency cases. I would be interested [Mr Okeyoh] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10381THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023in knowing what measures the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which supervises this sector, is putting in place to sensitise the communities where such cases are high to ensure that they are reduced. Mr Speaker, they raised another critical point, particularly in the area of rehabilitation of children. Rehabilitation, resettlement and education of those at the remand homes is very critical if we are to have a chance of seeing this generation not being wasted away when they are in remand homes. The last point is that they said the remand homes are few, which is true. However, as they recommend that we build more remand homes, what are the measures put in place to transfer children in conflict with the law from areas that do not have remand homes? For instance, in Kagadi, I visited Mambugu Prison and in my interview with those who were in the prison, I found there were four children. I raised this matter with the prison –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Member from Rubabo and, then, Hon. Lee. 3.58MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for the pertinent issues that have been elaborated here. Article 34(2) of the Constitution clearly states that children should not be deprived of their education. According to the report, children in remand homes are less facilitated in regard to education. Article 34(3) talks about health facilities and treatment. I think the Ministry of Education and Sports and other ministries should come together, now that we are coming to begin the budgeting process, to see how they can extend education to children in the remand homes. It should not only be education, but meaningful education that is geared towards bringing development immediately when these children leave remand homes. Therefore, when children are there and they are not attended to education-wise and they get back to the society when they have not acquired relevant education and they are lagging behind, it takes us to square one. It is very important that the ministry takes this into consideration so that our children, who are in remand homes, are given relevant education that will help them, especially when they get out. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Lee? 3.59MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am surprised by some of the recommendations of the committee. As a remedy to congestion, they are proposing that we build more remand homes, but the committee has not even stopped to ask themselves what drives children to conflict with the law. I would have expected that we deal with the problem at source, but there seems not to be any investment by the gender ministry to transform children. I have been told that children are born with plain minds, but they learn all these criminal acts among us – the society. Right now, if you move on the streets of Kampala, you will see a lot of street kids and these are people who end up being criminals. So, what are we doing to transform such children other than investing in remand homes? The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should pick interest in how we can transform children without necessarily investing in them when they are in remand homes. Secondly, I am told that some of these children, when they are in remand homes, cannot even get access to justice. As rightly observed, some are mistreated, some cannot be brought to court while other children’s cases are not heard. 10382PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETherefore, it will be critical that the gender ministry liaises with the court authorities and the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to ensure that children who are not necessarily supposed to be in prison are taken care of in remand homes. Mr Speaker, children are now engaging in drug abuse. Recently we passed the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, Rule 41(1) provides that “There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’ s Time, commencing at 4.00 p.m. every Thursday.” With that, my hands are tied. However, since it is the Government’s time – Leader of the Opposition, when you are responding to the Prime Minister, you can touch on this because at least you have that gap. Prime Minister, let me borrow three minutes for your minister to give responses and we conclude this matter and, then, we go to the Prime Minister’s Time. 4.02THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and also thank Members for the comments. I would like to state that, number one, under the Children Act, the police are mandated to dispose of cases related to children under 12 years of age, who have committed crimes. Therefore, the police, at their discretion, can use alternative mechanisms in which case they bring the parents and find a mechanism of disposing of cases involving those under the age of 12 and rehabilitating them. For those above 12 years of age, we have, of course, seven remand homes and one rehabilitation centre in Kampiringisa and the issues raised by the committee require financing. At the ministry, we are allocated Shs 600 million every year for the nine remand homes, to handle issues of food, health and transporting them to court. So, it is not sufficient and we thank the committee for the recommendation. We shall continue to engage in education and health. All those under rehabilitation are meant to have education and health care. Therefore, we shall closely work with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health to see how we can operationalise this. I would like to conclude by saying that we shall look at the committee’s recommendations and see how to handle them. In the context of expansion and new remand homes, I would request that we, really, do not go this route because, on average, we have about 1,200 children who are in a rehabilitation centre. In most of the remand homes, at any point, you will find less than 200. Therefore, the best mechanism is to reintegrate the children back to homes rather than expanding the number of remand homes. That is what we are looking at. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on remand homes in Uganda be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Clerk, extract the resolutions and pass them to the relevant MDAs for action. We shall need an action taken report in three months as per Rule 220 of the Rules Procedure. Clerk, now I think we can go to the Prime Minister first so she can fulfil her obligation under item six and then we go to the Prime Minister’s Time.[Mr Oguzu] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10383THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 10TH TO 12TH OCTOBER, 2023, PURSUANT TO RULE 28 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE4.05THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure that requires me, as the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in this House regarding business of the succeeding week. Therefore, I submit the following Government business for the succeeding week; 10th -12th October 2023. Firstly, the Ministry of Water and Environment will present an action taken report on the resolution of Parliament to address climate change in Uganda. Secondly, the Ministry of Public Service will present an action taken report on the harmonisation and enhancement of remuneration for public officers. Thirdly, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance will present an action taken report on the petition for the unsatisfactory and unfair service delivery by various telecommunication service providers in Uganda.  Fourthly, we shall get a statement from the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs on Uganda People’s Defence Forces forming a security company. Fifthly, a statement will come from the Minister of Health to update the country on the status of COVID-19. I beg to submit. (Applause)Mr Speaker, allow me to go to item – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let the Clerk call the item and then you present.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.08THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, allow me to respond to the following questions raised by Members of Parliament:Hon. Ayoo Jennifer Nalukwago, Woman Representative, Kalaki District raised a matter on the poor state of the Abalang-Idamaka-Surambaya road that cut off Ogwolo and Anyara subcounties despite an allocation of Shs 360 million for its rehabilitation.Her prayer is: “Can Government provide an update on the status of this road and update the House on roads earmarked for upgrade under National Development Plan III (NDP)?”  ResponseIt is true Government provided funds – Shs 360 million through the Teso affairs ministry to Kalaki District to rehabilitate the road mentioned above. However, it was reported that substandard work was done and the road was damaged after rain. The State House Anti-Corruption Unit investigated the matter and the district engineer and CAO were interdicted and investigations are still ongoing.Government has allocated Shs 599 million in this financial year under the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister (Teso Affairs) for different infrastructural development projects including road rehabilitation in that district. In addition, Shs 1 billion was allocated to each district for road maintenance this financial year. So far, the finance ministry has already sent Shs 250 million per district in the last quarter. His Excellency the President directed that the finance ministry maintains the already existing budgets for road maintenance across the country. Hon. Nantongo Fortunate, Woman Representative, Kyotera District raised a 10384PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEmatter on the national special disability grant payment, which is pending, as well as the coverage gaps in the 17 local governments and several subcounties in the country that have not benefitted from the national disability special grant. Her prayers are: (i) Can Government provide an update? (ii) What policies are in place to ensure that buildings are disability-friendly? Response The performance of the national special grant for persons with disabilities is as follows: In the Financial Year 2019/2020, Government introduced the national special grant for persons with disabilities as an incubator to capacitate PWDs in basic survival mechanisms and to bridge the capacity gaps towards access by people with disabilities to other wealth creation programmes. This grant targets people with disabilities in groups of five to 15 members. Each group is supposed to identify a profitable enterprise that can be implemented within their localities. A maximum of Shs 5 million is distributed directly to the group bank accounts. The programme started with a budget of Shs 2.1 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020. This was enhanced to Shs 5 billion in the Financial Year 2020/2021, then to Shs 9.6 billion in the Financial Year 2021/2022 and currently, it is at Shs 16.6 billion.From Financial Year 2019/2020, Shs 13.74 billion was disbursed to groups in local governments across the country directly funding 22,606 enterprises. This Financial Year, 2023/2024, the programme will disperse Shs 13,279,901,564 to benefit 2,653 PWD groups, targeting 15,918 households. This grant is a key intervention for persons with disabilities in addition to other wealth creation programmes like the Parish Development Model where people with disabilities are entitled to 10 per cent per parish. The programme empowers PWDs with enterprise development skills to manage enterprises, instils self-esteem and enables them to interact with the local authorities and get information about Government programmes.The greater involvement of persons with disabilities in mobilisation, sensitisation, prioritisation and planning for their needs; implementation, monitoring and evaluation of programme activities has created a sense of ownership, empowerment, and confidence to take charge of their destiny. Mr Speaker, every local government has now benefitted from this grant after the concerted mobilisation efforts put in place by the President, the ministry and other stakeholders who include Members of Parliament, national and district councils for persons with disabilities and persons with disabilities themselves.The specific outcome of the grant is to contribute to and improve the livelihoods of persons with disabilities through increased provision of income support. There are rules, policies and regulations in place on accessibility. What is required now is our concerted effort in ensuring enforcement and Government is planning to increase adequate resource allocation towards the national special grant for persons with disabilities for increased national coverage. The policies include the following:(a) Section 28(2)(j) of the Buildings Control Act, 2013. (b) Section 22(2)(d) of the Buildings Control Regulations, 2020. (c) The Building Control (Accessibility Standards for Persons with Disabilities, Code, No.52 of 2019).(d) The Occupational Safety and Health Act, No.9, 2006. [Ms Nabbanja]10385THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023(e) Section l0(l) and (2)(b), (c) and (d) of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020. (f) Sections 3, 4, & 5 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020. (g) The Building Operations and Works of Engineering Construction (BOWEC). Question No.3, came from Hon. Godfrey Saazi, the Member of Parliament for Gomba East in Gomba District. He says that: “The Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa-Maria route became an alternative route after the collapse of the Katonga Bridge on Masaka Road. This road contains a lot of sharp corners without signs for speed limits, hump warnings, and other risky features coupled with the absence of direction guides. Consequently, road accidents have become the order of the day, and many accidents have been witnessed between Mpigi and Kinoni. This was brought to the attention of the Executive Director of the National Roads Authority (UNRA), and nothing much has been done about it.” His prayers:(a) That the Ministry of Works and Transport through UNRA installs road signs for speed limits, hump warnings and direction guides as a way of preventing these accidents from happening since most drivers are not familiar with this road.(b) More traffic officers will be deployed by the Uganda Police as we wait for the restoration of activities of Katonga Bridge to be concluded. My response is that the Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria route is a tarmac road which was constructed by the Government of Uganda during the Second National Development Plan (NDPII). The road was constructed to provide reliable all-weather access to the agricultural productive areas. The traffic expected on the road was mainly passenger cars and some agricultural heavy goods vehicles carrying produce from the farms to the markets.Mr Speaker, you will recall that in May 2023, the main Kampala-Masaka Road was cut off  by flooding at the Katonga Bridge crossing. The Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria route was chosen as the most appropriate diversion for the traffic going from Kampala to Masaka and other destinations. This increased traffic levels on the road above what had been envisioned during the design of the road. The traffic from the main road, that is Kampala-Masaka Road, also includes heavy goods vehicles meant for international trunk roads.When the Government of Uganda restored the existing Katonga Bridge, a decision was made that the heavy trucks would continue using the diversion through Kanoni until a permanent bridge will be constructed. The increase in the number of vehicles has resulted in more accidents on the same Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria route. Through me, His Excellency the President guided the Ministry of Works and Transport and a team from UNRA to visit the road and undertake a technical assessment of what can be done to reduce the rate of accidents on that route. The team found out that, there was indeed an increase in accidents due to;1. The lack of signs along the road and faded road markings made it unsafe for new drivers along the route. 2. The change in the type of traffic using the road to include;3. International heavy goods vehicles which experience difficulty in some of the corners and the hills along the road. 4. The over-speeding by motorists along the road. The Government of Uganda has already come up with short-term solutions to address the challenges that are being faced along this route as below:10386PRIME MINISTER’S TIME1. Continuous sensitisation and enforcement of the relevant rules and regulations by relevant Government agencies.2. Replacing missing road furniture, such as road signs, and reflectors, and the use of appropriate alternative materials to minimise vandalism and safety. 3. Towing of abandoned vehicles off the road. In the medium-term, funds have been earmarked for road safety improvement works which include;1. Reintroduction of mandatory vehicle inspection under Uganda Police. 2. Road marking to ensure that the curves, lanes, and junctions are visible to drivers both during the day and at night after the completion of the Gulu Highway. And this will be done next month. 3. Installing humps and rumble strips to slow down the traffic along the road, especially in trading centres and areas that have been identified as black spots.4. Adequately equipping the relevant enforcement agencies with tools to aid effective enforcement of the law.5. Strengthening road monitoring and surveillance for timely detection and removal of abandoned vehicles from carriageways. As a long-term solution, Government has embarked on the process of constructing a new metallic bridge at Katonga so that the traffic can go back to using the main Kampala-Masaka Road, which was designed as an international trunk route. Construction works are ongoing and passenger buses have since been cleared to use the Katonga Bridge. Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the Government of Uganda, under the able leadership of His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is committed to ensuring the safety of Ugandans and all efforts are being made to improve the road safety along the Mpigi–Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria route. The next question came from Hon. Kaaya Christine, Woman Member of Parliament, Kiboga District, on the irregular boundary opening and demarcation of forest reserves in Kiboga District.Her prayers are:1. What are the criteria followed by the National Forestry Authority (NFA) in demarcating central forest reserves?2. Why is the boundary opening exercise encroaching on private mailo and freehold land?3.  Can NFA avail the recent survey report such that we can compare it with the affected land titles, with a view of establishing a true ownership?My response is: The criteria followed by the National Forestry Authority in demarcating central forest reserves is as follows:(i) Stakeholders meeting The stakeholders involved are: the Resident District Commissioners, the District Police Commanders, the District Internal Security Officers, the District Local Council V , the District Staff Surveyors, the District Natural Resource Officers, the District Environment Officers and the forest adjacent communities.(ii) Reconnaissance survey(iii) This is a familiarisation tour of the central forest reserve boundary done jointly with the forest-neighbouring communities with the view to:a. Identify all the available survey marks or control extension basing on known national points in the area to guide the boundary opening;b. Identify all the available corner marks [Ms Nabbanja]10387THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023of the forest reserve to use in the geo-referencing of the boundary plan;c. Identify any security issues or hot spots; andd. Identify necessary work force by the surveyors.(iv) Setting out the coordinatesThis is where the surveyor transfers to the ground all the information on paper or map (boundary plan) by locating the corner points using coordinates.(v) Pillar InstallationPhysical digging of the holes and planting pillars (concrete mark-stones of about one metre high) on the identified coordinates to mark the forest boundary.The exercise of the Central Forest Reserve boundary opening does not encroach on private mailo and freehold land; instead it identifies the correct boundary and the related private land used by communities adjacent to the forest that might have encroached into the forest.I have put a table below that indicates the issues raised on the cited private mailo and the findings on the ground by NFA. I know Members have this information on the intranet and can access it on their iPads; the issues raised on the cited private mailo are in the first column, then findings on the ground by the district staff surveyor and NFA surveyors after the boundary opening.Let me talk about the following:  1. Block 621, Plot 3 of Isaka-Miyingo land at Kamirampango, Kiryankonzi-Kalusungwa; trees planted by New Forest Company licensed by NFA had encroached on private mailo. The solution is for the new forest company to harvest the trees and have the boundary issues resolved.2. Block 621 Plot 1864 of Mugwanya land at Bukasa Nakayaga; land use of the private mailo land encroached into the forest reserve. In the new block, a new forest company licensed by NFA had encroached on the private land. The new forest company is to harvest the trees and have the boundary issues resolved.3. Block 661 Plot 9, land at Kabada and Kyankwanzi used by a private forest company for more than 15 years; the New Forest Company licensed by NFA had encroached on the private mailo. The New Forest Company will harvest the trees and boundary will be corrected.4. Block 626, Plot 7 of Yokana Bafiilawala and Plot 32 and 15 land at Kikwatambogo-Namunyuka and Bumakya taken during NFA private mailo titles; private mailo titles encroached into the forest reserve by a strip of over 30 hectares (74.1 acres). NFA is to engage with the district land board to have the ownership resolved.5. Block 624, Plot 24 of Kamya Beckham, Nakiganda Florence and Kapere Samuel; land use of freehold titles encroached into forest reserves. NFA will engage with district land board to have the ownership matter resolved.6. Block 624, Plots 13 and 18 of Kiviri Moses, freehold title land at Wabitosi taken during survey by NFA; freehold titles encroached into forest reserves by over 100 hectares (over 247 acres). NFA will engage with district land board to have the ownership issue resolved.The source of this information is the National Forestry Authority and the district land board.The National Forestry Authority has availed the recent survey report such that we compare it with the affected land title, with the view of establishing true ownership. This report is readily available.10388PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEGovernment, through the Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Forestry Authority embarked on systematic reopening of the boundaries of the forest reserves (Central Forest Reserves and Local Forest Reserves) to deter encroachment by the forest adjacent communities.At gazettement, the forest reserve boundaries were marked with underground and above-ground mark stones which over the years have been used by the community in construction thereby demolishing the boundaries. NFA is currently using concrete mark stones (pillars) of about one metre, as I told you earlier, to mark the forest reserve boundaries.In some instances, we continue to register illegal land titles in forest reserves by individuals and/or forest-adjacent communities who knowingly encroached on the forest reserves and do not want the boundaries to be reopened. The forest reserves are a national good; therefore, I request all leaders from the LCI up to MPs to sensitise the public on how to preserve our heritage.Question 5: Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda, Member of Parliament, Ntoroko County on the dire situation of health care services in Ntoroko District. His prayer is that Government should undertake an onsite assessment of the situation of health care services in Ntoroko District and report back to the House.Mr Speaker and colleagues, as you all know, I moved around the country. I have personally been able to go to Ntoroko a number of times. My Office has been able to construct a health centre III at Kanara.The Ministry of Health together with the political and technical leadership of Ntoroko District inspected four facilities to assess the state of health services with a particular focus on the state of the health infrastructure.The findings are as follows:Musandama Health Centre II, Karugutu Health Centre IV , Rwebisengo Health Centre IV and Rutungamo Health Centre III, which were started in the Financial Year 2019/2020 under UgIFT programme were all identified to have some gaps.Mr Speaker, in view of the above findings, Government shall consider this by providing both short-term and medium-term solutions or interventions to address some of the critical health infrastructure gaps in Ntoroko.Question No.6: Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, the District Woman Representative, Omoro District that the Ministry of Health and respective local governments should review the recruitment of local askaris  (health facility watchmen) and their deployments. According to her, the watchmen of these health facilities in most cases have remained suspected for either conniving with or being accomplices to these criminals.Her prayer is: Can Government review the recruitment of local askaris  in health facilities?Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to inform this august House that Government is equally concerned about the issues raised by the Hon. Lamwaka, regarding the safety of medicines and health supplies from health facilities.The Ministry of Health undertook a restructuring exercise together with the Ministry of Public Service, for the local government health facilities and there was an increase in the number of askaris  for health centres IV from three to five, and for health centres III from two to three.Mr Speaker and colleagues, you need to know that the responsibility of ensuring that these askaris  are recruited lies in the local governments and I believe that they will ensure that there are regulatory provisions for supervising these people and how to appraise them.Question No.7: Hon. Otaala, Member of Parliament, West Budama County South, Tororo. His question was: “Why is asbestos still used in some public structures – secondary [Ms Nabbanja]10389THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023schools, health facilities and local government structures yet they are said to be harmful to people’ s health?”  This is a very good question. His prayer is: “ When is Government coming up with a work plan for the safe disposal of asbestos materials?”It is true that asbestos was declared harmful and one of the leading causes of cancerous infections in the respiratory systems. Government is aware of this critical challenge. Interventions for development have been prioritised for the proper removal and disposal of asbestos roofing materials in line with NEMA requirements.Interventions for the removal and disposal of asbestos in selected schools, health facilities and government structures have been carried out by the Ministry of Works and Transport. The remaining facilities with asbestos roofing will be removed in a phased manner.My office with the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Works and Transport have had a number of meetings and agreed to do the following:1. The Ministry of Works and Transport continues to carry out assessment of facilities with asbestos roofing materials.2. The Ministry of Works and Transport will work with the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to carry out the demolition and safe disposal of the asbestos structures. 3. We are looking at the UPDF Engineering Brigade which will be trained to carry out the demolition and safe disposal.Question No. 8: Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino, Member of Parliament, Upper Madi County – “When is the Ministry of Health actualising the construction of Anyiribu Health Centre III as provided in the policy where every subcounty should have a health centre III?”  Relatedly, he asks: “Can you explain why the funds which were already allocated to the construction of the health centre were removed from the final approved budget for the FY 2022/2023?”Mr Speaker and colleagues, my response is that it is true in the First Budget Call Circular both Anyiribu and Uleppi Health Centres II had been allocated funds for construction and upgrade respectively. However, in the Final Call Circular, funds had been cut. Hence, some facilities had to be dropped off the list with the hope of being constructed in the subsequent years – 2023/2024.In the FY 2023/2024, the First Budget Call Circular through the Ministry of Health, Government allocated funds for the construction of Anyiribu Health Centre III. However, before the final budget, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development directed that all the UgIFT funds should be used to complete the ongoing facilities and no new construction or upgrading would be carried out.The other prayer from Hon. Etuka is that: “Aware that Upper Madi County has no Health Centre IV as it should be the ideal situation according to the Government policy, when are you promoting Offaka Health Centre III to Health Centre IV?” My response, is that from the year 2018 to-date, the Government’s focus has been mainly on strengthening reproductive health services – that is maternity – at subcounty level through upgrade of health centres II to health centres III. Construction of maternity blocks including equipment under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT) project. Upgrading of health centres III to health centres IV , shall be our next programme depending on the availability of funds.His third prayer is that:  “Can you assure the people of the Okollo Subcounty and Ugandans as to when we shall upgrade Akino Health Centre II to health centre III?”10390PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEGovernment policy is that every subcounty should have a health centre III and the ministry’s strategic plan is to upgrade all existing health centres II to health centres III. Under UgIFT, we have already upgraded 340 health centres II at the subcounty levels to health centres III. In Madi-Okollo District, Ulepi Health Centre II is being upgraded to Health Centre III under the same programme. However, the UgIFT project could not upgrade all the facilities and over 100 subcounties still remain without health centres III. Government or the Ministry of Health will progressively upgrade these remaining facilities and also construct health centres III in the new subcounties. Lastly, Hon. Florence Natumanya, Woman Representative, Kikuube says that: “Most schools have introduced a practice of setting up restaurants within school premises. This has created classes among students, with children of the rich eating in the restaurants and those of the poor eating from the dining halls. Parents are under pressure from their children for lots of money to support their special diet in the school restaurants.”The prayer is: “Can you inform this House why schools abandoned the tradition of all students having a uniform diet provided by the school administration?”My response, Mr Speaker, is that Government appreciates the concern raised by the honourable Member. The Ministry of Education and Sports follows rules set out in the basic requirements and minimum standards when regulating issues of food consumption in schools. These rules stipulate that food should be handled according to the relevant laws, safety and security guidelines, to protect learners.The practice of opening restaurants in schools is not common, and the ministry will endeavour to investigate this matter and ensure that it does not disrupt the learning environment in our schools. We call upon all honourable Members to share more details to aid our prompt handling of this matter. I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Procedure, Hon. Naome Kabasharira? MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for ably answering all the questions raised by Members.However, in the first question, when she was answering Hon. Ayoo from Kalaki, she mentioned that two hundred and – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Kabasharira, Rule 41 does not allow a review of the Prime Minister’s answer in any way; whether under procedure or what. It is only the Leader of the Opposition who has a right to reply. So, it should be a matter outside.MS KABASHARIRA: My procedure is that Ntungamo District has got five counties with 2,000 kilometres of roads and we have districts which have 60 kilometres of roads, but we passed that each district gets Shs 1 billion. Are we proceeding right for Ntungamo District to get Shs 1 billion with five counties, which is equivalent to your district, Mitooma? Thank you. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker must give a ruling on a procedural matter. We are proceeding well because we are the ones who passed that money and not anyone else. However, it was a huge improvement from what we had. A good example is that my district, Mitooma, which was getting Shs 320 million; if you add us Shs 1 billion, then we are getting good money.The concern of the honourable colleague is valid because of how we do service delivery. Giving service delivery basing on administrative units is what has led to clamour for creation of more administrative units. [Ms Nabbanja]10391THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023When you look at a district like Ntungamo, it is four times the size of Mitooma. If such a district has Shs 1 billion – and I know districts which have one constituency also getting the same money; it is something Government needs to look into. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you are looking into that.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, that issue came to Cabinet’s attention on Monday and the President guided that Shs 1 billion was for maintenance of roads and that the already existing budgets should remain. The Shs 1 billion was a relief by Government to help all the districts across the country. For example, Wakiso District which is big has a budget of over Shs 1.2 billion. The next district, which is Kiboga has a budget of Shs 460 million. Kakumiro District has a budget of Shs 396 million and Mitooma District might be having even less. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, it has Shs 320 million.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I think the President guided wisely.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable colleagues, it is Prime Minister’s Time; follow Rule 41 and that is not how they handle issues under this rule. It is a very strict rule, which gives details of how we handle questions.I just gave an exception, but I do not want to deviate from that next time. Questions for oral answers. Hon. Maximus Ochai? I have colleagues who first came in early; so, give me a chance to read them out and then, we sort out ourselves quickly: 1. Hon. Maximus Ochai.2. Hon. Nakimuli Hellen.3. Hon. Juliet Bashiisha.4. Hon. Abeja Suzan.5. Hon. Sylvia Bahireira.6. Hon. Lagen David.7. Hon. Ebwalu.8. Hon. Oguzu Lee and 9. Hon. Josephat Tumwesigye.10. Honourable colleagues, we have up to 6.00 p.m.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Rule 41 provides that we do for one hour, but we have Rule 179(7) which requires the presiding officer to appoint a time when Members can raise issues of their constituencies. So, we shall continue beyond that one hour, so that we invoke Rule 179(7) for members to bring out their issues. Spot on, no narrations, going so much-4.55MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two months or so ago, you requested the Prime Minister to take up the matter of non-responsiveness of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) on the upgrade of the Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe road (44 kilometres), for which money for a feasibility study as a trigger was provided for in last year’s budget.Unfortunately, despite the fact that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued a warrant of expenditure amounting to Shs 16.46 billion for feasibility studies, including for this particular road.Instead, UNRA opted to do other roads and ignored this particular road of Tororo. This road has now become a death trap. It was opened during the colonial time and the traffic has actually built up. Madam Prime Minister, what can you tell the people of Tororo about the feasibility study for which money was provided and money instead was left unspent and yet accidents are continuing unabated? Thank you.4.56THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, if a Member wants an accurate answer for a question, it is better to write. For a question like this, I have to involve the ministry concerned and yet on 10392PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEmy bench now, I do not have anybody from the ministry. The Minister of Works is not here; so, I request that the Member contacts me so that we get an accurate answer. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, there are questions indeed, like the Prime Minister said, which you know that she needs to go back and consult the technical people. Those questions should be written like you have heard these ones, but there are questions that are clear and you get the answer right away. 4.58MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Why is there discrimination when it comes to the arrests of illegal fishermen? A number of officers in this House own boats, “big fish”- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  In this House?MS NAKIMULI: Yes. Fishermen on the front bench.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you mention names, honourable member?MS NAKIMULI: Mr Speaker, it is not wrong for anybody to own boats or any business, if they do it legally; it is okay, but illegal fishing is illegal and bad. We have a one Kaweesa who manages boats in Kamungu and Kamaliba in Kalungu district and these boats inconvenience people on Lake Victoria, especially the fishermen that I represent. This gentleman is a close ally to Hon. Bamulangaki Ssempijja, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. The boats were labelled “ Wacha Waseme”  and they were yellow in colour. When I and the Leader of Opposition and the other MPs were moving around, we discovered- after talking about it that they were now changed to colour blue and when we went back, they were now changed to black. These boats are managed by a one Kaweesa who usually dons a military fatigue- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Conclude.MS NAKIMULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This gentleman scares people off. Actually, one time, one of the boats was apprehended by the UPDF on the lake. A call came in and the person who was on the other side of the phone call said, “You release them and actually escort them to do the illegal fishing”. These men on the lake cannot apprehend this person because they say he is their boss. Please, can I get a response to that because my fishermen are not doing any fishing because the ‘big fish’ is left to do the fishing while the poor are the ones who are arrested? Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the President has given me the six policy proposals or policy guidelines. One of them is the intervention in the fisheries subsector. The fisheries subsector especially our fishermen and women, are yet to benefit directly from Government. The illegal fishing gear is removed from them, yet Government has not given them an alternative. The Ministry of Agriculture – where we have the minister in charge here – has come up with – how can I term this? - with ways on how to help the fishermen. On the issue of Hon. Bamulangaki Ssempijja, you are aware that he needs to be heard and so I request that you allow me, through the Clerk to Parliament to give him this, so that he can personally come here with a statement. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. However, Madam Prime Minister, it would be good if these allegations are investigated not for a statement to come, then we again go ahead – I think a statement can be given to your office when you are investigating this matter-because he can say, “I do not know that gentleman,” and we end there. [Ms Nabbanja]10393THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Now, it is 5.00 p.m. and so, we have gone out of the Prime Minister’s Time. For this time, you can even ask the minister directly, but the Prime Minister is here as the Leader of Government Business to coordinate the whole exercise. Honourable colleagues, I requested that I finish the list I read. 5.03MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to our dear Prime Minister is: Uganda is looking toward to sciences, but we have our schools in Otuke District, and one of the best schools called Okwang Senior Secondary School. This is a school which has no laboratory and library. Although we have books, they are packed in the classrooms. We lack very many things. How can we help our students who are also yearning to earn these good salaries that are being paid to scientists? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, can I request the Minister of Education and Sports to come and give an accurate answer?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sure. Now, honourable colleagues, in this period, if you see a minister here, you do not need to disturb the Prime Minister. You can ask the minister directly. If the Prime Minister wants to come in, she can come in because for her, she comes in at any time. That is so that we do not waste time.5.04THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the Member for the concern raised. As a minister for education and sports, I will take up the matter and follow it up to see how we can begin to look at the plans for the next financial year. As you are aware, the current budget that we have is constrained, to begin to look at additional support to some of these specific schools. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Bashiisha?5.05MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a concern about an officer in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, who took 13 land titles from my people in Ruhinda Constituency. Seven years down the road, they are still claiming for their land titles, but in vain. I have tried to engage all gears; I have talked to the minister. I even engaged the area MP, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire who even called, but they are not helping. I also engaged the former minister, seated next to you – and he knows the person; he is by the name of Saul Kato. He even blocked me because I have been calling him; he has now even changed the number. I request that you come in and help my people to get back their land titles, which were taken when they were getting compensated for Kashenyi-Mitooma Road.Thank you, Mr Speaker. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, Kato will be handled according to the law – the Majegere style . (Laughter)  I am telling you. So, let me get in touch with the Member and we handle Kato, head-on.  (Laughter)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Oguzu Lee?5.06MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 3 April 2018, this House approved a bilateral agreement between the Government 10394PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEof Uganda and the Government of South Sudan, to allow Uganda to compensate traders who had lost goods in South Sudan. It has now emerged that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is moving to pay only three companies out of a list of 23, which a select committee had verified and were due for payment. What is even emerging is that Government wants to pay more than what the committee looked into. I have come before this House as a custodian of people’s interest, to ask the Minister of Finance to explain what criteria they used to fast-track the three companies which have been selected, out of the 23.Secondly, how did they arrive at a company which was not even on the list of companies that the select committee verified? That company is called Runway Petroleum and they are demanding more than $147 million. Actually, now, the total which has to be paid to these companies is about $190 million, yet what the committee verified was about $124 million. I need to know how the figures changed.Lastly, Mr Speaker, we have Ugandans who are losing property and they were among those 23 companies, which we verified – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR OGUZU:  Mr Speaker, in March 2023, a company called Aponye sold a city mall here because they could not meet their obligations to financial institutions. On 11 September 2023, a property in Nakasero here, belonging to a debtor called Ropani, which is on the list of companies due for compensation, was advertised and it is going to be sold. We have KKT, a company with the origin in West Nile, which property is also due for sale. I would like the minister to tell us how they intend to rescue those Ugandans who picked grains from ordinary people in Toro, Bunyoro and West Nile and have remained helpless.Please, I request the minister to also lay on Table a recent sovereign guarantee executed by the Government of South Sudan to the effect that only three companies should be paid, yet there were 23 that were duly licensed. Mr Speaker, we have members of the committee who handled this matter and they are in this House. I have Hon. Roland, who has information about this matter. I request that you allow them to substantiate such that the minister can comprehensively respond to this matter. Otherwise, I fear that Ugandans are going to be fleeced by a group of people who are bent on exploiting this country and we cannot allow it and it should not happen on our watch. I expect the minister to respond to these concerns. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, Hon. Ruhunda?MR RUHUNDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, it pains to see that Parliament pronounced itself on the fate of traders – given the fact that we set up a select committee to see that the 23 companies which were fully verified must be compensated – but to date, we are still moving in circles and not addressing the plight of these Ugandans.Mr Speaker, when you look at how Kenya treats the traders, especially those who go to trade out and bring wealth to Kenya and you look at Uganda, it is really a big shame to see that our people are left to struggle on their own, yet they are the biggest employers, are taxpayers and have gone to earn revenue for the country. So, would it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for us to just handle this matter by way of an answer from the Minister of Finance, yet there are deeper contradictions that we can now see, out of Hon. Lee’s submission? I think we need to go deeper and investigate this matter to its conclusion, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, we had a select [Mr Oguzu]10395THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023committee and it brought a report here, which we discussed and adopted. If you remember, a few months ago, the Speaker assigned me, as her deputy, to follow up on this matter. I reached out to the Minister of Finance. The minister and I travelled to Juba. Her counterpart, the Minister of Finance in South Sudan and our ambassador held a meeting. In that meeting, we agreed that all the 23 companies should be fully verified so that they issue of the sovereign guarantee covers all of them. I think this was in December. The Minister of Finance in South Sudan was new in office, but he knew about it because he was the former Central Bank Governor of South Sudan. He promised to look into it. What Hon. Oguzu Lee has talked about is an issue of justice. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are companies demanding just Shs 500,000 and this is not money for compensation. This is the clarification I want to make. This is not compensation; it is money for companies which supplied to South Sudan. According to what we agreed upon, the Government of Uganda is now lending to the Government of South Sudan. This is why, South Sudan must acknowledge your debt and say, “I know about this debt”. If it was compensation, it would be a different matter. The issue is, we first had 10 companies; the ones which opened the way. They were agreed upon by the Government of South Sudan and they were paid. However, Parliament discovered another 23 companies at that time and there was an uproar why they left out these companies. We even constituted a select committee in the Tenth Parliament, which went to South Sudan and got all the documentation. Out of the many companies, they found out that 23 had documents. The Member is asking: why you have picked only three out of the 23 companies, moreover the big companies, and left out the smaller ones? Why don’t we help the small companies so they get paid? That is what I have picked from him. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, you partly answered Hon. Oguzu Lee, but let me give you the latest information as the Leader of Government Business. Recently, the Cabinet, chaired by the President himself discussed this matter and came up with a resolution that the Government of South Sudan, under the leadership of their President together with the President of Uganda will schedule a meeting soon to have this matter discussed at that level. We realised that these other companies were not given sovereign guarantees because they only gave it to those three companies. This debt is not for the Government of Uganda; it is a debt of the Government of South Sudan. They are the ones who were supplied by companies in Uganda. So, our President has offered to meet Dr Salva Kiir, the Head of State of the Government of South Sudan. This is recent - I think a month ago. I request for time, since this matter is above me, so that the President, at a later time, can brief us on how far he has gone with his counterpart in South Sudan. Mr Speaker, I have no control over the Head of State. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oguzu Lee, you had documents which you came with and you wanted to lay them on the Table. MR OGUZU: Mr Speaker, this matter is actually a public issue. It was even published in the newspaper; the Daily Monitor of 26th this year clearly states– (Interjection)  The issue which has emerged is - I also have Parliament’s resolution which has a list of the companies –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Oguzu Lee, the question is very simple. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue is very simple and I want us to be honest, because I recently went to Juba. 10396PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThere are details which I do not want to say here. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will share them with you. Honourable colleague, leave aside the resolution of Parliament and all those issues. Members are saying – some people have come here - the “small companies”. Why isn’t South Sudan verifying the smaller companies that are requesting for Shs 500,000, but verifying those worth hundreds of millions? That is the question. The small companies do not have anyone to fight for them. This is why Parliament said, before you pay anyone else among the big ones, verify the small companies so you can have their sovereign guarantee and then upon payment, you will know how to handle the schedule. However, last time, you postponed this; we have even now postponed. When I recently went to Juba with Minister Kasaija, it was clearly put to us to help the “small people”.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on this matter, let the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development bring a statement on Tuesday to update the House – (Applause) - on the exact the agreement they signed to help the three companies. He should also update us on the verification of the small companies. In fact, I talked to the minister when he was going out and he said he will be ready on Tuesday with that statement. So, let him bring it on Tuesday instead of disturbing the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.5.20MS SYLVIA BAHIREIRA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the lower local governments in Kamwenge District. Some were established two years ago and others three years ago, but have never got funding. The political leaders and the technical staff are struggling to work. They do not have a wage bill. Some of them do not even have office space; they are renting. This affects the way they work. To confirm that these structures exist, they appear in the database of the Electoral Commission. Some of them even elected their leaders for this term.My question to the Prime Minister or the Minister of Finance is: what is the fate of these lower local governments? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is true we have over 300 new local governments. These are the town councils and new subcounties which have not yet been given the Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs) It is true the Government, through the Cabinet has discussed this matter. We have all agreed that these local governments should be funded. Now that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, I believe he has the latest information regarding money for the local governments. 5.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you. On financing for lower administrative units with respect to the ones we call “the newly created”, Mr Speaker, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, we provided Shs 29.2 billion to take care of start-up costs for all those newly created administrative units. We went further to provide for a Wage Bill for the key positions. In the constrained resource envelope, our understanding was that these new administrative units would share the resources with the mother units where they came from. In the same way, I remember when Rubanda and Rukiga Districts were created out of Kabale District; we had a Budget that time for Kabale District of Shs 54 billion. This Budget was apportioned among the three districts initially. We expect the new administrative units, on top of the start-up- because they did not have where to begin from- the Wage Bill for the town clerk and other key staff for the new - we expect them to share the existing budget as we hope for the better in the medium-term. Thank you. [The Deputy Speaker]10397THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Ebwalu –5.25MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti):  Mr Speaker, in April 2019, President Museveni came to Soroti and commissioned the Soroti Fruit Factory, with the main aim of improving the social and economic well-being of people from that region and beyond. However, last week, the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister (Teso Affairs) called the local governments and told them the President has directed that the factory be privatised and given to the former First Lady of Ethiopia, Azeb Mesfin Haile, which position we protest as a region. Mr Speaker, the reasons being advanced are that the factory is making losses. However, in February 2022, I raised a matter on the Floor of Parliament regarding the challenges facing the Soroti Fruit Factory. The Speaker, in her wisdom, at that time directed the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to investigate and report to this Parliament. Subsequently, on 2 March 2022, the committee made 21 recommendations to this Parliament, among which included;That Parliament gives money to the Soroti Fruit Factory to buy a weighbridge.The committee also recommended:1. That money be given to the fruit factory to build a warehouse for storage. 2. We need to expand the water treatment plant at the factory. 3. A fully automated packaging line be bought for the food factory. All that has never been done.Mr Speaker, among the 21 recommendations only two have been implemented; that is, to interdict the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and to set up the board. My humble view is that the Prime Minister should tell us why we have not implemented the recommendations of Parliament before we go ahead to privatize this company and give it to a foreign investor. Finally, as I conclude -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have given a question and we are done. You know I gave you more time, so you better behave. Do you have another question or an observation?MS NABBANJA:  Let me give him an answer about the fruit factory.MR EBWALU:  I would put this, then you -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is it about the fruit factory? MR EBWALU:  No.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, it is one question. I can pick you another time for another question. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, during the campaign of 2021, His Excellency, the President was overwhelmed by the demands from the people. He advised and mobilised the people of the Teso Subregion to choose the enterprise of fruits. Therefore, he is the one who initiated the setting up of the fruit factory in Soroti with a view that it would help the farmers to increase their household income. However, it is absurd that even up to now, that fruit factory is not helping our farmers and so, he came up with the idea that we look for an investor who will help us to put in place what he has come up with because Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) has naturally failed to manage that factory. We have had several meetings and the answer to this is for us - the machines these people bought cannot handle the number and tonnage of fruits produced by the factory.10398PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMr Speaker, this question requires us to come up with a comprehensive answer. Fortunately, I have the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here; I do not know whether she has a better answer than this. The reason is, we want to help our farmers. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is the principle. To me, since the factory belongs to the Government, the issue will be how you treat the 20 per cent shares owned by the farmers. Otherwise, if the investor is coming to make the factory run better, and buy the fruits of the people, this is a central government factory; it is not a local government factory. The Government has a right to treat its shares the way it wants; it is a shareholder. The concern should be how you treat the 20 per cent shares of the farmers. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you selling 100 per cent? Have you engaged the community to look at their 20 per cent?5.31THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Mr Speaker, what the honourable member has reported here is a process in thought. It is ongoing and nothing has neither been signed nor concluded. However, as Mr Speaker said, the purpose is to find someone to invest in this institution to do that. Mr Speaker, the 20 per cent shares of the farmers and the fundamental purpose of that factory to off-take fruits from the region will be maintained. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Suzan Amero –MS AMERO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister and her team. When this factory was being started in Teso, it had the aim of helping the people of Teso, but from the time this factory came in place and it started operating, it is never taking fruits from Teso. They buy fruits from outside Teso and leave the ones in Teso. The committee is aware of that; I happened to be privileged to sit on that committee when we were doing that investigation. However, the clarification I would like to seek is, are the people who are advising the President to establish these kinds of factories doing it the right way? Do they do due diligence before they establish these factories, I see many of them are mushrooming; where then are they going to end? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister –MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, it is only that the growth exceeded the investment. The purpose of the fruit factory was to help the people of Teso, but our extension farmers or extension staff did not guide our farmers on which fruits to grow –(Interjections)–  no, I am telling you. Members, I have - you do not want facts. I do not deceive. 5.33MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question may be answered by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I got complaints from my people in Tororo, but I also received, in my inbox, a complaint from some civil servants in Kaberamaido –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us have order in the House. MS OPENDI:  I believe it cuts across the shortfall in wages, salaries, and pension. A number of public servants have not been paid for the last two months; September has also ended. This particular letter that I have informs the civil servants that due to the wage shortfall, some of them may not receive their salary. So, it is very unfortunate that pensioners have to wait for months to be paid; these are retired people. The statement made occasionally on the Floor of this House is that salaries, wages, and pensions have the first call on the Consolidated Fund – [Ms Nabbanja]10399THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, just ask the question. MS OPENDI: So, my question to the Prime Minister, but directed to the finance minister is, why do we have these shortfalls on wages, since the financial year has just started? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  In this session, you can ask the minister directly. 5.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, indeed, it is true that we opened this financial year with the item of wage, gratuity, and pension amounting to Shs 334 billion. I wish to report to the House that this has been addressed and in quarter two, we have released monies to take care of the arrears, which arose from non-payment in the months of July, August, and September. They will all be paid this month. Going forward, up to the end of the year, we have an adequate budget to pay these obligations, as and when they fall. Indeed, salaries, gratuity and pension take the first call on the budget. That is why we had to run very fast. Mr Speaker, since I have this opportunity, yesterday, a matter was raised on the funding of the loan scheme. The issue was that we have students in universities whom we are unable to pay for. However, this is not true. I have established that this financial year, we have a budget under the loan scheme of Shs 27 billion, which should be able to take care of all the ongoing students. What we have not provided for are the new entrants, but those who are already on the program will have adequate fees to take them up to the end. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I am going back to my strict rule of one minute for questions. I think in that way, we were receiving very many questions. I see that we have now gone into many explanations and many Members will lose out.5.38MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is directed to the Prime Minister. On 5 September 2023, I got a letter from the LC 3 of Adilang Town Council giving details of disasters that took place there. Around two big institutions of government-aided schools’ roofs were destroyed by the hailstorm. Around 3,907 people were affected; 979 crops were completely destroyed, and I have the evidence with me here. My question is, how can the Office of the Prime Minister help these people; support and rescue them, in order for them to be able to survive? MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, we are aware that Agago District, the subcounty of Adilang, was hit by hailstorms. We had just given them support recently in form of food and the Member is aware. We shall continue to help our people. Thank you so much. 5.39MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Bugangaizi South County, Kakumiro ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an urgent matter of national importance that touches –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Go straight to the question. One minute is already gone.MR TUMWESIGYE:  Our students are about to sit for the examinations; that is senior four and senior six. To our dismay, the Uganda National Examinations Board is denying the heads of centres from picking examination materials, just because they have not cleared with other entities like SESEMAT and UNSA. My prayers are that: 1. This House restrains UNEB from acting like an enforcement agency of other entities.2. This House immediately orders UNEB to release materials for centres to prepare for the examination. 10400PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister of Education and Sports? I told you, “One minute” and you said, “yes”, as if it was too much. 5.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleague, for that very important question. First of all, I would like to put it on record that we are talking about the Uganda National Students Association fee, which is about Shs 1,000 or Shs 2,000 charged per child. Then, the other fee is for SESEMAT. We, as a ministry, try to look at how we can help these associations - when I talk about UNSA - to raise some money to facilitate them to move into the schools to support the student movement, as far as their matters are concerned. Unfortunately, some of the school operators are becoming elusive. Even when they collect this money, they do not want to remit it to the schools. Therefore, as a ministry, we agreed to this decision so that UNEB helps us to enforce and make the schools collect the money because of the students. By the way, parents pay money to these respective schools. So, now, the challenge is with the administrators of the schools, who are refusing to release this money to this respective entity. I request the honourable colleague to help himself and the school to pay this money and then UNEB releases the papers to them to do the work. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, we all know this is part of fees; we all paid it. However, many schools “eat” the money. So, for Parliament to come here and say, “release exams to schools” without clearing that money, then you will be encouraged - no, please, the Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) is a Government tool - that is an indirect way of scraping it off. Let them pay, and we ensure it is delivered. What you need to do, as the Ministry of Education and Sports, you need to write to all head teachers informing them that you have instructed UNEB so that they do not take it as a UNEB matter, but as a directive from the Ministry of Education and Sports. 5.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker I would like to inform the House that we did communicate officially and I can lay on the Table the circular which we sent to all head teachers across the country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the head teachers collect that money and remit it. Hon. Alioni. 5.43MR ALIONI ODRIA (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. My colleague Hon. Amero has been talking about the fruit factory in Soroti. The same factory for mangos has been established in West Nile in Yumbe District for mango fruit processing. This factory was ready to take off by 2021. A test run was done, but up to date, it has not yet taken off because of a group of people who claim to be part of the directors. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you answer why the factory has not taken off - Hon. Alioni, we have rules here and they apply to all. Therefore, I do not want you to look different. I request you.  MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker. I know the issue. Remember you came to my office. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister - honourable colleagues, the rules are clear. I give you your time and you determine how you use it. Whether you want to give a long story and you eat your time; it is not my problem.  Let us follow the rules. Thank you, Hon. Alioni.10401THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request that I get in touch with the Member, cause a meeting in my office between me and the leaders from Yumbe such that we handle this together with the concerned MDA. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Karubanga, Hon. Boniface Okot, and Hon. Andrew Oulanyah. I am coming colleagues; I will pick you. 5.46MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Thank you Mr Speaker. In the year 2001, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, on invitation by Her Excellency the Vice President, visited Budhwege Primary School. He laid a foundation stone and pledged to make this school a model primary school in the Busoga subregion. To date, there is nothing that has happened. Even the little structures that were on the ground were recently blown off by the hailstorms. The district wrote to the Prime Minister for some assistance or intervention. To date, there is nothing that has taken place. May I request the Minister of Education and Sports to give hope to this school and rebuild the image of the foundation stone that was –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister. 5.47THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, the policy of the Government is that we build a primary school per parish and a secondary or seed secondary school per subcounty. I have got the information, as you are all aware, this is a budget period. Hon. Muwuma, I request that you formally write to us so that we begin to look at how we incorporate that as a Presidential pledge for purposes of the Government working on that primary school. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Okot Boniface. 5.48MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Year in, year out, Ugandans lose billions of their hard-earned money to ponzi schemes. The latest of the ponzi schemes are Capital Chicken and BLQ Development Channel. Most of these schemes claim to be duly registered with the Government, and most of them operate for long at large without a crackdown. My question is; how is the Government considering to proactively identify and prevent fraudulent financial schemes and what mechanisms are in place for restitution? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Finance minister, this is under your sector. 5.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, it is good the Member said that these ponzi schemes claim to be registered. As far as we are concerned, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have not registered any ponzi scheme to operate in this country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have seen the Bank of Uganda giving out warnings. I have seen the Capital Markets Authority giving out warnings, but Attorney-General, we need more on this. The finance minister played it safe.5.49THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Mr Speaker, these schemes are elaborate criminal enterprises. They are akin to thieves and corrupt people. The Government 10402PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEhas in place laws which make this illegal, but the population must help the Government, especially as far as reporting these offences is concerned. This matter has been taken up by the Capital Markets Authority (CMA), I know, right now. It has been looking at this matter again out of what the public raised. I cannot say that apart from the fact that we need to educate our people that even when a person purports to be registered there are ways we can actually check. Capital Markets Authority and the Uganda Registration Service Bureau (URSB) are going to be sending out messages on how you can check online for a company that is duly registered and that is not, because we have the system- under URSB, we have the system now, but we only need to educate the population. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you. Hon. Andrew Oulanyah.5.50MR ANDREW OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request the learned Attorney-General to share an update on the compensation of the cattle debt claimants in Northern Uganda, especially Omoro District. I would like to appreciate the Prime Minister; she is always on the ground and gets things done. When I raised two issues in December, one of them was the issue of Moroto Road. She went on the ground and made sure that now we have a contractor who is doing the design of the road. I thank you very much, Madam Prime Minister, as I wait for the update from the learned Attorney-General. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, you did not have a question? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, he asked a question.5.52THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka)  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are on course to make the payments for cattle compensation depending on the resources that have been made available to us. In this quarter, we were given Shs 9 billion. I am picking the numbers off-cuff, but I will present a written report later. In the last cycle, Omoro and Kumi did not get any compensation because their processes had not been completed and they missed out on about Shs 1.27 billion on the first payment. In this quarter, they have been allocated Shs 1.27 billion from the last quarter, and then the remaining Shs 6.8 billion has been prorated among the people who are supposed to receive this money.We have sent to every district, the list of the beneficiaries, who have been verified to receive payments in this quarter. As soon as those lists come back and the payments are made, as is our practice, we shall lay on the Table the report for this payment. 5.53MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu East, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My matter has to do with the Katonga River Bridge, where they allowed buses and bigger trucks up to 30 tons to cross, but it beats my logic that some trucks which are of less tonnage, are not allowed to cross the bridge. I request an explanation from the Minister of Works and Transport or the Prime Minister. Why has the work stalled? They told us that they were going to complete the bridge, but no work is going on.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, we need to investigate and find out why vehicles with low tonnage are not allowed to cross the bridge and vehicles with more tonnage are allowed to cross the bridge. [Mr Kiwanuka]10403THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023As far as the construction of the new bridge is concerned, the report I received is that the work is at 30 per cent. First of all, we are going to make a steel bridge, where all vehicles will be diverted to pass through. All the materials are on the site and he is aware. The contractor is currently going to be fixing the steel material so that vehicles can be diverted to pass through that steel bridge and then, a concrete one will be constructed. I request the Member to be patient.5.55MR JULIUS TUSIIME (NRM, Rwampara East County, Rwampara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the procurement of road equipment for the newly created districts. When are you going to release the funds to procure the road units for the newly created districts?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the procurement process is ongoing. We all agree that in order to block the middlemen, we are doing direct procurement from the manufacturer and the procurement process is ongoing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, you are being impatient. Okay, just ask your question and we –5.56MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a representative of the people and I received complaints that my people’s crops are being cut down in Soroti. Even if you were to harvest your crops tomorrow, they come with a mower, slash all the trees down and even burn the sugarcane because they are in the wetland. Is it not right for us to ask them to remove their crops from the wetlands and next year, they do not cultivate on it? MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request the Member to get in touch with me, so that I know which swamp is being affected. The fact is that we want to secure our swamps, but the President directed that we allow our people to harvest their crops and then, restore the swamps. However, if something is happening contrary to the President’s directive, then you need to come to my office and we handle it.5.58DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the shortage of medicines in health facilities across the country. National Medical Stores indicates that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to honour the recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee appointed by the Prime Minister, in which it was resolved that operational funds for the distribution of medicines, shall be released within the first week of the first month of every quarter. That was not honoured in the last quarter, we are now in the second quarter and drugs have not yet been delivered. They are in the stores, but there is delayed release of the operational funds.I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; why didn’t we honour that recommendation in the last quarter and have we honoured it in this quarter, to release the operational funds within the first week of the first month of every quarter?MR MUSASIZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, I thought that we had completely settled the matter with NMS. There were resource constraints in the first quarter, but Mr Speaker, the good news I have, is that releases for quarter two have been fully taken care of, plus what was not released in the first quarter.10404PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5.59MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My people from the fishing community have been exploited by fish processors for a very long time. They buy a kilogramme of fish at US$ 3 and below and sell a kilogramme at US$ 25 at the international market. We have been mobilising our people to stop supplying these fish factories, but we have discovered that there are a number of technocrats in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have been working with these fish suppliers or fish processors. I have a copy of a circular letter here, written by the Director Fisheries Resources, directing that a kilogramme of fish should not –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, you know how we use time; please do not go into – as the chairman of the committee, ask the question. I do not want to do double standards, honourable colleagues. Committee chairperson, conclude. Ask the question straight away and leave the documents; the minister is aware of it.MR MIGADDE: My question to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is have you come up with the minimum amount of money that should be bought per kilogramme of fish like this letter portrays, which is US$ 6 instead of –?6.02THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES)  (Ms Hellen Adoa):  Mr Speaker, we have not come up with any fixed price. This letter written by my commissioner came to my knowledge three days ago. I also saw it on social media and the next day, which was on Monday, I wrote to my PS who is supervising them, to explain to me when we fixed the prices and why I was not copied. I disassociate myself from this letter and I am waiting for an explanation from my PS.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, on such issues, you should have called for a meeting because you are the minister. You do not just send letters to people when they are your neighbours in the office. Call a meeting for top management.MS ADOA: That is exactly what I am talking about. This is a policy matter, not for an individual to decide. That is why I have written to the Permanent Secretary to explain because it should have come from the Government and it is not even copied to me so, I disassociate myself.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, first order for the withdraw of that letter and then go to Cabinet as a minister in charge because if you wait until the Permanent Secretary does, the letter will still be valid.MS ADOA: Most obliged.6.03MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, my question goes to the Prime Minister. When will the compensation of the Musita-Lumino-Busia-Majanji road be completed because it is almost done, but some of the project-affected persons have never been compensated?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, that matter was brought to my notice when I was in Mayuge recently, and the answer I got was that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) had not been given enough money. Now that they have been given money this quarter, I will make sure that those people are compensated.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, when you put me on pressure to pick you, the signal is that you want to speak and go. Yes, I know many of you; the moment I pick you, you speak and disappear thereafter. I will be marking you. [Dr Opio]10405THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023The moment you speak and disappear, it will be an indirect punishment of two weeks before I allow you to speak. (Laughter)6.05MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, a few years ago, Members of Parliament from Karamoja sub-region contacted you regarding the trucks that ferry raw material from Karamoja due to the heavy loads, the roads are being affected.We also requested for weighbridges; almost two years ago we were informed that the Government had purchased them. We want to know when they will be installed because from then on, they said they were still trying to assess where to put them. The Government is losing a lot of revenues and people are being taken advantage of. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the issue he is talking about. Our road is getting dilapidated at a high rate because of the heavy trucks. We are going to deploy mobile weighbridges in the meantime. I am going to make sure that we enforce this as we wait for the fixed ones.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not been taking most of these issues; members have very many issues. so, I will beseech the Front Bench to bear with me in picking members so that we sort these issues quickly-procedure, Hon. Kabanda?MR DA VID KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday, you directed that the Minister for Foreign Affairs comes to Parliament to give us information about the people he accredited to go for the United Nations General Assembly meeting. I have been here from 2.00 p.m. and it is already 6.00 p.m. and coming to 7.00 p.m. Are we proceeding well? Should I expect the minister to come? - (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. David, we are still doing Parliamentary business and that issue is part of Parliamentary business, so please be patient; the patient ones always reap benefits. 6.08MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT) project, last year, one of our health centres in Nebbi District, that is Ossi Health Centre, was supposed to be upgraded from level II to level III by the UPDF Brigade. They had advanced the payments for building the maternity ward, amounting to Shs 189 million. But upon receiving the amount, they stopped at the foundation and disappeared from the site for a whole year. I want the relevant ministry to answer as to why the UPDF Brigade disappeared once they received the advance money to complete the project. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister – (Laughter) – you mean even the UPDF Brigade can disappear? Now who will arrest them? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, as you were aware, last year, the money for UgIFT was re-voted late in the month of May. So, this House came up with a resolution that this time round, let money to be re-voted early enough. I know that this money is going to be re-voted in the month of October so that our districts have at least nine months.UPDF did not run away. The Shs 189 million given to them was used to build that damp course foundation, when the Government gives them more money, they will go back and complete the site.6.09MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Buwekula South, which depends on one Government-aided secondary school. 10406PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWe have a number of other subcounties without secondary schools -this school is located in the centre. People in the west are 37 kilometres away and cannot access this school. Other schools were mapped in different sub-counties, but there is no progress and yet we offered free land to the ministry, to construct these schools. Through community mobilisation, we started them. We want to know if they are ready to rescue the situation.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Education Minister?6.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker. I would like to request the Member to tell me the specific school or else, I need that information-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will share it.MR OGWANG: Let him come to office with the information, so that I am able to report here, where need be. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, Hon. Byarugaba?MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Are we proceeding well, especially with regard to this question about a secondary school for every sub-county? Should I be convinced that the honourable minister does not have data regarding secondary schools and the spread out, especially in the subcounties in the whole country?I had the same question and we were talking about the same issue the other day. Mr Speaker, you may possibly have the same problem. Doesn’t the minister of Education have data about senior secondary schools and how they are spread out in our country?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the Ministry has data, but it is not uploaded in the minister’s head. He is a person and not a computer; that is why he has asked for time.And then, you also know that these ministers attend the House on different schedules, so if you ask Hon. Ogwang about any stadium in this country, he has the information. However, he is from that sector. So, he will relay the message and they will give feedback. So, the minister is honest; otherwise, I do not want us to box ministers into a corner to say “honourable member, I know that school very well” when they do not know it. (Laughter)  He is being honest.MR OGWANG:  Mr Speaker, I would also like to call upon our colleagues – we are here to serve you and to serve the country. While we appreciate that you have a role of legislation here, it is important that you come to our offices, because for some of these questions you are asking, in my considered opinion, if you came to the ministry, I would be able to call the commissioner or the PS and follow up the matter directly other than me coming here. Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu is here; he came to the ministry and I attended to his matter directly. So, I encourage Members: all of us, ministers, are there to serve this country. Get time, come to our respective offices and we will see how to address these specific problems. I thank you. 6.13MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo):  Mr Speaker, I thank you. My concern goes to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister because, in her communication, she said she met the President and the President emphasised that the Shs 1 billion is an addition to the original budgets we had as districts, under the road fund. I chair the roads committee of Kyenjojo and, to be specific, our money for this financial year was cut from Shs 537 million to around Shs 167 and the Prime Minister has told us here that, that money is still there. When the Prime Minister says something here, the whole world will hear that we still have that [Mr Museveni]10407THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023money, yet all the roads that we had budgeted for under the road fund, we cancelled them. So, we want clarification from the Prime Minister and the minister: is this Shs 1 billion in addition to the original budgets we had or the money has been cut? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And, if yes, when will the budgets be reinstated? I think that is what is very critical. 6.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me answer the question and then add something as I finish. It is true that the Shs 1 billion is over and above what the Government has been providing to districts under the road fund. However, Mr Speaker, there are two things;1. The road fund budget, in the Financial Year 2023/2024, was reduced by Shs 60 billion. The implication of this reduction is cascading to the existing budget.2. Because of budget shortfalls, we were not able to release the 25 per cent, which we normally release on a quarterly basis. On average, each district was getting Shs 10 million, which was far below the expectations of these districts. However, Mr Speaker, in quarter two – tomorrow, we are addressing a press conference. In quarter two, we released the Shs 1 billion for the quarter, which is Shs 250 million, plus the portion that already exists under the road fund. Mr Speaker, as I conclude –(Interjection)-  I normally get feedback that I have the trust of this House. When a Member says that Musasizi –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  For that one, you are the one bringing it on the record of Parliament. We do not have it on the record of Parliament. Hon Musasizi, you can only respond to what we have on the records of Parliament. Honourable colleagues, you see why I asked the question of reinstatement? I remember when we were here and the Shs 1 billion came, we, ourselves, reduced money for the road fund by around Shs 60 billion and gave it to KCCA and other entities. This means that even when Government says that this money should remain, it is not in the budget because we gave it away. This was our proposal, not even Government’s proposal. Government had left it the way it was. So, that is why I am asking for the reinstatement. If you have said that – are you using, for example, a supplementary of three per cent to reinstate the local governments to their original position? Honourable minister, if you say that, it will be in fulfilment of what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said, that the President directed that districts should maintain their budgets as they were before the Shs 1 billion. Some of that money was removed and taken to other sectors. So, the question is: are you utilising your capacity under supplementary? Are you making a proposal to reinstate us to the original position? MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, I was trying to avoid that route until I come to report because the law requires me to report some decisions and actions after four months. However, everything is in the direction in which you are guiding.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, that is why we have trust in you, honourable minister. So, those who are peddling rumours that we do not have trust in you should stop. (Laughter)Let us have Hon. Mpindi and the neighbour. Then, I will go to Hon. Karubanga, Hon. Pascal – no, Hon. Sekyanzi has already spoken.  (Members rose_) Honourable colleagues, I can give you a chance, but I would like to, first, give a chance to those who have not yet spoken. 10408PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThen, I will do Kyankwanzi – and, I am going to reward those who have been coming this week. For some of you, I have seen you just today. (Laughter)  So, if you know that for the whole of this week you only attended today, kindly, be seated because I will not pick you – I know you.6.20MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Section 10 of the Persons with Disabilities Act and the Building Control Act, 2013 provides for accessibility to public buildings and all other infrastructures. However, despite those provisions of the law, the public is continuing to construct buildings without providing for accessibility and it is becoming difficult for persons with disabilities to access public buildings. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether they are willing to implement those provisions of the law.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, in my earlier submission, that question was asked and I remember I answered it. We have the law in place and what matters is enforcement. Like I said in my submission, we shall make sure that the enforcement officers are given all the support to enforce that law. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us follow it up in the budget, honourable members, when we are budgeting.6.21MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Mr Speaker, mine is about the trailers or vehicles that are parked along the highways. On the 28th of September, a vehicle carrying our students of Kaberamaido Midland High School rammed into a stationery trailer along the Mbale-Soroti Highway. Very many students were injured. Two died on the spot, 38 were badly injured, and about two or four had multiple fractures. Mr Speaker, we are suffering high burden of medical calls from the hospitals. My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport or Uganda National Roads Authority take serious actions on such vehicles. Mr Speaker, Members have time and again raised this issue, but no action has been taken. MS NABBANJA:  In my earlier submission while answering a question raised by a Member on Kinoni-Villa Maria Road, I remember, Mr Speaker, I told you that the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda Police have put in place a system that will help us tow all abandoned or parked vehicles on our main highways to avoid accidents. As I said earlier, we need to give them the relevant support in terms of budget so that the police can do the enforcement.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Prime Minister, at the burial of the late Mr Aponye who died in such a scenario, I remember, in a speech of His Excellency the President, read by the Vice President, there were very clear guidelines, but these accidents have continued to claim people.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, advise us on any kind of support you need from Parliament. We shall give it to you to ensure this is handled. Hon. Karubanga? Honourable colleagues, on this, I am not allowing shortcuts such as points of procedure - just settle.6.24MR DA VID KARUBANGA (NRM , Kigorobya County, Hoima):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Around 2016, the Government secured a loan for the accelerated rural electrification programme through a company called TBEA. In my constituency, some subcounties have not gotten any electricity because they fall under the medium category of 11kv. Those which fall under 33kv have all got electricity. Mr Speaker, I have three subcounties - it is a long time and indeed, whenever I try to ask, they say, “The contractor had the scope” - [The Deputy Speaker]10409THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Indeed, the contract came on the ground and took site possession, but will only construct a 33kv. I am requesting the Leader of –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, do not disturb yourself with this. I announced to the House on Tuesday that next week on Tuesday, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will bring a statement. Otherwise, every day, I receive over 10 questions on this matter. Members, we agreed that she brings a statement, we discuss it and you express all your views on issues of incomplete schemes within your constituencies. Let us handle it on Tuesday and ensure you are here honourable member. Honourable colleagues, I have now changed the tactic. I will be rewarding people for attendance. (Applause)  We have Members who are always here and there are others who just come for one day and within 10 minutes, they stand up 20 times to speak yet they have not been attending. How do you think the House was conducting business for you to just come and want to be picked? Hon. Pascal Mbabazi?6.26MR PASCAL MBABAZI (NRM , Buwekula County, Mubende):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It has been two years down the road since gold mining has been taking place in my constituency, particularly in Kiruuma Subcounty. People have lost their land and property. What plans does the Government have in regard to the compensation of those who have lost their property? And which company is mining this gold? Otherwise, I am not aware of the company. Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request that I get in touch with the Member. You are aware that Kiruuma and another area in Kassanda have issues which have been on this Floor since the Ninth Parliament. I request to get in touch with Hon. Mbabazi and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The Member knows we have handled a number of issues with him so I promise that we shall handle it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Member for Kyankwanzi, Member for Kibaale, Member for Hoima, Member for Gomba, Member for Ntungamo, Hon. Okeyoh, Hon. Kazini, Hon. Kahonda, Hon. Enoch, Member for Kiruhura. Member for Buhweju, were you here yesterday? The Member for Buhweju was here. I know those who were here.6.28MS CHRISTINE BUKENYA (NRM , Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last month, on 22 September 2023, the National Forestry Authority (NFA) sprayed all people’s plantations in Kitwala Subcounty in Kyankwanzi District. The plantations consisted of maize, beans and Irish Potatoes. I wrote to the Executive Director of NFA and copied the same to the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, this is the same place where Bosco was killed and it is near the forest. We need the Government to intervene. Mr Speaker, can the Prime Minister come so we see how to solve this issue of Kitwala people who are near the forest. Thank you very much.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I take note of the Member’s issue. I promise that we will get in touch with her, go to Kyankwanzi, do the boundary opening of the forest like I said in my earlier submission and have that matter settled. 6.29MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the Electricity Project - Energy for Rural Transformation Project (ERT 3) funded by the World Bank. We are informed that the project period expired and it is -10410PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, electricity will be handled on Tuesday.MS KISEMBO NOELINE:  Much obliged, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, on Tuesday and I will give you a chance. Hon. Michael?6.30MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all the former counties in Uganda have turned into districts, except 19, which are in Ntungamo, Isingiro, Kasese and elsewhere. At the moment, we have funds because all districts were given an extra Shs 1 billion and these districts have been having difficulty maintaining their roads.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are we getting extra road units so we can be able to maintain roads in those bigger districts? Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the President guided that we give all new districts road equipment and thereafter, districts like Ntungamo, Kasese, Wakiso - the big districts will be considered next. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Member for Hoima and then Member for Gomba.6.31MR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City):    Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My request is to the Minister of Education and Sports. I have a Government aided school, in Hoima West Division called Parajwoki Primary School, which was built in 1928.Sometime back in December, there were heavy winds which almost blew off part of the roof. The engineer went and assessed and condemned only one classroom. When you look at almost all the classes on the whole structure, they are not fit for students to study in. They wrote a letter to the Permanent Secretary in January, asking for emergency funds, but up now, they have never got a response. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you are very welcoming. I will come to your office and see how you will be able to respond. Thank you. 6.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, first of all, we no longer have emergency funding in the Ministry of Education and Sports. Most of those issues normally come and we also write to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, under the disaster preparedness docket. Therefore, I would like to request that my boss, the Leader of Government Business, specifically takes up that specific problem which my colleague has. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of the colleagues have informed me that they were not in the House because they were in the committees. I had forgotten to tell you about this. Committee chairpersons and the Clerk, there should not be any committee meetings after 2 p.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. (Applause)  There should not be any committee retreat that starts earlier than Thursday evening and goes beyond Monday. If you are, for example, in a committee retreat working on a Bill and you want it to be brought to the House for support; if you are not here to support other committees’ business, who will support yours? You just want to come when you have your business. Clerk; let us write to all committee chairpersons because Plenary prevails over other business. That is why most of you who did not perform well were saying, “I do well in a committee”, but resolutions are made in the House, not in committees. You can make a resolution in a committee, but the House rejects it. 10411THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Therefore, what is on your record and the official record of Parliament is Plenary. Colleagues, ensure that you attend the Plenary. Some of those who I saw roasting ministers are people who come here one day in a month. When he accidentally comes here and there are no ministers, he creates a scene.Look at how the Front Bench is full, yet we have empty seats here. You saw how people were saying that the Government Chief Whip and Prime Minister have failed; they cannot summon ministers. I do not want to say the Chief Opposition Whip has failed – (Laughter) - but I do not see his ministers.6.35MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in Kigezi Subcounty, a secondary school, St Queens, was closed down by the landowner as the term began. As I speak, the locals are trying to find where to put over 400 students for education because the Government has failed to commit its payment to that particular landowner. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask you to urgently come in and give us a hand, so that our students can return to school. Mr Speaker, I had a burning one on PDM, but I have been told by a colleague that you forwarded it to Tuesday. Just like you have booked Hon. Noeline for Tuesday, I have booked myself in advance for PDM because I had a burning one.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. For PDM, we referred it to the committee. We said regional caucuses will do reports that will be submitted to the Committee on Local Government and compiled into one report, which we shall discuss here so that the Government can respond to a consolidated report, not region by region.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the school has been closed.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request the Member to get in touch, so that we know the cost of the land; know the owner, and the terms and conditions that are in the agreement, so that we can rescue the situation. Thank you.6.38MR GOLI OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine results from the recess. The major complaint which I got was on the mobile network connection. Out of eight subcounties that I have, six do not have good network and yet we know that UCC charges taxes on communication companies. I think it is about two per cent. The aim is to upscale and have connections in areas which are maybe hard to reach by other communication systems. I request that that be addressed. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Member needs masts. We are many.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will get in touch with UCC because it is the regulator so that MTN and Airtel can construct masts there for people to get connected to the network. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what we can also do, since it is cross-cutting, is to request the Members who have poor communication and need masts in their areas to register in your office – (Applause) - or with the Government Chief Whip so that it is laid to you and you sort it out. Colleagues, let us do it so that the list is submitted by the end of next week. (Applause)  6.39MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last year, Kabale was hit by floods and we lost everything, including the lives of people. The President, in his own words and voice, promised to give each family Shs 5 million.10412PRIME MINISTER’S TIMERecently, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development took Shs 5 million to a family that lost a member due to an accident. That resurrected all the accusations. They are now on my neck. I do not know those who received their pledge –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many were there, Hon. Ndamira? Do you know the number of the people?MS NDAMIRA: I do not know the number, but I have about 30 people who are now demanding for the same. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the floods hit Kabale, the President promised Shs 5 million for each family to help them bury the victims. Therefore, people want money and they can demand for that. (Laughter)  MS NABBANJA: Honourable members, it is true that we lost people due to floods in May this year in Kisoro, Rubanda, Rukungiri and part of Kasese. The President, in his wisdom – As you know, he is a caring President -(Applause) – provided support to the relatives of the people who lost their lives; Shs 5 million and Shs 1 million to those who were injured in the process. So, he chose a number of ministers with my guidance and we delivered that support. Mr Speaker, the number was overwhelming, as you may know. We still have a few whose identity - and the relatives were not yet identified at the time the burial ceremonies of those people were conducted. Therefore, I request the Member to help us with the nitty-gritty of those people who lost their lives and were not assisted. The President is helping and he will definitely care. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Isamat, Hajjati , Hon. Rauben, and then Hon. Okeyoh. Honourable colleagues, I beg you; you know I know each of you. If you were not here the whole of this week, do not stand up because I know you, and I see you continue to stand up. 6.43DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Increased instances of torture of animals have been registered in our country. There have been shootings of animals. Recently in Northern Uganda, a live goat was set on fire and even when they were transporting them, you can clearly see cattle tails being tied; that is cruelty. These are creatures of God, just like human beings were created by God. There is a Cruelty Act, but its implementation or enforcement is not being done well in Uganda. I wish to ask the Prime Minister, who are those people shooting at goats, cows, and transporting animals in a very inhumane way? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, there is a law, but animal cruelty is on the rise. 6.44THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norbert Mao):  Mr Speaker, laws do not enforce themselves. The law exists, but I can tell you of comparative cases. In some countries, we have organised groups known as Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. It is such societies that push Government to do the right thing. Therefore, I think the law, for the moment, looks like a dead letter, but it is possible for instructions to be given. I think the Prime Minister can report this concern to the Cabinet and an executive order, in defence of animals, may be issued. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want you to ensure justice for all living organisms is realised. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I was a Minister of Health, and I have information that once you torture an animal, it creates a substance, which [Ms Ndamira]10413THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023can poison the beef. Once you consume that, beef, it is cancerous. Therefore, I request - you know some people were laughing and saying, “Nabbanja is not able”, but I have been answering questions. (Applause)  I have answered the questions with very accurate answers for the last three hours, and I am still around. We can even cruise up to whatever time you want; I am available and able. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the House respects you and how you are doing the work. Continue doing your work. 6.47MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the time. My question is simple: out of 202 parishes in Yumbe District, the Ministry of Local Government has never gazetted the six to benefit from the government programmes like Parish Development Model (PDM). When will those six parishes ever be coded or gazetted by the Ministry of Local Governments? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She misses six parishes in Yumbe, which are not benefiting from services like PDM. I think that I have around three to four parishes - I have been raising it with the minister. I have Kaburara, Bukiriro - MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I think you are aware that we put a ban on the creation of new administrative units, until such a time when - you know the law - and I promise the Member that those parishes will be created at that appropriate time. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I discovered is that some of these parishes were approved by the districts, but the minister did not include them in the instrument. In the case of Hon. Kwizera Wa-Gahungu’s case, the Government was stopped. It does not have powers to create administrative units in the middle of a year. Therefore, those ones will come in 2025 and that is what I have also been assured for my parishes. I request that we be patient. This is a matter of the law, but also, I will ensure you meet the Minister for Local Government so that you follow up on the matter. 6.49MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes specifically to the Minister of Education and Sports. We know that salaries of all science teachers in secondary schools were enhanced, except those for the head teachers and the deputy head teachers. To be specific, I am a Chairman of the Parents and Teachers Association (PTA), Kisyoro Secondary School in Isingiro West. The headmaster and the deputy are scientists, but their salaries were not enhanced. The reason is that they are being treated as administrators. I would like to request that if they are scientists, whether it is the headmaster or the deputy headmaster, let them be in the same boat and their salaries be enhanced. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Honourable Minister of Education and Sports. 6.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Mr Speaker, first of all, that specific question was answered yesterday by my colleague, Hon. Dr Kaducu. It is true that His Excellency the President gave a directive that all those science teachers, particularly the head teachers and deputy head teachers, be taken into consideration. I am aware that the finance ministry has also been carrying out an audit on the payroll to ascertain the number of teachers; whether they are ghosts or not, and I think that audit report will soon come out. Once it is out, all those factors will be taken into consideration. However, I want to still inform the Member that that directive is out. Thank you.10414PRIME MINISTER’S TIME THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, thank you. Hon. Okeyoh. Honourable colleague, if you were not here, stop pulling the microphone. You have not been here whole week. Because I see many faces, people think I do not take note. If you want me to mention names, I will, if you keep harassing me by standing up and pulling the microphone because I know all of you. If you did not attend the sitting on Tuesday, Wednesday and you just came today, but you want to speak, kindly forgive me. 6.51MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this House passed the Fisheries and Aquaculture Act, 2022. In this law, there is a provision that looks at surveillance officers. However, up to today, the law has not been operationalised. What program do you have to operationalise this law in terms of issuing a statutory instrument so that our people are relieved of the harassment on the waters? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The minister has gone? Okay, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Speaker directed that we put regulations in place to operationalise a number of laws, and one of them is that. I promise that Cabinet is going to handle this matter, and we shall bring these statutory instruments here for ratification. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Do you have any proposed timeline, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? MS NABBANJA:  I think within a month. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Within a month. Thank you6.53MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ntungamo Health Centre IV was upgraded, in 2019 from Health Centre III. A theatre was constructed, but up to now, we have never got theatre equipment. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are we getting the equipment because people need services? MS NABBANJA:  I have taken note of her concerns. I promise that the Minister of Health will come and give an appropriate answer.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  In fact, now that you have talked about that issue, when the minister is coming, let her also come with a report on allegations of ghost health centres in Ntungamo. The story on television was so bad. This is not something we are hearing in speculation. They clearly showed that they have been releasing money to very many ghost health centres, in Ntungamo. And I think this is not only in Ntungamo. But let us look at that issue. Let the Minister of Health also look at that. 6.54MR FRANCIS KAZINI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Mine goes to the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. There is a conflict between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) officials and the community of Kabwoya Lower, specifically Nkondo Parish. The UWA officials closed the road used by the community from Kyehoro to Sebagoro LC1. They do not have access and so there is a conflict. My prayer is that the minister orders the re-opening of the road, but also, in my constituency, Mr Speaker, is a delicate one because of oil. We do not want conflicts in those areas because of those economic activities. I thank you.6.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Kazini, my good friend. I am actually surprised that while he was seated next to me did not raise the mat -ter because by now the road would be open. I think we can resolve the matter going forward.10415THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.6.55MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We agreed in this House that the Ministry of Works and Transport should contract contractors to tow vehicles that are always parked on the road. There are a lot of accidents taking place in this country. Can we get an update from the ministry on whether these contractors are already on the ground? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We just finished that matter. 6.56MS JENIFER MUHEESI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kazo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Mine goes to the Minister of Education and Sports. In Kazo District, we have so many dilapidated Government schools. The UPE programme has failed because of the lack of enough teachers in the schools. We have so many private teachers who need to be paid by the parents and once the parents fail to pay then the teachers will not teach. Then those parents who cannot afford to pay, their children get out of school. That is why you find in Kazo, I do not know elsewhere, we have so many dropouts. What plans do you have for such schools? Thank you. 6.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  First of all, honourable colleague, you are aware that we have compulsory free education for both primary and secondary, and of course, you also know that at the tertiary level, we have technical and university. I have personally been to Kazo and I would like to confirm that the state of the infrastructure of some of the schools in Kazo is really appealing. I personally discussed this with the Hon. Dan Kimosho. I also want to confirm, that the honourable Member of Parliament for that constituency has actually written, and I would like to confirm that we will follow up with some of the specific schools he has identified for funding going forward this financial year, for the purpose of supporting the infrastructure development of schools in the Kazo District. 6.58MR EPHARAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. About two years ago, a perennial disaster cropped up in my area in Buhweju. There are insects called “variegated” grasshoppers. I reported it here in Parliament, and the agriculture Ministry did a one-off  treatment of those insects and they died a bit, but never completed the exercise. However, they are now all over the place and they eat everything and anything green; tea, bananas, cassava, coffee, everything. My appeal is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, maybe working through the agriculture ministry again, investigates what brings these insects and how they survive, and exterminate them so that people do not starve. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What are they called? MR BIRAARO:  They are exterminated. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What are they called? MR BIRARO:  They are called variegated grasshoppers.  They look like locusts, but they are green and short – (Member timed out.) MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the Member, in detail, what the ministry officials did the other time so that we can start from where they ended. However, in our area, those grasshoppers are a delicacy; our people would eat those grasshoppers and finish them. But now in 10416PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEAnkole, I do not know what happens. I do not know whether these are the edible ones or not. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I know you are very good – you are an ardent admirer of our President, you may have heard our President saying that our people do not eat grasshoppers. My view would be that you send a team on the ground, asses and handle this issue. 7.00MR ENOCK NYONGORE (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I did not know that the honourable had a similar question. Anyhow, this country depends on agriculture. This financial year, there was no money for agricultural extension services. The problems that my colleague is raising would have been gotten this way. However, because we have not appropriated money, we are getting a lot of problems. I do not know whether the minister has an immediate answer so that we can save even what PDM is going to get. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do we have money for extension workers?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, like I told you earlier, the President, in May last year, wrote and gave me six policy guidelines, and one of them was on extension services. As you are aware, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Water and Environment are moving around the country, to sensitise people and find out the gaps when it comes to extension services. We have so far covered eight districts in greater Mubende and greater Luweero. Tomorrow, we are going to greater Kibaale; these are districts of Kagadi, Kibaale and Kakumiro. From there, we shall go to other areas. Mr Speaker, while the extension grant had not been provided for in our budget, the President directed that that money be included in the supplementary. So, we are going to have some money for extension services. I think it had been an oversight, but that money is going to be reinstated so that our extension workers can have fuel to move, mobilise and educate our farmers for production.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you. Hon. Kahonda? 7.03MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My constituency has four mining areas - Mutini in Nyakizinga, Mutaka in Mutara, Nyakishwojwa and then Rwaza in Rwizi Subcounty. These companies have been transporting the raw materials through Rwitanzi in Mayanga, connecting to Ntungamo, then Kabukyera and Kajuguta. However, as we speak, the bridges, especially in Rwitanzi got damaged and have cut these areas off.The Minister of Works and Transport visited the area last financial year, but to-date, nothing has been done. May I know when these bridges will be worked on in order to promote the socio-economic transformation of our people? Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to give an update to the House. I do not know whether that bridge is on a trunk or a feeder road. If it is on a feeder road, that responsibility goes to the district. If it is on a trunk road, that responsibility goes to the Central Government under UNRA. So, can we get the details so that the Minister of Works and Transport gives a report? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, such responses will clog the Order Paper. I propose that you link the Member to the minister and they engage on this matter. [Ms Nabbanja]10417THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023When your call comes in, it becomes easier for him to reach the minister. 7.04MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. The elephants in some areas in my constituency - Bwambara, Garuga and Kakoni - have continued to destroy crops and people’s lives, threatening food security. We have talked about compensation, but nothing is being done. People have moved up and down; Uganda Wildlife Authority, LC 1, among others, but no compensation has been done. I kindly request him to go on the ground and engage these people, and tell us how far the compensation is in regard to the conflict between people and wildlife has gone. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the same applies to me. You even visited the place, but when I went for the Parish Development Model, people nearly finished me together with the area Woman Member of Parliament. They said, “You brought here a minister and he said in two weeks, we would have got our money.” 7.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra)  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable Member for raising the matter. Of course, there could be challenges with the law on how someone can access these compensation funds because some verification has to be done in order to compensate the rightful person.However, we also have a challenge of funding; it is not adequate compared to the number of cases we get. For instance, in the year 2022, we had about 7,000 cases yet what is allocated is about 2 per cent of the revenue collections we get from gate entry.So, the funds are not enough, nevertheless, we are working around the clock to make sure that our committee fastens the process of verifying these people so that we can compensate them; the issue still is the resources, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I think we should have time to discuss this because people are not necessarily interested in the compensation; people are interested in ensuring that animals do not destroy their crops. That is where we should focus.7.07MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I am raising had earlier on been alluded to, but as a matter of emphasis, I would like to put it on record that Isingiro South is comprised seven subcounties, but only three are served with Universal Secondary Education aided by Government. The rest are entirely supported by the communities and myself. It is a burden on me to run a school that should be aided by the Government. I have written letters to the minister three times. One time, I even petitioned your Office because one of the headmasters knows you and he said maybe we could write to the Deputy Speaker, but nothing is forthcoming.May I, therefore, request –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable Minister of Education and Sports?7.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  I thank Hon. Alex Byarugaba, for that presentation. However, I also want to remind my honourable colleague, that we are all operating under one budget. Of course, we would love to have all subcounties in this country get seed secondary schools, but whatever resources we get from the Ministry of Finances, Planning and Economic Development, we normally try to put it on 10418PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEbudget. That is why now, we also had the ugIFT, which is busy working on the question of securing land. When we talk about securing land, we need land titles for fast tracking the construction of those schools in those respective subcounties.I plead with my honourable colleague, Hon. Alex Byarugaba, please, we will work hard to ensure that some of those subcounties within your district are supported with the seed secondary school as per the policy of the Government. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, let us hear from the member for Tororo, Hon. Phyllis Chemutai, Hon. Were, Kwania, Hon. Komakech. If you were not here for the last two days, just take your seat. Hon. Kabanda, the Member for Kyotera, the Member for Jonam and Hon. Balimwezo; he booked space yesterday. 7.12MR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to raise a long standing problem of the proposed Pongolojo Bridge, which is downstream on River Malaba. In 2009, when we were campaigning for a by-election in Samia-Bugwe County North, His Excellency the President, promised that this bridge would be constructed. At that time, what was notorious was that crocodiles kept on mauling people as they attempted to cross that river from my constituency in West Budama County South to Bukooli County North and to – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : No, we use one minute each.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, fortunately, I know that that bridge separates Busia from Tororo District. You know, being a person from the grassroots, I have gone to many areas. I request that the Member writes a proposal, we shall cause a meeting with the Ministry of Works and have that bridge constructed because it is a well-situated bridge that helps to revamp business between those two sister districts. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As former RDC for Busia District, she has all the information. Yes, Hon. Phyllis Chemutai.7.12MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the Government sponsorship programme and students’ intake. I looked through the list, which came out in August to find out how many students were from Kapchorwa, and I found out that only one student had been under Government sponsorship. And this was the first list.Then I was told that there would be a supplementary list, which would come out. I have been waiting for the list, but I have not seen it. The Minister of Education and Sports, is that list still coming out or I forget about it?   7.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Sports) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleague, as you may be aware, there are those who are admitted on merit depending on the points that they have got in terms of their excellent performance. It is those points that qualify them to join the university or any tertiary institution of higher learning on Government sponsorship. Then for the second list, which I need to be educated on; is it the one where admissions are based on district quota system? If it is the district quota system, you are also aware that the district councils have a role to play, in terms of sending the list to the respective tertiary institutions of higher learning, which the Ministry of Education in a nutshell - I almost want to say, has no role. So, I would like you to educate me; are you talking about the Government merit direct admission or what?[Mr Ogwang]10419THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable minister, you can engage with the Member here.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, this issue is of national importance. Members of Parliament are sometimes denied information by the district leaders and end up send their own children. So, I request that the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the Committee on Education and Sports help us to scrutinise and make sure the beneficiaries are children from the needy families because that is the major purpose the President came up with this policy. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I appreciate it, but that would mean that the structure of Government has failed. I know what I am talking about. Sometimes we do our oversight then you hear statements such as “You are bringing Government down. You are questioning Government.” But surely, you have Resident District Commissioners, Gombolola Internal Security Officers and everyone on the ground; you should use those structures and if your structures have failed, is when we can also do something.Otherwise, we want your side first to do something, but not the Prime Minister coming here to request the committee to do work because I know when my committee comes in, sometimes it goes beyond. But anyway, since a request has been made to the committee, I hope it takes up this matter.7.15MR GODFREY ODERO (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine goes to the Ministry of Education and Sports. In my area, I have two technical schools, that is Lumino Community Technical School and Nalwire Technical School, which happens to be one of the oldest technical schools in the country.However, to my surprise, the principal human resource officer in charge of the technical schools keeps on transferring tutors from those two technical schools without replacement. I would like to know; does he have any hidden agenda?  I am asking this because there is a project, sponsored by the Islamic Bank, which is soon coming to Nalwire Technical School. I would like to understand from the Minister, why the human resource officer is transferring tutors from those institutes without a replacement.MR PETER OGWANG:  Mr Speaker, I would like to implore the Member to come to the Ministry at 10:00 a.m., tomorrow and we specifically address that issue with the director or the commissioner human resource. I thank you.7.17MR BOB OKAE (UPC, Kwania North County, Kwania):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine also goes direct to the Minister of Education and Sports. During recess, I moved to my primary schools; Kwania has 57 primary schools. We had a meeting in one of the biggest primary schools and the inspector of schools gave general data of latrine coverage in the district. And I got to realise that over 60 percent of my primary schools have got no latrines. The few that have are even sharing them. The five stance toilets are shared by girls and boys. When I was a district chairperson, we used to have very many grants for education. As a – (Member timed out.)MR PETER OGWANG:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member, and I am happy that he is a former Chairperson LC V of Kwania District.  There is what we call school facilitation grant. This money is directly sent from the Ministry of Finance to the districts. That money covers furniture, pit latrine coverage, iron sheets, name it. 10420PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEPlease, as a Member, try to interest yourself in the budget of the district and what it does. That is why where there is a very big disconnect. Most times, we no longer go down to look at what the money in the district council does. So, Honourable colleague, latrine coverage, is not a central Government mandate, it is a –(Member timed out.) 7.20MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Wait a bit, honourable member.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker,  I would like the Minister of Ministry of Education and Sports and all the ministries to always give information to the members of Parliament, so that I, for example, can know how much money you are sending to my district. The other day, we were in Nakaseke, and we noticed that members of Parliament are struggling to repair boreholes yet Government sends money, in millions of shillings. I will write a circular to my ministers to give you information so that you can know what is sent to your districts; you cannot know this information from out of the blue. MR ONGIERTHO: Mr Speaker, the public account committees in local governments are supposed to perform their work and give reports, which are supposed to come to the Ministry of Local Government. And once in a while, the Minister of Local Government is supposed to present consolidated reports from the public accounts committees of local governments to this Parliament. However, ever since I came to Parliament, from the 10th Parliament, there is no single day that the Minister of Local Government has presented a consolidated report from the public accounts committees of local government. When will that start?  Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of his concerns. I will direct the Ministry of Local Government to present reports of the public accounts committee from all the districts across the country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us listen to the Member for Kyotera, then, Hon. Eng. Balimwezo.7.21MR JOHN PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, some time back, you were in Kyotera District over the issue of Sango Bay. You did an aerial survey and indicated to the nation that Sango Bay had 300 people, and that Government would be considering them for compensation. Would you, kindly, share the list of the 300 people?Secondly, going by the polling data from the last polls, Sango Bay has over 7,000 voters. So, I am wondering how you arrived at 300 people. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Sango Bay has been on since 2007, the President has been giving policy guidelines to Government since then. I got a directive last year to go and handle Sango Bay and make sure that we get investors who can grow palm trees. As I speak now, the investor has been on site since 2022, yet the directive has existed since 2007. What happened is that after the aerial survey, we sent there the ministry of agriculture, ministry of local government through local leaders, together with the RDC’s office, and the ministry of lands and they truly discovered that the Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) were 300. After those people were identified, they also came up with the compensation rates; which money is in this year’s budget.Those people are going to be compensated depending on what they have on the land, because that is Government land and they know that they encroached on it. Most of the people [Mr Ogwang]10421THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023in the affected communities were herdsmen, who had temporary structures there – and most of them were from Tanzania. Mr Speaker, I know you are a neighbour. Of course, we shall not compensate those who came from Tanzania. We shall only compensate the bonafide occupants. Mr Speaker, remember how we suffered as a country because we had a problem of lack of soap, cooking oil and many other products that come from palm oil. Therefore, honourable colleagues, I request that we support this initiative. The people of Kalangala have benefitted from growing palm trees. And so, as people of Kyotera, this will help you greatly too.7.25 MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You may note that the ongoing rainy season has caused terrible floods in the city.On the 20th, a downpour caused a terrible flood, with Forest Mall Ground Floor submerged in water. We also had cars submerged in water – in fact, swimming. We had our good road infrastructure cut off and destroyed by the floods. This is as a result of people, particularly the investors that block the waterways. Some of them have -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question? Your time is up.  MR BALIMWEZO: My question is: what has Government done to make sure that as we construct new roads – because they are destroyed by water – we open the waterways to Lake Victoria?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Cabinet directed that Kampala Metropolitan Area be supported. Even Parliament did the same and that is why the other Shs 60 billion was allocated to KCCA – and I thank you for that support. We are going to use this money to make sure that some of the roads are raised. Secondly, on the drainage system, you are aware that we have issues of people encroaching on our swamps. We are going to make sure that those people are removed from those areas so that water can easily be drained to the swamps, and up to the lake. We need your support.7.28MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for ably answering the questions. (Applause) I can confidently say that you are fit to be a Prime Minister. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, we all know that information is power. For one to start a radio station, you need a frequency. Long time ago, many people went to Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and acquired these frequencies. If you want to start a radio station now, you have to pay millions of shillings – She 200 million, Shs 300 million or Shs 600 million – to people who are not using their frequencies.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can Government find out from UCC the frequencies that these people got from UCC, but are not being utilised, so that those frequencies are cancelled to allow people who are ready to start radio stations to use them? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hoarding of frequencies; in fact, they are seated on Government revenue. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, join me in thanking my brother.  (Laughter) I think he had never seen me, but now, he has seen who I am – (Laughter)-  and what I am made of. I think he had a rumour that there was an able Prime Minister. Now, he has seen for himself. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, in 2019, I was a Commissioner of Parliament. That time Parliament came up with an idea to establish a radio station, but we failed to get a frequency. I was a commissioner in charge of establishing that radio station. We 10422PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEconstructed it and put everything in place, but failed to get a frequency – and up to today. I believe the radio was donated – I am told – to UBC because they had a number of frequencies that were lying idle. Mr Speaker, we came up with some resolutions in this House. We resolved that frequencies that are idle for more than two years be cancelled and given to other people who can utilise them. However, I think there is a problem in Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). I promise to handle this head on, but I need your support. (Applause)7.32MR BRIGHT AMOOTI (NRM, Kyaka Central County, Kyegegwa):  Thank you. Mr Speaker, a month ago, you went to your constituency and managed to help Government and support your people by giving out laptops or computers. Mr Speaker, some of us are now on fire because our parish chiefs are demanding computers. Everyone is asking: “Honourable member, why are you not giving us computers like the Deputy Speaker?” I wonder if the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance can give us computers or laptops so that we can give them to our people, especially parish chiefs, to do their work better for data collection.Secondly, Mr Speaker, Kyegegwa is a water stressed area; it is the only place where you find a jerrycan of water costing Shs 1,000. My grandmother – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleague, you should have first of all reminded them that you are not the Deputy Speaker. (Laughter)Anyhow, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we were working on the Parish Development Model, we had a discussion on money for IT systems and computers. I would like to know: does Government still have that plan because people are cheated Shs 40,000 to be captured in a computer? This is what I found in my area and that is why I had to pick from my pocket and buy computers for all parishes in my area.I have areas around the national part where some people have never seen a computer. When someone hears that their information is going to be captured in a computer, they can even sell a goat. This is because they think that when their name is captured in the computer, it means poverty is gone. (Laughter)  So, they quickly pay. I found out that they charged Shs 50,000 per person for their information to be captured in the computer. So, I had to make them refund that money. What I did, I said “I am buying that computer for you, but refund people’s money. Imagine Shs 50,000 per person!  Yet, the Parish Development Model can only operate if one’s name is captured in the computer because there is a software they run. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these are some of the issues the committee is going to handle. Otherwise, I know it is cross-cutting in the whole country; charges for a computer.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I have been able to follow the Parish Development Model up to yesterday. I think some people are taking advantage of our citizens. Mr Speaker, there is no subcounty in this country that does not have a computer, and most subcounties across the country have an average of four to five parishes. Let me share with you the experience in my district. Issues of computers came - and - we have 105 parishes, 24 subcounties and six towns councils. I shared this idea in Nakasongola, Nakaseke, Luwero, Mityana, Mubende, Kyankwanzi, Kiboga, Kassanda, Kagadi and many others, and I have been on TV so that the whole country can get information. Mr Speaker, what happened is that in most areas, our people recruited parish chiefs who are not fit for the job. They recruited their [Ms Nabbanja]10423THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023relatives, and I am told some of them paid averagely Shs 2,000,000 to get the job. So, we ended up with parish chiefs who are below standard. So, when it comes to issues of entering data, these people do not know anything and so, they keep deceiving our villagers to move here and there because they are not able. The community development officers at subcounty level, according to the Ministry of Local Government and the Parish Development Model Secretariat, were called upon to come in and help. In fact, a subcounty can register over 100 people in a day, in a parish. Mr Speaker, what we did was to ask the parish SACCOs to come up with an identified list of people, come with the people physically at the subcounty and enter the names of the people in the database. One can actually register names of individuals in a parish in a day. Also, we added the technical people and we received support from the Minister Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. The ministry gave us two officers who helped us at the subcounty level. Mr Speaker, that big team would handle a subcounty per day. They enter the data, but this data does not mean people must go through the data to get money. The money does not come from the data. We need the data to ensure our people can be identified to avoid duplication because someone can get money from Kakumiro - and - some people have multiple families. I can get money from one parish in Kakumiro and get money from Kagadi. To manage that, we agreed that we need data to avoid double or even triple payments.Therefore, honourable colleagues, I would like to interest you to use this approach. Get in touch with your Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), commercial officers and district planners so they can go and handle each subcounty because they have the knowledge. Otherwise, some of them are waiting for Government to give them money, which money is not there. It is just patriotism that can help us move this project called PDM. I am requesting you, honourable colleagues, to use this approach because for us, we are now at 100 per cent.  All the districts I asked to adopt this idea are now at 100 per cent. We are now waiting for the Shs 50 million they are going to send to our district this quarter. In fact, that money should be sent to only districts that have completed entering the data of its people in the subcounty. If we do not do that, they will - honourable members, banks are using our money; they are taking advantage of the delay to give beneficiaries money and lending this money out. It is a planting season and people should have used this money to buy seedlings and empower themselves economically. Let us all go back to our districts and ensure the district officials help our subcounties by training especially our parish chiefs who do not have the knowledge. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you and I like your pro-activeness. I would like to inform you that there are subcounties without computers. This is what should be captured on the record. I request - I can give you some examples. Rwoburunga Parish does not have a computer and it is in my constituency. Okay? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your idea is very good, but what we need to do is to instruct the Minister of Local Government to write to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), to find out which subcounties have computers and which ones do not so that, those which do not have, since many seem to not to have, can be supported.Secondly, the approach you have used, to me - if you could sit at Government level and reduce it into a circular - because some of these CAOs do not want to see the MPs in their offices. Some want to contest against the MPs and are asking what their role in the Parish Development Model (PDM)is; we did not define the role properly. 10424PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEYou will find some of them, it is the opposition area, the CAO is saying; you are coming here to sabotage the programme.  Some of   the MPs have been sabotaging Government on PDM clearly, saying this cannot work. Now, how will that MP go to the CAO to say implement it this way? It cannot work. Therefore, reduce it into a circular, agree on it and then, we shall say, Government has issued this circular to help you, why don’t you implement it? Honourable colleagues, we have PDM and we are processing issues of PDM. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we      shall bring a report on our findings on ground, as a House. 7.42MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Masindi-Pader-Acholibur Highway tarmacking was commissioned in 2020 by the President. However, up to date, Pader-Acholibur portion has not been worked on. Can the Prime Minister give a date of when that road will be worked on?Secondly, Mr Speaker, a unit of water in Uganda is currently at Shs 4,100 and taxed, 1.8 per cent. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation is demanding Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, Gulu main Prison, Uganda Police Force a total of Shs 4.2 billion. Gulu City alone is being demanded Shs 6.4 billion. Is it not high time that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister looks into the tariffs charged on water? Why should we pay highly for water?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, water is life. However, I would like to report to this House that despite those charges, safe water coverage in towns and trading centres, now stands at 72 per cent, averagely across the country, and 68 per cent in rural areas. Therefore, maybe, if that charge was not there - we shall look into it; I promise and see whether accessibility to safe water can improve, more than that.In regard to Acholibur Road, I promise that I will get in touch with you, to get an answer; I do not have it right now.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, there are issues we shall have to tackle as leaders. I remember, when I had just been elected an MP, there is an issue I tackled boldly, because we started it in a Committee on Natural Resources here, where we engaged National Water and Sewerage Corporation and agreed that urban areas get charged little bit higher, so that the money can be used to support rural areas. When we went to rural areas where a jerry can was being bought at Shs 50, National Water - because they charged Shs 25 in the urban areas and then, the person retailing it, adds on Shs 25, that is how it should be. However, some even charged Shs 200. Therefore, people who are used to free flowing water, and were disturbing me as a politician, to come and repair water, leave the taps open, they go and cut the pipes; I said, no. Let National Water and Sewerage Corporation came and takeover.These people threatened me. I remember, they even reported to the former MP, of how I had sold the free water, which he had brought to them. I said, no and I will not relent on this; I made a calculation for them. One of them who was asking me, was even drunk. I was at a rally; I asked him, “How many glasses have you taken?”  He said, “For me to reach this level, it is usually around three and above.” He had taken three glasses.      I then calculated for him, and we found out he had taken alcohol equivalent to 60 jerry cans of water to come and abuse me. One day, I would like Ugandans to complain about the cost of beer and whisky by asking: “Why are you raising the price of beer?” Then, after they have drunk enough, they start complaining about water. [The Deputy Speaker]10425THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023Anyhow, I am aware of families, which cannot afford water, but when you look at a study - I was a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources and I was passionate about this issue - when you look at how much water is used in a day, an average homestead, when we calculated, was using around four jerrycans. If we were to enforce the rates of National water, and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is where we need you, four jerrycans, which a home uses in a day would be Shs 200 at a cost of an average Shs 50. So, you can see that these are things of implementation and enforcement. But these Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) we are protecting – colleagues, we need to look through, especially different committees - these MDAs do not want to budget for utilities such as water and electricity. Because when we cut water off to a hospital, they know an MP will come here and cry and it causes chaos, yet when we provide them money in the budgets they would rather pay allowances than paying for utilities. That is why we were even of the view that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cuts money for utilities at source. We appropriate for example, for Mulago National Referral Hospital, Uganda Police, and barracks, but when the money reaches their accounts, they divert it. Therefore, why don’t pay it direct – yes, so that they stop blackmailing Government. This is money they use in allowances, divert and all that.If that money was corrected well, there is a percentage of it, which can help us to build water reservoirs in rural areas, but we are now grappling with - you know – anyway - it is a deep issue. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have just heard my proposal and idea; it is only you who can implement it because it is a charge on the Consolidated Fund and this can only come out of your own directives.      7.49MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also thank the Leader of Government Business for the ability to sustain both the physical and mental effort in answering these questions, and also for blowing your own trumpet. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I have a few comments; I will begin with question two - I know the listening span has gone down – by Hon. Fortunate Nantongo and there was a supplementary one from Hon. Mpindi, on the National Special Disability Grant. Madam Prime Minister, what is at hand, is the recommendation in the reports of Equal Opportunities Committee. I had an opportunity to go through – mentions, actually the dictates of Section 10 of the Persons with Disability Act, about buildings being PWD friendly, but what about buildings, now like Parliament, hospitals, banks and even courts of law that have already been constructed? There is no provision in that law. It, therefore, requires an amendment to remodel these buildings so that they are - even if the design, or rather the structural and architectural designs never captured the PWD-friendly aspects, this time around, you ought to think of re-modelling such buildings. For instance, it does not have handrails that ease the movement of persons with disabilities. We may have designated parking yards, and ramps in some places, but not all over the place. The second question, which is correlated to this was raised by Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu on the Soroti Fruit Factory. There is a report, and for all the time I have been here, I have been going through the raft of 21 recommendations, which are very good recommendations. One of them, particularly number 16, adversely mentions Uganda Development Corporation and even makes a proposal that the UDC Act, 2016 should be amended because issues within UDC are responsible for the failure of this fruit factory. 10426PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEAlso on privatisation, remember the popular or rather notorious World Bank Structural Adjustment Programme and the disadvantages, especially when it came to privatising state-owned enterprises. We actually had more disadvantages than advantages. The recent cases of the track record of Government speak volumes about privatisation. Let us go to the Lubowa Specialised Hospital, the recent Pinetti coffee issue, Yumbe and even Munyonyo. This means that even if you procured a private person to run this factory, you may not expect heaven on earth, given the recent bad track record, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The question by Hon. Godfrey Saazi was equally supplemented by Hon. Katabaazi of Kalungu. It was all about the preferential treatment being given to buses, even when the tonnage is extremely higher than for some of the trucks. By the way, the complaints about trucks are rife. In fact, what they are waiting for is to generate signatures. Mr Speaker, you will soon receive a petition here from these truck owners. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you coordinating them?MR NAMBESHE: By virtue of my office, Mr Speaker, I receive some of these complaints. The cost of doing business is skyrocketing. They have to go through a very long distance, even when the cargo on the trucks is much lighter than the tonnage of these buses. So, your boots must be deployed on the ground to know this. There must be some corruption that has compromised either the Ministry of Works and Transport, the contractor, or both. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was this question by Hon. Christine Kaaya about the National Forest Authority, I know you have unequivocally said that the National Forest Authority has embarked on a systematic reopening of boundaries of the forest reserves. However, the challenge is all over. You ought to come up with a comprehensive report on this because there are running battles with those people living along the fringes of Mt. Elgon National Park; it is similar. And by the way, there are illegal titles that are even being issued. In 2023, you will be shocked to see them. So, when I get a question from a Member about wetlands - there is also the selective implementation of the directive by the President, because what is in the urban setting is not what is in the rural setting. The RDCs are harassing people in those rural settings, his included. However, when you go near here in Namugongo, you will find people constructing in wetlands, with the supervision of even those that are in authority. So, when you speak tough, I wonder whether you are preaching water, but drinking waragi , Madam Prime Minister. (Laughter)  I am concluding, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, you know how offensive it is to the Prime Minister. MR NAMBESHE: I withdraw it. I did not necessarily mean that the Prime Minister, whom I know very well and interact with every other evening, takes waragi . (Laughter)Mr Speaker, the last question was raised by Hon. Maximus Ochai about that road of Nagongera. It is similar to the circular road. Feasibility studies are being done; things are in advanced stages. I do not know what has happened because works have stalled. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable colleagues, I thank you. I am sorry to those I have not picked, but at least 95 per cent of you have spoken – (Applause) - which is good. So, next time, I will start with those I did not pick today. That is how I usually do it. Honourable colleagues, this is to, once again, invite you to the National Prayer Breakfast. All of you, Members of Parliament, are invited to [Mr Nambeshe]10427THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 5 OCTOBER 2023State House Entebbe at 7.30 a.m. COVID-19 tests are already being done. For the female Members of Parliament, we have a women’s forum, which is on Saturday at 9.00 a.m., here in our main parking lot. That is why you saw the tents going up already. Come join in the prayer. We need to come and pray. With the kind of work, we do, we need prayers.You are also invited to the Independence Day celebrations in Kitgum. Let us join His Excellency, the President, and our guests, so that we can celebrate our country. I wish you a very happy Independence Day.The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2o’clock.(The House rose at 7.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 October 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)  