Tuesday, 2 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanya, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery are staff from the National Assembly of Ghana attached to the Public Accounts Committee. They are here to benchmark and share experiences with the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament of Uganda. They are: Abigail Anso, Mrs Linda Jekel, Samuel Ado, Mr Kweku Obeng. You are welcome! (Applause)

Honourable members, you will recall that about two weeks ago, I made a communication in relation to a public lecture that is supposed to be taking place today afternoon. The President will be there, and this public lecture is on his invitation; he is the patron of this particular initiative; and the lecture begins at 3.00 O’clock.

In view of that, we will not be able to conduct business on the Order Paper. So, the matters on the Order Paper will be deferred and the discussions will begin tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

I have the honourable member from the Pan African Assembly, she wanted to say something.

2.48
MS BEATRICE RUSANIYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank God that I am here in this Parliament alive.

In March this year, I was travelling from Kashari to my home with my husband and our first born, and we were ambushed by thieves.

They shot at us, and I took cover under the vehicle and it rolled over me, and I died; I do not know what followed from there. But I want to thank God and my sister Margaret Kiboijana, because she arranged for the ambulance, which brought me here to Kampala. 

I was put on oxygen for two weeks. Later, when I recovered, I would see Parliament on the screen in the room where I was. I saw the body of Kakoma; and I saw the body of another person. I was really seeing that my body was also coming after that. 

I want to thank you people because you all came. When you see that you are loved, you feel that you should not die. I want to say that God has a plan for all of us and He has a roadmap for each one of us.

I want to say that your vote for me here to the Pan African Parliament also contributed to my recovery. Because later, when I had failed to get help from the medical board - from Government - they called me to South Africa as a PAP member; they asked me whether I would manage to go to South Africa, and I answered yes, yet I was lame; I could not rise because I had broken ribs and a broken backbone. I could not rise from the bed. The chest was bad, but it had recovered a bit.

When I was discharged from Case Clinic, I was discharged in an ambulance, but later when time to go to South Africa came, I convinced them that I was okay. I sent my son to pick the ticket and per diem and I went to South Africa. When I reached there, I was no longer a small woman; I had now become a diplomatic embarrassment. I was a Ugandan who was lame; so, even Government had to come in. I want to thank the President because he called me and sent me some money, and I was operated by a Ugandan, Dr Ouma, who is working there. He is a senior person in Wits University; he is teaching neurology. 

I was operated on and it is now three months after the operation, but at least I can stand and I can walk on my two legs. It is indeed a miracle!

I want to say that we sometimes put our trust in people and elsewhere, but it is good to put our trust in God! Because His phone is always available and He can never change His mind; He does not have security on His gate so that when you want to see God you have to be disturbed by the security. So, I am so happy and I hope I will live.

Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The Speaker came to see me in the hospital in South Africa after my operation, when they had gone for CPA.

All of you Members from NRM and Opposition came to see me. I am sure you all prayed for me because it was not easy. I am so happy, tomorrow I am travelling to deliberate in the Pan African Parliament. God is wonderful! Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member; miracles happen every single day in our lives. You may not recognise it as a miracle, but there are miracles happening. The mere fact that you wake up and you are able to move is a miracle in itself, and you have only one person to thank for that; it does not matter what your faith is, for as long as you believe. You have to thank that person who makes you wake up every morning because every day is a miracle.

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, on behalf of Government, I want to welcome back our colleague, and to also thank God who has saved her up to today.

I want to inform my colleague that please, with what you went through, what we know and we do not know, I think God left you up to today for a purpose. I think the purpose is to serve this country, this continent and this world. We pray for you to go through all that is remaining - the medical treatment and all that you need - such that we have you again as a very active Member in this House.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Parliamentary Commission; Members have stood here from both sides of this House – Government and Opposition sides - but they have all been grateful for the timely intervention made by the Parliamentary Commission. Thank you so much Parliamentary Commission because when that happens, that means Government is working. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The lecture that is going to take place this afternoon is a Presidential public lecture. The President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni requests the pleasure of all you Members of Parliament to the public lecture at Serena Hotel Kampala today at this time. 

The theme of the lecture is: “A 50-year journey since Independence 1962 to 2012: A good foundation for social and economic transformation.” That is what we are going to have a discussion on this afternoon. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 2.54 p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 3 October 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
