Thursday, 13 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you and to welcome our visitors who are in the Public Gallery. These are students from Hilton High School, Mukono, who have come to witness you transacting business in the Parliament of Uganda. You are most welcome! (Applause)

I want to thank the honourable members who were here yesterday and were able to communicate what I said to some Members who were not here. Thank you very much! Continue to send the message. As we said yesterday, it is necessary for record purposes to know who is here and who is not here, and for this, we decided to take an unusual procedure of using our roll call. 

But for purposes of record, before we start the roll call, I have received apologies seeking leave to be away because of duty. First of all, Members of Lango Parliamentary Group are not here because they have got an appointment with His Excellency, the President. So, if their names are read – they could be even skipped because they have informed me. 

I also know that Members of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee are also transacting business somewhere and the chairman has informed me about this. The other one is hon. Janat Mukwaya, who also rang me to seek leave to be away from the session. So, that is the record. Although I know the number is small, for purposes of record, let the roll call be taken so that we have ink to refer to.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I should have been in Entebbe with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee because we are jointly meeting with Members of the Public Service and Local Government Committee.

THE SPEAKER: If the Committee on Public Service and Local Government is jointly handling the bill, then Members of Public Service and Local Government Committee are also away.

2.36
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a slightly different matter, I am seeking guidance from the Government on a matter of a natural disaster that hit our friends in South East Asia. Not long ago, when we had a similar situation in the United States, we sent a message and probably some little donation.  I was just wondering if we are going to do likewise with our friends in Pakistan and India, who suffered a serious earthquake and are in a disastrous situation. Do we have any guidance or kind of hope, or should we individually send our donations?

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform this House that the matter is being handled. Thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go on with our roll call.

(A roll call of the members was made.)

(79 members were ascertained as being present.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wanted to pass some information. There is a road sector review meeting taking place in Munyonyo to which Members of Parliament who sit on the Committee on Works were invited. I suspect some of my colleagues who are not here may actually be in that meeting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Well, honourable members, there is a slight improvement.  But you see this is not the best way to deal with the issue of a roll call. First of all, it takes our time, which we should have utilised to do business. But I was forced to do it simply to put on record that you attend or you do not attend. We may have to repeat it tomorrow, but if the situation improves the other day, we may not use it. It is not the best way, but I think it has some effect. I thank you very much.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to what has just taken place and I think there is need for us to consider what might be causing this lack of quorum. As you are aware, the political temperature in this country is rising and many of the Members seated here are being harassed by potential opponents. They are actually running around the constituencies and there is a tendency, therefore, for Members of Parliament to retreat back to their bases to try to sort out matters on the ground. This is just natural. 

I think for us to continue to have quorum, something needs to be done to ensure that the campaigning that is going on in the constituencies does not continue because this goes a long way towards undermining Members of Parliament. You cannot sit here comfortably yet there is somebody who has invaded your territory. I really think we need to scratch our heads over this and reach a solution that will ensure that lack of quorum is avoided. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let me assist you on one thing. I think now you cannot be said to be campaigning.  Technically, if you say campaigning has started, it may work against you. To campaign, you will need to become a candidate after you have been nominated. It is only then that you will be campaigning; otherwise they will start attacking you that you are offending the law. But before you become a candidate, the issue of campaigning is not there. 

There may be informal meetings, I agree, but this is the point I said yesterday. I know what is going on especially in parties, but then there is some work which we have to do and which is relevant to what you want to achieve in March. What you want to achieve in March is free and fair elections and this cannot come unless we have passed proper laws here.

My request is that at least this month, we sacrifice other things, be here, clear our table especially deal with those laws and then later I may see how to handle it. But for the time being, I am appealing to you honourable members to come so that we transact business, especially next week. I think the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is sitting to finalize the reports. Once the reports are there, we clear them and then we may see how to handle the rest. (Mr Mike Sebalu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Mr Sebalu.

MR MIKE SEBALU: I just want to register my presence.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, there is a general panic in NRM circles. I have observed that since they started their primary grassroots elections, there seems to be serious competition to capture the delegates who will at the constituency level determine who shall be the candidate for NRM. [Members: “What about in UPC?”]. For us in UPC we are not worried about it at the moment.

MAJ. GEN KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for this UPC serial loser to come here and start challenging the activities of another legitimate party?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, what I am observing is that we are practicing water getting in Uganda and I think that is what the honourable member is saying. The point is taken, let us be here especially this month, we clear important bills, then we shall see how we handle it in the following months.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to apologize that yesterday I was not available in time to present the report, but I am here now. This committee was set up in accordance with Rule 155 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the terms of reference were:

i.	To examine how the immigration department handles the immigration of aliens into Uganda and in particular alleged cases of illegal entry, registration, work and other activities of aliens and to determine the registration of foreign investors in the country and other related investment issues.

ii.	To examine the factors affecting and influencing the activities and performance of the immigration department particularly allegations of corruption, political interference and understaffing.

iii.	To investigate any other matters related to the above.

Mr Speaker, the committee conducted public hearings in order to gather views from as many witnesses as possible, and we also made research on existing laws, policy documents and memoranda.

The immigration department is specially mandated to facilitate, monitor and control movement of persons, both citizens and non-citizens in and out of Uganda and in this mandate, therefore, the following are the responsibilities of the department:

§	To control and regulate entry of foreign nationals into the country.
§	To control the staying and taking up of employment by foreign nationals.
§	To remove all undesirable foreign nationals who threaten the security of the country and those who stay in breach of immigration laws.
§	To verify citizenship of Uganda nationals and issue them with the necessary documents and national identity cards and
§	To grant conventional travel documents to registered refugees.

In order to fulfill the above mandate, the department is composed of three operational sections:

i.	The Passport Control Section, which is charged with issuance and control of passports and other travel documents.

ii.	The Non-Governmental Organisations Board, which is responsible for registration, monitoring and guiding NGO’s.

iii.	The Immigration Control that is supposed to monitor and control movement of aliens in and out of the country; regulate and monitor activities of both legal and illegal aliens into the country; regulate and monitor issuance of work permits, visas, special passes, transit visas, etcetera; maintain and update records of all aliens in the country; monitor, control and prosecute and remove all aliens who engage or who are found to be engaged in illicit activities like drug trafficking, human trafficking, etcetera and maintain and update contact addresses of aliens, places of work, nature of work and period of stay.  

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that despite the above mandate, the immigration department has a number of bottlenecks that hinder the department from performing its statutory roles. The committee held a meeting with the Minister of Internal Affairs who informed us of the genesis of some of the operational problems within the department. 

In his testimony, the minister observed in part that the problems in the immigration department are in a way self-created by some of the procedures in the Government. Because 10 years ago, when the Government decided to restructure and specifically the Public Service, restructuring was essentially okay. However, there were about 100 or so departments that were identified to be divested from government so that they could become agencies –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I note with great concern that we are reading a report on a matter of immigration and yet the line minister is not here. I am not aware whether somebody is taking notes on his behalf. How will he respond to our concerns when he is not here?

THE SPEAKER: What would happen when somebody does not want to consider the report and does not turn up? Does it mean we should not hear the report? It is our duty to hear the report and make recommendations. We shall take into account that questions were not answered but the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs is here. Maybe she will provide the answers. Let us get the report. We may not deal with any reports when a minister absents himself or herself.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just calling the attention to the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to read the whole report? I thought you were summarising.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, I am picking a few things certainly. I was saying, because of that decision, recruitments, promotions and many others were put to a halt. Ten years down the road, people have been dying, they have reached retirement age, and some people have left for greener pastures. All these have left big gaps in the immigration department.

Many other issues have crippled the operations of the department. There is lack of transport for adequate inspection. The committee noted that immigration has only two vehicles, which are very old. These are to facilitate operations of the 27 exit or entry points, 11 passport regional centres and the immigration headquarters. The committee received information from management that without adequate transport patrolling boarders, inspecting, investigating and weeding out undesirable immigrants from the country becomes impossible.  

There is also lack of appropriate information communication technology. By the time the committee visited the airport, the department had not fully computerised its operations.  

The immigration department also lacks telephones.  The committee was informed that the entire western region Fort Portal, Hoima, Mirama, Katuna, including Masaka and Mbarara has no telephone link to the headquarters. The eastern region immigration offices are expected to link with other stations and headquarters using phone lines in Jinja and Mbale. 

The committee further noted that there is no communication in Northern and northwestern regions. It was further noted that not all border stations have a radio call yet these are very vital to immigration duties. Of course, there are no fax machines. The Internet facilities in the department located at the headquarters were disconnected due to non-payment.

Mr Speaker, after visiting several stations, the committee observed that all entry or exit points and regional offices lack computers. It is only Entebbe Airport where we found an old computer. 

There is also lack of identity-kit-photo scanners and passport machine readers at entry or exit points. This means that people who have been declared unwanted will find their way into the country.  

Mr Speaker, despite the problems, the immigration department in its own way had some few achievements:

The processing of entry permits, work permits have been streamlined, and the volume of work handled has tremendously improved. 

We were also informed that the processing of passports has been streamlined and is even more expeditious. Passport queuing has been eliminated and the number of passports issued per month has increased. 

The introduction of machine-readable passports with enhanced security features to combat passport malpractices especially photo substitution is also available.

Services have been brought nearer to the public through the establishment of passport centres in the region.

Extension of passport services to Ugandans in the Diaspora like the establishment of passports issuing centres in London and Washington has been established.

There is also upgrading of immigration documentation like the introduction of visa stickers. 

There has also been deportation of some 417 undesired immigrants including one famous Van Brink. 

There has also been reform of the relevant laws that make it compatible with the existing socio-economic realities of the day. 

There has also been the construction of four permanent blocks at Mutukula, Katuna, Busia and Ishasha. Mr Speaker, when the committee visited the exit and entry points, most of our border points were operating in unipots.  

Allegations of illegal entry, registration and work of aliens:

Mr Speaker, arising from the interviews conducted and the visits of various entry points, the committee noted that compared to other countries in the Great Lakes Region, Uganda has very porous borders. It was noted that some border points like Sigulu Islands, Ntoroko and Atiak are not manned at all due to understaffing and other logistical problems In addition, where borders are properly manned pre-entry screening of undesired aliens is also difficult due to lack of computerisation at the main entry points, to check on their bio-data and other particulars.

Employment of foreigners: 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that some relevant laws regarding the employment of foreigners in this country are not applied. For example, Section 12 and 13 of the 1975 Employment Decree, which require employment of a non-Ugandan to be attested by the commissioner for labour before engagement, are not adhered to. It is a requirement that where a company intends to bring in highly specialised workers not available in Uganda, that company is under obligation to advertise those vacancies in the local press for a specific period to ascertain that there is no local response. 

In the event that the required personnel are not available, then work permits for the foreign workers can be applied for from the immigration board for a specific period. We believe that this important requirement has not been observed and could be one of the root causes of the current escalating problems of unskilled and unqualified alienations flooding the job market in Uganda.

The committee also noted that there is one area where the general public including Members of Parliament have for a long time raised concern regarding employment of foreigners. The committee observed that Uganda has very few embassies abroad to screen all the persons intending to visit the country. For this reason, both bona fide visitors and illegal aliens in most cases have to get clearance from the entry points. 

The committee observed that aliens once in the country, engage in small business ventures like salons, selling of used clothes and other retail businesses, which should be done by the locals. It was noted that in some countries like Ghana, foreigners are not supposed to engage in such businesses. Ghana has a checklist that details areas where foreigners are prohibited from carrying out business ventures. Having such a measure in place would tremendously protect the locals from unfair competition from aliens.  

Work of aliens:

The basic law applicable in relation to work of aliens is the Employment Act cap. 219 and the Employment Regulations, 1997. Section 7 of the Act explicitly states: “No person may recruit or engage in recruiting unless he or she is in the possession of a valid permit issued by the commissioner or is a recruiter’s agent duly approved by an authorised officer.” The authorised officer is defined by Section 2 and the powers accorded to him or her are in Section 4 of the law.  

Section 61 talks of vacancies to be notified. The committee noted that the following provisions relating to the employment of aliens are really adhered to: One, that every person employing more than 20 employees shall notify the labour officer of the area of any vacancy whenever it occurs. Two, the commissioner may require any employer to furnish him or her with particulars on a prescribed form relating to the number of persons he or she employs, their nationality, the rate of pay and other information, which the commissioner may from time to time require.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the above provisions have always been ignored because the Commissioner for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations is neither a member of the Immigration Board nor the Uganda Investment Authority Board.

The Aliens Registration and Control Act, 1985 prescribes the manner in which aliens can be registered and empowers the commissioner for immigration to monitor and control aliens in the country. We received submission from the Uganda Police force that in the past, Police were empowered to enforce this law under the old Act of 1970. We established that this requirement was enforced through the maintenance of an aliens’ registry at special branch headquarters that monitored all aliens in the country. 

The practice then was that every alien was required by law to report his or her presence in the country within 48 hours. When they became residents, they were to continue furnishing details of themselves and their employees who are foreigners on a quarterly basis to the aliens’ registry. We observed that since the amendment of the law, compliance to this requirement has become voluntary. 

It was also noted that the policy of a one-stop centre for expediting the facilitation of investors sometimes undermines effective enforcement of other laws. For example, the committee observed that the commissioner for labour who previously used to sit on immigration board has been left out. This creates a gap in the working relationship between labour and immigration in the country.

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should improve the interface between the department responsible for employment and immigration department by re-instating the membership of the Commissioner for Labour and Industrial Relations on the immigration board. If possible, the commissioner should be a member of the Uganda Investment Authority Board for purposes of linkage.

Without prejudice to the specific provision in the law, the committee recommends that there is need for the country to have a data bank for all the skilled manpower.  

We further recommend that government should have an employment policy in place as soon as possible.

The committee also recommends that the policy of having the Uganda Investment Authority as a one-stop centre should not supplant but supplement other institutions.  

The termination and registration of foreign investors:
Mr Speaker, classes of investors are determined by the licenses applied for and issued.  However, the majority of the so-called foreign investors have turned out to be petty traders dealing in various merchandise. Types of visas issues in this chapter show how most of these fake investors take advantage of the fluid system to settle in Uganda as investors. Most of them are illegal immigrants. 

As noted above, a lot has been said and written about illegal immigrants in the country, who enter without valid documents. At times, they are not even detected. Apart from refugees who are recognised and protected by the law, international treaties and conventions, there have been a massive influx of undesired aliens in many parts of the country in the last 20 or so years. 

Members will recall that one of the major reasons why this committee was set up was because of public outcry against fake investors who roam the streets of Kampala and other major towns either looking for jobs or engaging in petty trade, thereby disadvantaging the local people in a number of ways. 

Concern was also raised regarding the capacity of the immigration department to handle such cases of illegal immigrants. We wish to note that although there are a big number of bona fide investors in the country, many aliens have taken advantage of government’s genuine open policy of attracting investment and grossly abused it.

Police operation and managerial weaknesses within the Ministry of Internal Affairs in general, and the immigration department in particular, have provided fertile ground for the undesired aliens to enter and stay in the country.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the practice in Uganda is that foreigners get in the country as visitors, look for employment in various work places like factories and their potential employers apply for permits on their behalf. This is total breach of immigration laws.

Observations. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, tell us which page you are reading.

DR KASIRIVU:  I am now on page 27, Mr Speaker. The pages I have skipped contain the types of work permits. 

The special pass and work permit procedures are subject to the same bottlenecks as the licensing and registration procedures. They are time consuming because it takes two weeks for the immigration department to receive the payment.  First, the investor submits the application form and the required documentation to the immigration department before an assessment of fees from the cashier is considered. The fees are then paid at a designated commercial bank. The bank then sends the payment to Revenue Authority, which in turn sends it to the immigration department.

The requirements that must be certified to obtain a work permit have also been reported problematic. For example, Uganda Investment Authority letter of recommendation is requested, but it is only an optional requirement. Thus, in theory, an application without Uganda Investment Authority letter of recommendation is complete, but in practice, it is impossible to obtain a work permit without the Uganda Investment Authority letter of recommendation.  

We also noted that another problem with the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) recommendation letter is that, the UIA is reluctant to provide the recommendation letter, where the documentation provided by the expatriate worker shows only work experience, and not academic titles. In most cases, Mr Speaker, companies, especially small and medium enterprises need technicians to set up a new plant.  These technicians are not experts in these jobs, but they are good practitioners.  

In addition, it was noted that immigration department has broad discretion in deciding if the specific qualifications are sufficient. That is, if the board may want to check whether the amount of money invested is sufficient to carry out the business, whether the investment is in a priority area etc.

Finally, the procedures of obtaining the permits must be carried out in Kampala. When the committee visited the immigration department headquarters, it was noted that although there is some little computerisation, the increasing amount of data has constrained the system resulting into slow processing and poor performance. The system needs to be upgraded. However, budgetary constraints have limited the maintenance of the equipment. There is a need for an integrated local network to be set up so that information can be shared within the department, and possibly in future can be linked with other border posts. It is also necessary to install software to protect the information and prevent access by un-authorised users.

The immigration control board: 

The immigration board has its functions as you can see in section 3.1. Our observation was that the current board was appointed in 1990 under the old Immigration Act. Although its membership was 15 at the time of appointment, only three members are now running it. In his submission to the committee, the board chairman observed in part, “We started when we were about 15, but as time went on, some died; others resigned; others went for other jobs, which would not enable them to be board members. As I speak now, we are three board members”.  

When the Minister of Internal Affairs appeared before the committee, he promised that within two months a new board would be in place. No action has taken place since that time. The committee further noted that apart from the Board Chairman, Mr Kagumire of Katera and Kagumire Advocates, the other two members have got very busy schedules that do not allow them enough time to supervise the immigration department. Other members are Mr Jackson Bambalira who is the Chairman of LC V Bundibugyo and Mr Odongo from Lira.  

Under the old immigration law, the board was supposed to be appointed for a two-year term, renewable once. However, the committee observed that the old board could not leave office without handing over to another board and that is why they have stayed. They are waiting to hand over.

Recommendation:

We recommend that the Ministry of Internal Affairs ensures that a new board is in place, in any case not later than the end of this year. The board should carry out supervisory and other statutory roles to ensure that the department functions properly. The board should be in place to oversee the long awaited restructuring exercise of immigration department.

Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, the immigration department is understaffed because of the policy of restructuring which halted any recruitment. As we present this report, 126 officers including those on study leave man the entire department. Because of this inadequate staffing, the country has failed to open reciprocal border stations with our neighbours.  

It is the considered view of this committee that the current human resource scenario reflects badly on the wide mandate of the department. In one of her submissions to the committee, the commissioner for immigration department stated in part, “More entry points have been opened, more passport special centres are required at district level and there is even the great impending challenge of the identity card issuance programme, which should commence as soon as the funds and operational infrastructure are in place.” 

Although the Minister of Internal Affairs informed the committee that Cabinet had already approved a re-organised structure for the department with a view to upgrading it to a directorate with more staff, by the time of presenting this report, no tangible results in terms of implementation has taken place.

Mr Speaker, there are no promotions and staff motivation is at its lowest.

Regarding training, there are some staff that have had small short courses and many of them are on their own initiatives. Some members have taken initiatives to acquire additional qualifications.  However, this is only possible for staff stationed at or near the headquarters, leaving those in upcountry stations yawning. 

It was also noted that an important component of training in security related studies is almost non-existent in the department, and yet as we know immigration has a lot of stake in security concerns. This poses a very great danger not only to the security of Uganda but also for other countries especially at this time when terrorism is at its peak.

Recommendation:

The committee recommends that tailor-made training should be introduced in the department to re-align immigration operations with international standards.

During the restructuring process, emphasis should be put on staff motivation including needs assessment to match with a new public management agenda.

Allegations of corruption and political interference:
Mr Speaker, we wish to point out from the outset that the committee was mandated by this House to inquire into allegations of corruption in the immigration department, with a view to putting to an end this malpractice and expose the culprits.  

While discussing policy related matters with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the committee was informed by the minister that it is true there had been reported cases of corruption in the department, which were adequately dealt with by the relevant authorities. The committee noted that there are several internal loopholes and the breakdown of systems within the immigration department that provide a very fertile ground for corruption, especially at border posts. 

In addition, we noted that there are managerial weaknesses within the department that have been exploited by some members of staff to enrich themselves. Throughout our interaction with Mrs Mutiibwa, the Commissioner, the committee noted that although she possesses a very long experience as a senior civil servant, she lacks self-drive to take decisions in critical situations. 

We further noted that she lacks confidence, managerial capacity and skills necessary for a top calibre leader. Besides, she relies heavily on unofficial cliques rather than top management of the department to make vital decisions. From our recorded testimonies, the committee was informed that the working relationship between the commissioner and some senior staff members was very poor, resulting into outright hatred, alleged witchcraft and other inhuman acts.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the committee visited a number of border stations and discovered that even the little revenue collected, it is never banked in the nearest banks. The practice is that the immigration officers physically take the funds collected to the headquarters, thereby increasing chances of risks associated with transporting cash.  The committee could not get adequate explanation from the commissioner why this practice that tempts officers and puts their lives at risk has never been addressed.  

Allegations of nepotism and favouritism:

Although the committee received numerous allegations of favouritism in the department to the effect that there were attempts by the commissioner and the permanent secretary – the duo hail from Busoga region – to busoganise the immigration department by assigning staff members who are Basoga work schedules that involve handling cash and bigger responsibilities. The committee found no merit in these allegations. We found all these allegations baseless and therefore unfounded. 

We also noted, for example, that there were no Basoga favoured when it came to transfers within the department. However, the committee observed that there are some members of staff who overstay in some stations, especially border areas, and no satisfactory explanation was provided for this anomaly.

Recommendations: 

The committee recommends that the department should develop a clear policy of deployment of staff in the re-organised department.  

Managers should have periodic meetings with senior members of staff to streamline the operations of the department.

Allegations of political interference:

The minister informed the committee that he was not aware of any case or cases of political interference in the operations of the department.  However, in the course of the investigations, the committee came across one possible case of political interference that we wish to point out.  There is undue protection of aliens who come to Uganda, either to look for jobs or those who purportedly enter the country, as investors yet have no investment. The committee noted that some politicians protect some aliens. The committee was informed that at one time, the immigration department carried out an operation to track down illegal immigrants in the country, but the exercise almost flopped due to political interference. 

In his submission regarding the above operation, Mr Kagumire, the board chairman, informed the committee, “Telephone calls came through all angles, including ministers, quarrelling with us and saying that, ‘Why are you disturbing the country, leave those people alone.’ Therefore, each person has a godfather around. Each Indian you see, has a godfather. If you had the opportunity you could go and arrest some of those people, and you would see how many telephone calls you receive.”  These are words from the chairman of the board.  

Although the chairman refused to divulge the names of the politicians involved, it is the considered view of this committee that some politicians may be contributing to the escalation of the problem of illegal aliens in this country as stated in this testimony.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that the immigration department be overhauled in the restructuring process. Government should carry out the exercise urgently to streamline the operations of the department. 

It is also recommended that the President urgently appoint a new board.

Mr Speaker, the committee wished to visit our neighbouring countries to see how their immigration departments are organised, but we could not get the facilitation. Therefore, our report lacks that bit of comparison. However, in the course of our investigation, while at Mpondwe, we crossed over to Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and saw the difference. In Mpondwe, our immigration department is housed in a unipot. In DRC across the river, is a well built office block. In Katuna, whereas our immigration office is in a permanent building with almost no furniture and no telephone, across in Rwanda their office has Internet, fax machines and a telephone. 

We missed out on an opportunity to give a picture on how our neighbours are operating. We have been giving an excuse that we have got porous borders, our neighbours also have got porous borders, but how they manage them is a responsibility of government to learn and therefore apply. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee for this very good report, which he has presented to us. Now it is open for debate and comments.

3.45
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for allowing me to make comments on this report.  It is a very good report and initially a number of items were left out. Maybe because of the terms of reference or maybe because they did not have sufficient time and facilitation to look into all the details. I also note with great concern certain areas, which are very critical and very important to this country are superficially treated.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, at the end of the report they come out very strongly on certain specific items, and I am disappointed to learn that the Government over the years has not addressed these issues.  

On the issue of the board, the Government has done nothing and yet they come to us regularly asking for the money. We have been presuming that probably part of this money would be for revamping the department. Even the matter of upgrading this particular department to a commission has not taken place. This is a major disappointment. 

I am much more disappointed with the minister’s performance on this issue of security aspects of immigration. I am sure all of us are aware that the US Government, as part of their revamping internationally anti-terrorists measures, they have provided us with equipment at every entry and exit point in East African countries. 

I have an immigration point in my constituency, which I regularly visit, and notice that this equipment is so sophisticated. It takes every bit of information in your passport directly to Langley Park, the CIA headquarters in Virginia USA.  When I inquired from the officer operating it as to whether we get a copy of this information he said, “No.” Immediately you pass your passport into that machine, it just transmits information directly without depositing the same information into our headquarters. 

On our part, this is a serious oversight. We cannot be a country that gathers intelligence information on behalf of a foreign power without remaining with a copy of that information. We know we want to curb international terrorism, but the only way we can cooperate with any power that is aware and conscious of this problem is to share it. I am disappointed that the Government has done nothing about this information.  

Mr Speaker, on the matter of the aliens working here, we know internationally that the aliens –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from my colleague regards the other machine he was talking about. How can it detect a person like Aggrey Awori who has a brother who is a Vice President in Kenya, and yet we have this device brought about by the imperialists, which divided families? How does that machine operate? 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, sometimes English eludes me. I have not followed what my colleague is saying. If he is referring to my brother, who is on the other side, he is not an immigration officer. He happens to be the overall minister in charge of immigration and I am simply saying that when it comes to East African countries, we are just agents of information gathering system for other powers.  

What I am saying about this information gathering system is not only in Uganda but also in Tanzania and Kenya. If you go to Isebania in Tanzania, Namaga, Busia, and Malaba, you will notice that the same thing is happening. Therefore, my concern is the whole of East Africa and more specifically Uganda. 

In terms of international terrorism, we collect visa money from all the aliens who enter the country. I do not see it reflected in this report at all. I do not know whether it is part of the exercise, because immigration is in charge of collecting visa money from all the aliens entering the country.  

In terms of tracking down the aliens who are here illegally, at one time in this august House, I mentioned that there is a big local industrial group that is employing people from one Asian country. They were actually living within the factory precincts. I have been there and I know that these people live on top of the factory. The manufacturing process takes place below and all their passports are in the custody of their employer. Not only are we infringing on immigration laws but also on the human rights of these persons. These are serious issues, which immigration department has taken very lightly.  

Mr Speaker, concerning the capacity of the immigration department, at one time we got a huge grant from the US Government to improve capacity building. One of the items was that equipment. However, in terms of training, we never got people to go abroad to train on these new international measures of curbing terrorism. We have never trained people at the border post on how to detect a would-be terrorist or a person who answers all the questions and the requirements of immigration. Yet, these are people operating under cover. 

We heard in the recommendations and observations of the committee that even the commissioner herself, her operations and her method of work are relaxed. I hope it is not true that she even depends on witchcraft and a select group of people to work with. This is a serious matter. It is not a question of just affecting our employment here but also dealing once again with security. Security is a serious matter nowadays.

This question of certain officers moving with large sums of money from immigration point at the border post to bank it in Kampala is very risky. There would not be a better temptation for somebody to purify the money or to use it for a long time in business since he is at the border post and then eventually deposit that money with immigration department, having realised a big profit.  Therefore, he is really getting capital making money out of government. Mr Speaker, this kind of laxity on the part of government is a serious indictment against the Government and particularly the minister responsible.  

Mr Speaker, last but not least, this question of investors. We have had so many times of so-called foreign investors, who as we now see in the report are probably mandazi sellers. Really, it is comprehensible that we would expect somebody to come up with US$ 100,000 in order to get a work permit. This is temptation to corruption. If the would-be investor approaches the immigration officer and say, “Look, I will pay you US$ 10, 000 and find a way of getting me a work permit.”  

Obviously anybody who is going to save US$ 90, 000 will do it and there are so many ways of getting these stamps. The stamps you see in the passports of the so-called investors are not of the same security quality that you would find for the visas, which means they can be easily forged.  Now, why do you insist on getting US$ 100, 000 from the investor or would-be investor when the whole field is open for corruption? As I said, you give me US$ 10, 0000 and I will forge the stamps. Therefore, why would the Government fool itself by putting the level of fees high and making it possible for that poorly paid civil servant to make money out of it? 

Mr Speaker, this is not an allegation. The matter of foreign investors going directly to see the head of state should be questioned. I know President Museveni is very eager to attract foreign investors in this country, but at the same time, I value his time. He should not be the one to handle the so-called investors. Actually, the nearest that foreign investor should come to the President, is to talk to the minister. That is it.  What is it that they are going to discuss with the president that they cannot tell the minister and the minister to take the relevant action?

Mr Speaker, there is a proposal, which has been in the pipeline for a long time. Uganda Investment Authority Export Promotion Board and Uganda Tourist Board were supposed to be merged and form one big conglomerate. Mr Speaker, even before the matter comes to Parliament for approval, I would discourage it. Let these organisations remain separate and particularly so Uganda Investment Authority.  

From time to time they have been giving us figures saying, “This year we have received investments worth Shs 250 million.” Mr Speaker, I question it, a proposal is not an investment on the ground. If the rate at which they have been telling us that this money is coming to this country, this country would have cut down our dependence in the budget from 50 to probably 30 percent external support. So, they should not fool us and again it goes back to basic information from the immigration department. They should also access this information, the accuracy before they issue these work permits. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, maybe before you do that, we want to welcome to Parliament pupils and teachers from Mother Manjeri Primary School Kirinya. It is in Kyadondo East Constituency. You are welcome! (Applause)

3.59
MR JACHAN OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very brilliant report on the immigration department. There has been a lot of talk about national identity cards and I think this is the time for this country to have a national identity card given to each and every bona fide citizen of Uganda.

We have gone a long way in computerizing the driving permits, and giving pictures for the voter registers, but I believe the national identity is supreme and should be handled at this time. I do believe that the funds for this can be made available so that we are able to identify those who are Ugandans and those who are not Ugandans and, therefore, we can deal with the issues of aliens.

There are a number of people who entered Uganda in the 60s, 70s and they do not take themselves as refugees but they also still identify themselves with their countries of origin. In Nebbi, for instance, we have people who came from Congo and they are settled there and have been there for many years. We have people who settled in Bunyoro and of recent, they are being disturbed as being aliens and yet they have been in this country for over 40 years.  

So, what would be the definition for an alien vis-à-vis a refugee? So, streamlining of issues within the immigration department is therefore very important and so is this report very timely.

Mr Speaker, the issue of the housing for the immigration department staff is an issue not only of humanitarian grounds, but also of security. The immigration officers at the borders handle a number of very critical security matters and I shudder to read that in a number of the places, they are in mud and grass thatched houses. A person who is handling very critical security issues to stay in a grass thatched house and a box of match, which is only Shs 50, and it would not take just more than one to set the whole place ablaze. Therefore, it is important for us to look at the security of these people at the borders and house them appropriately.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of understaffing, this is affecting most of the border posts. I had a recent experience when I travelled from Nairobi to Uganda by road and the bus that I used reached the border post at Malaba at 3.00 a.m. and because of understaffing, the bus had to wait for one full hour for the immigration officer to come and clear; and there was only one immigration officer and there were two buses. You can imagine how much time was taken to clear these buses?

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. At least with Malaba it was 3.00 a.m. I know with Busia the immigration closes at 11.00 p.m. until the following morning at 6.00 a.m. when actually they are supposed to be open 24 hours.

MR OMACH: Thank you for the information. So, Mr Speaker, you can see the gravity of the matter and I therefore support the committee’s position that the staffing positions be looked into.

Finally, at Entebbe Airport, if there is day and night shift and members are expected to sleep there, it is most desirable that appropriate facilities be made available. To say that there are only three beds to be shared by over 27 workers and of having no respect for the sex in the third millennium is deplorable. I thank you.

4.05
DR STEPHEN MALINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start by apologizing that I was not here during the roll call. I was at another duty by the Committee on Local Government, which was in Entebbe. However, that is another story.

THE SPEAKER:  You have gone on record.

DR MALINGA: Thank you, Sir. I think the question of immigration has reached a stage when it has become a matter of concern for all of us as Ugandans. I am particularly interested on the aspect of employment for the Ugandans. In most countries the citizens of that country take all the jobs, and foreigners take the jobs, which those citizens do not want to perform. That is how the word “nkuba kyeyo” comes. Citizens take the cream of the jobs; foreigners take the jobs the citizens do not want. It is a paradox that in this country the foreigners apparently take the cream of the jobs especially in private companies and then the worst of the jobs in those companies are the ones taken by Ugandans.  

That is a matter of concern and I think we all owe a duty to the citizens of this country to make sure that that kind of thing ends. When a country comes to operate in this country, they should have a plan to train Ugandans to run that company in this country though they can stay in control worldwide. I am saddened when even the minor of jobs like ownership of grocery stores or supermarkets is at the moment in this country under the control of foreigners. The Ugandans who have attempted to go into that business have been competent out. These people pour money into their little supermarkets and petrol stations to support them, just to out compete the Ugandans and make sure that Ugandans are completely eliminated. 

There are people I used to know, who were in the business of supermarkets or grocery stores and are now out. I am saddened to find a foreign husband and wife sometimes three people in a supermarket or a petrol station, this sort of job, which should be done by Ugandans. Are those really serious investors, are these people who are coming to invest in the country and the picture we are given that these people are introducing technology, which is not available in the country? Is running a supermarket or a grocery store technology, which the Ugandans cannot afford or cannot capture? Let us protect the citizens of this country –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: The information I want to give is that these people have started the business of making cakes and taking them to these groceries.  So, Africans who have been making cakes and selling them, say to these groceries are certainly going to be out of business soon. I was surprised this morning when I was having breakfast, I was shown a pair of cakes well packed made by these so-called investors.

DR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I think that is an example of when we really have to pull up our socks and make sure that Ugandans have got access to jobs, which they are entitled to. Which country –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much my brother for giving me way. I would like to inform you that even the permanent jobs are not given to Ugandans.  Ugandans are employed on a casual basis, therefore, in another way there are no jobs for Ugandans in these industries. Ugandans are just doing casual work and being paid very little and if that Ugandan is educated, they fear to employ him therefore Ugandans have no proper jobs in these industries.

DR MALINGA: Thank you very much, my colleague. Mr Speaker, the problem of unemployment can be solved by tightening our borders and if necessary, going to places of employment to see who is the foreigner holding a job, which a Ugandan should be holding. 

As it has been mentioned, corruption in immigration has been known for sometime and it is hurting us, we have people with skills, leaving universities and yet they cannot find employment.  Ugandans have the privilege over very high standards of education, but still we cannot find employment in our own country. Instead, we are resorting to going to other countries to do the lowest of the menial jobs. We should have respect for our own people; to be a Ugandan, when you mention it in our own country, should be a source of pride. But we have been relegated almost to second-hand citizens in our own country and I think we should, as legislators, work hard to make sure that the people of this nation have pride and privilege in their own country. 

Because of the laxity in our immigration, Uganda is becoming a very vital point in the international drug trade. Drugs are passing through this country to go to the world market – [An. hon. member: “And illegal arms”] - I do not know much about illegal arms, maybe you can give me information on that but I know for a fact that cocaine and some other drugs are going through this country to be distributed to certain parts of the world. Occasionally, there have been arrests at Entebbe but I think we have to tighten our belts. It is very dangerous for dirty money to invade the economy of our country. 

Then you have the so-called underground business, which you cannot explain. There are signs of that in our country and it is our duty as part of the governing process to make sure that we rout that kind of business in our country. 

To end, I would request my fellow legislators that we must take a lead in strengthening what has been presented today. We all agree that the presentation has been good, but what are we going to do about it? A lot of things have been revealed, what are we going to do about them? Unless there is a follow up, the good presentation we have listened to today is useless. We can go through the same process, good presentations, investigations, spend money going to Mpondwe and all around the borders and after presentations here, then there is no follow up –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Thank you, for giving way. Can I give the following information in support to your submission regarding today’s presentation. If we open page 14 we read: “Work of aliens and some labour laws relating to employment of aliens in Uganda,” and we see the specific cap 219 employment and regulation of 1997. It says explicitly that, “No person may recruit or engage in recruiting unless he or she is in possession of a valid permit issued by a commissioner or is a recruiter agent duly approved by authorized officer.” 

If you go on page 15, the aliens registration control Act of 1985, if you read through to the committee observation below it says: “We observe that since the amendment of law, compliance to this requirement has been more or less voluntary indicating that the weakness is actually with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and immigration department in particular, which has not made it effective to make sure that these particular parts of the law regarding immigration due to this country are effectively not adhered to.”

Then when you come to other committee observations, which have been put there, for example, the immigration board having been constituted as 15 and now has a standing force of three and they cannot resign because although their time for resignation had come, they could not resign because they have no one to hand over to. 

This all points out to the serious weakness in the performance of the ministry in ensuring that handing over is not a determinant to resignation when your tenure is over because they were appointed by a particular authority; they could have handed over to that particular authority not to wait until there is a new appointment of the board.  

So, honourable member, if we put all these things in place and make a strong recommendation and ensure that the ministry enforces them, I believe this could be one of those things, which could make a revamp in this particular sector of government.  I thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by saying something about banks and the so-called investors in this country. Some banks are totally unwilling to lend money to indigenous people. Even when they have reasonable security, but the so-called investors come here with no money at all and these banks are willing to lend them money. 

I do not know how we are going to handle it but I think it is not too much for us to get interested in this area and make sure that banks lend money to indigenous people to do business in this country if they have reasonable security, and to see to it that those who do business in this country do not come in with no money and call themselves investors and then repatriate all the profits they make in this country to their foreign countries. It does not make sense and it is a way of milking this country and it is going on before our own eyes. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to address myself to two concerns. 

One, is on page 8 where the committee has observed that the situation is worse like in Entebbe Airport, where staff work day and night shift and they noted that there are only three beds available for over 20 officers at the airport. So, people have to share if they want to go to sleep.  

It makes me more perturbed to hear that there is no separation of male and female. This is very absurd and unfair. I just cannot image how you can force Mrs Ssentongo to share a bed with someone whom I do not have any relationship with or share a bed, which has been used by some other person! It is not only unhygienic, but also very inhuman because it is infringing on someone’s privacy and rights. It is very unfair! 

It is high time the Government looked into this; workers are human beings and they need their human dignity to be observed by the employer. It is very unfair and there is no way you can force me to share a bed. It is one of the worst that should not happen again. Honourable Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, please take note and tell the minister responsible to take care of this.  

The other concern is about the gap that has been observed by the committee that the labour commissioner is not represented on the immigration board. We have been making noise over this, as members of trade unions that this has been a practice all along, but 15 years down the road the thing have not been taking place. Workers have been represented, labour commissioner is always being represented so that we can internalise and scrutinize whoever comes in this country for any type of employment.  

This foreign employment that we have been making noise over in this House has been brought about as a result of having people on board who have no idea about industrial relations, and there is no way you can put someone who has no idea of industrial relations to scrutinize someone who is coming into the country for any work.  

We have seen people working, for example, in the cement industry in Tororo; people just coming to be drivers of trucks of cement from Kenya. Driving is a skill that can be taken by any person whether one is illiterate or not - even people driving tractors in sugarcane plantations. This is very unfair. Let us be serious and when you look at the unemployment rate of which we have no data, it is really high. We are just anticipating but in reality the unemployment rate is very high if you consider –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my sister for giving way. The fact is that in sugar estates, we have lost over 300 jobs to Kenyans. So, they prefer Kenyans to Ugandans. We do no know the cause, we have been complaining but the answer is that this is a liberalized economy, so you can bring anybody.

MRS SSENTONGO: We have been making noise over this kind of thing for a long time. Thank you for your information and I think this now is an eye opener to us all as 7th Parliament that there is a great need for us to bring the labour laws and discuss them and put them in place. Because if you look at the way things are here, it is very disheartening and even the absolute labour laws are not being enforced.  

If you consider the decentralization exercise and you look at the department of labour at the districts, it is as if labour is immaterial in this country and yet we are the backbone of the economy in any case. We are the backbone but labour is immaterial in as far as decentralization - and all the councillors in the various districts do not care about labour departments. You find one labour officer taking three districts and he is not mobile; he is not facilitated in any way; his salary is paid three months in arrears and that kind of thing. 

Let us take labour seriously if we are to develop this country. Much as we have liberalized the economy, we need to look at who is doing the work - it is the labourer. If you do not motivate a labourer, how do you expect to progress? 

Labour laws should be brought to the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. It will be very absurd if we leave this 7th Parliament without labour laws in place -(Interjections)- No, we have been making noise over this all along; now you can look at the conditions that have been demonstrated in this report. These are Ugandans suffering such consequences, sharing beds with people. How can I share my bed with someone else?  Whether Ugandan or not, I cannot get a blanket, which someone else has covered himself with and – it is very unfortunate! Thank you very much for the good report committee members.

4.25
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their effort. However, I have concerns on three matters: one is security, two is the economics and three is corruption and political interference. 

Mr Speaker, I will start with security. Surveillance to security is like prevention to medicine and for you to survive you must have the necessary facilities. If you look at this report on page 6, there is lack of appropriate information, and lack of appropriate technology. The departments are not computerized and you are dealing with multi-national mafias. It is so sad that most points do not have fax machines and that the fax machine is only at headquarters. They do not have Internet facility, they are not computerized- honestly are we talking of a department of immigration that is going to bring sanity in this country? 

This is very unfortunate and I think as Parliament, we must urge government to make sure that the immigration department is well equipped and it can only do so through funding. If you look at page 11 of this report, it is very sad. It was reported that Sigulu Islands, Ntoroko and Atiak are not manned at all due to understaffing and other logistic probleMs 

In addition, where borders are properly manned, pre-entry screening of undesired aliens is also difficult due to lack of computerization at the main entry points to check on their bio-data and other particulars. This is like having no immigration department at all, because the wrong doers will actually know that these points are not checked and they will use them; no wonder we get problems once in a while here and there. 

I would like to urge Government to address this issue because this is very serious and I think if we do not do something about it, we are heading for doom.  

The other concern I have is about the economy. I was saddened about the absence of data in this report because I expected to have the number of aliens we have, those who are officially recorded and are here legitimately, either because they are investors or they are serving in skills that are absent here. But none at all, and the explanation is possibly that the immigration department also does not have this data.  

If you look at the revenue we are foregoing because of this kind of arrangement, is very unfortunate.  Look at the employment, we have so many people on the streets and yet we have opened our doors. When you go to a hotel, they are the people who are serving. It is even very sad! Last night I had a guest, and I took him to a hotel and I was looking for a Ugandan dish but there was only Indian dishes, Italian dishes and to the amusement of my guest, there was no African dish. The explanation is that the market for these dishes is so high because we have opened our doors for everybody to come and go.  

If you look at page 14 of this report, Employment Act cap 219 and Employment Regulation 1997, Section 7 of the said Act explicitly states that: “No person may recruit or engage in recruiting unless he or she is in the possession of a valid permit issued by the commissioner or is a recruiter’s agent duly approved by an authorised officer”. If this is the law, then is this happening? Why cannot the Minister of Internal Affairs help us and tell us why these laws are not enforced. 

If you look at page 19 of the findings of the committee, the committee noted that the practice in Uganda is that foreigners get in the country as visitors but end up looking for employment in various work places like factories and their potential employers apply for their work permits on their behalf in total breach of the immigration laws. I think we have to come out and pronounce ourselves and urge government to eradicate some of these practices otherwise our people will remain in total poverty because they will never get jobs.

I heard the workers’ representatives talking about sugar plantation workers being imported. What do you expect if you privatise and do not provide for laws, if you do not provide an adequate regulatory framework? (Interruption) Hon Sabiiti, do not bring your politics here.

Mr Speaker, let me look at the revenue. It is very important that government undertakes to register all aliens working here; we should not be hostile to them but let us look at what is happening. There is need for us to put a fee on everybody who is working here like they do in other countries. I am a Member of Parliament, I went to Denmark on government business, but to renew a passport for two days was a bit of a problem. Up to the point when I decided not to stay and actually I did not stay, but here in Uganda even somebody who sells mandazi comes and fills.

Finally, Mr Speaker, political interference and corruption, certainly if it was not there, what is happening now would not be happening. You remember sometimes ago when I rose here you said, “Oh, we have liberalised.” Yes, but even if we have liberalized, somebody must come here legally and lawfully. 

I would urge government, therefore, to follow the laws especially the labour laws that exist before we even improve them, so that Ugandans can get jobs. I urge government to differentiate investors from people who are looking for petty jobs. Because I have a case of an investor who has a coffee factory here, who has been denied a visa and he is employing a Ugandan here and he is living in a neighbouring country. But it is very interesting that you find people with mandazi and they have a visa. What a contradiction!

Mr Speaker, let us register all aliens. We cannot enforce the laws unless we know the magnitude of the problem. Let us man all the entry points that are not manned and motivate staff. In fact, sometimes when you talk of corruption, I fail to understand. There is corruption of want and corruption of greed. Corruption of want is for survival. If you have people who are sharing the bed and these are the people you want to check, they will go away with anything to make them survive.

Finally, Mr Speaker, train these staff and enforce discipline.  I thank you.

4.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, honourable Speaker. I want some clarification on a few things. In this report, we have been told that the board members now remaining are three; their term expired 15 or 13 years ago. Is it legally right for these people to continue in office and earning salary? May be the Attorney General will help us, because if your term has expired, it has expired. They would have stopped to operate or this is a failure on the part of the minister to renew or to appoint new members to the board.

The other issue is the economic laws that this country faces by having its illegal immigrants working here. Hon. Aggrey Awori did mention here that some of these immigrants are staying on top of the factory; their passports are being taken. This to me even translates to these people not paying Pay As You Earn because we do not know that they are there. So, the country loses revenue, yet if these people were registered or if Ugandans had been employed, government would be gaining from Pay As You Earn. So, this is a loss to the country. Government must take it seriously and ensure that all these aliens are registered to be able to track them.

On the issue of investment, colleagues here have raised the issue and said that aliens are operating in supermarkets, and even running boda bodas. In fact, I was surprised to find an Indian on a boda boda in Katwe. So does it mean that we cannot even have boda boda riders here? Do we need to import the Indians to run the boda boda business here? This is totally unacceptable. These people have come here; they have denied Ugandans business because they have a network. They operate the network within themselves.

MS KIRASO: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. I wanted to be clarified about this Indian who was doing boda boda business. Was he riding and carrying passengers, or was he selling the motorcycles?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: In fact, they have got mobile phones; they do not mingle with ours. So, you will find him standing somewhere, talking then he picks somebody and delivers him; they are very sophisticated. Very soon our people will just run out of street with their boda bodas.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Bright Rwamirama. I think your question has been answered, that is how they operate. But some of them even have a stage where they wait for people.  

I was talking about the issue of how these so-called investors network and deny other people businesses. You find that they operate a supermarket, they have an industry, and another one has got a security firm. So, it is only those guards from an Indian security firm who will be guarding the Indian premises, guarding their businesses. So, if you are not from that circle, you do not benefit.

There was the issue of data.  We have been informed here that the department of immigration lacks computers, equipment necessary to enable them have data. But of course this is a failure on part of government to provide funds to enable the department have funds. But hon. Aggrey Awori did say, the US Government offered some equipment whereby all the passports for whoever was entering or getting out Uganda pass through a scanner and information is relayed to the CIA headquarters. I think this creates insecurity on part of this country.  

The honourable member did raise the issue of computerized driving permits. The Committee of Finance has been investigating the issue of trace technologies here on the issue of computerized driving permits. We were surprised to find that the Ministry of Works went ahead to commission this project without the report being discussed here, because the committee did find that the people who collect data are all foreigners and this data is solely in their hands. Ugandans do not have a say.  How can foreigners take charge of the data of Ugandans without Uganda Revenue Authority having access to this? This creates insecurity on part of Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, I do appeal to you that this report by the Committee of Finance on the issue of computerized driving permits should be brought and debated because there are very serious issues, which the committee has raised. In fact, I have been discouraging people from going to renew or get driving permits from these technologies because there are so many problems, which the committee has discovered regarding revenue, regarding the security, the location and the employment.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I think government needs to come up and help this department because all these problems, which have been raised here are a result of lack of funds to provide for offices, provide for vehicles. How can a department have only two vehicles and we have 27 entry and exit points? How can they operate? In fact, we must really congratulate them for having tried what they have done amidst all these difficulties, because lack of funds has made them not to have enough staff and equipment. So, government needs to come up seriously and provide funds to the immigration department or the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to say that one of the major reasons for the department not to perform well is not lack of funds, because this department is a revenue collection department. It must be collecting revenue from whoever enters this country, so I do not think the major reason is lack of funds, probably we should look at other reasons. But the major reason is not lack of funds because it is supposed to be collecting revenue. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the question of funds becomes a problem because if they had funds they would have several vehicles instead of two, they would have fax machines and telephones. They could be collecting but then the money is not given to them. I think that is the element of lack of funds. The impact is that they do not have money; they cannot buy the vehicles and cannot buy this or the other.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, maybe as I conclude I want to inform my colleague that this money collected goes to the Consolidated Fund, so they do not spend it. That is how they are not able to utilise this money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their detailed report. From this report it is a clear case of a failed organisation; a failed organisation without any competent management, without a system in place and susceptible to corruption and gross abuse reflected in the report: hatred among staff, practices of witchcraft and all other vices. That is a typical case of a failed organisation.  

So it is clear, like deep in Kitgum we have an Indian who has come, he is now running a disco system and selling beer amidst all that insecurity in the area, and they are busy thriving selling beer and so on. We know their motive, they are trying to get there in order to smuggle –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think we should not attempt to appear racist. When you talk about an Indian you should differentiate between a Ugandan Indian and a foreign Indian because there are people of Indian origin who are bona fide Ugandans and, therefore, they have the right to do any business anywhere in the country. So please, let us first establish whether the people we are talking about are non-Ugandans or not.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the problem members and the country at large have is that even at the moment we do not have the data to isolate these two. That is why in my submission I said we need a mechanism to isolate investors from others: Ugandans and non-Ugandans, but you do not have the information. So if you do not have the information to isolate the variables, then the general belief is that maybe all of them are not here legally.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much. I have taken note of the minister’s observation and that of hon. Rwamirama. I think that is the problem we have.  However, I would only like to recommend one or two things: I would wish to recommend that the department needs a thorough overhaul, to be staffed by trained personnel and have computerised systems in place.  

Government has to invest to ensure that we have a system integrated into our general national information system, including information from the Electoral Commission to issuing of the driving permits. All these systems should be integrated and it would be better if they were under the Police - as one of the departments of Police. It will make it easier for the Police to investigate and correlate the information they have effectively.

Government should also have in place an inspectorate of labour to visit companies, institutions, hotels, and so on at any time without any notice to ascertain the labour force there. Who they are, whether they are legally there, in order to get clear information on whether they are legally there, in the place of work –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much my brother for giving way. Again I would like to say that we do not have – the Labour Inspectorate Department is completely dead - even to inspect the factories is outdated. Most districts don’t have district labour officers. Therefore, the Labour Inspectorate Department is completely dead; it does not even have manpower - no recruitment. That is what I wanted to inform you about, therefore, it is difficult.

THE SPEAKER: But what are we talking about? Are we talking about immigration or labour? The two are different; you should know that they are different.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to restrain myself, but it has kept on aching me since the honourable minister brought up the question of racism. The African has been the subject of racism and we complain under the burden of racism. I do not think we have the capacity to be racists. So when you say we are saying Indians of the origin of this country are citizens, it is true, but those who come in are not. For you to label us racist is unfair. You live in a country where we have been subjected to horrible racism –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think let me explain this. The context in which the minister explained is that in dealing with the illegal immigrants – an illegal immigrant could be a black American here; it could be a person from the West Indies. Apparently if these are here you do not mind about them but because the Asians have a different colour you concentrate on them. So when you talk about illegal immigrants, talk about illegal immigrants. 

The question of colour – when you start concentrating on colour - you see, I know a Black American - there are ten of them in my village but people do not talk about them because they resemble you. I think that is the point – he is saying, be sophisticated in dealing with the subject without concentrating on color.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for clarifying all those. I mentioned the need to institute an inspectorate of labour to make sure that various companies really have the right people to avoid aliens working in our organisations illegally.

To have that in place the labour laws have to be very effective. I do not know whether the labour laws will not need revision, we might need to revise the labour laws. Once revised, then a mechanism has to be put in place to enforce it and ensure that we safeguard Ugandans rights for employment. Employment policies have to be right. 

I remember when the National Social Security Fund case was being discussed in the House, I raised the issue whether we really have any employment policies, a system that can safeguard a worker and apparently it is not there. So, we have a lot of work, Mr Speaker. Government has a lot of tasks to put right all these systems and coordinate activities of the various departments to ensure that the systems are working right. Thank you very much.

4.52
DR BYATIKE MATOVU (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much indeed, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report.  

The first thing I would like to comment on is that, yes, they recognise that the Immigration Department has got challenges, which we have to look into. Things like accommodation at entry points, they talked about three beds at the airport for 20 staff, lack of equipment itself and I suppose the remuneration is not that good, which is a very big temptation. So, these are things that we have to look into and sympathise with the immigration officers.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, despite all these problems, I think I have one good word for them, which is: Ugandan immigration officers are very polite; this is something that we have to grant them. I have been to places where the immigration officer looks at you like a cat. They say, “Oh! Well, it is another foreigner coming in.” But our immigration officers are very polite and this we have to grant it to them. So, I think let us put in at least one good word for them. 

Thirdly, this business of saying, “Well, they do not let you in they are supposed to be on duty for 24 hours and so on”, we have to consider the question of security both for the country and for the travelers across the border because I know of border points between Kenya and Tanzania where vehicles are not allowed across the border simply because of security. This is for two reasons mainly. The first one is we have to be careful as to whom we are letting into the country at a late hour; this is something we have to consider.

Secondly, we have to protect the travelers against potential thugs when they have left the border. So, if you are going to let in everybody at anytime -3.00 O’clock in the morning - then there is something wrong. I suppose we have to be very careful about that. So, those are the things that we may have to consider when condemning the Immigration Department. They are very polite, they are working under very difficult conditions and I suppose at times they have got reasons why they just do not let in anybody at 3.00 O’clock in the morning. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.55
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I just have about two concerns. 

I would like to urge government that since we are in the East African Community the Immigration Department must be restructured to handle the new changes. Members have talked about the employment policy, if we do not have the employment and we are opening up how will the Ugandans really compete within the community? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you that much emphasis has been put on aliens originating form outside Africa but we have so many aliens originating from within Africa. I would like to inform you that in my constituency Kenyans and Tanzanians come in and fish freely. The Fisheries Act is very clear that when you are a foreigner there are certain rates you are supposed to meet but basing on our culture these people actually do not pay those rates. They pay as Ugandans. 

Still on this note even as Ugandans we need to change our culture. When you meet a Black non-Ugandan, even MPs here do not mind. These people are everywhere but we put emphasis on these Whites –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: I thank you my colleagues for giving me way. Mr Speaker, some colleagues have said that aliens have come to work in sugar plantations, which is true. Even in my area in Kakuuto I have a sugarcane estate, Sango Bay Sugar Estates, which is under rehabilitation. The inflow of Tanzanians has increased because Sango Bay Sugar Estates have agreed to sell some of their sugarcane to Kagera Sugar Estates in Tanzania. They have overgrown sugarcanes and yet they are yet to put their sugar plant in place.  

Many Ugandans were invited from Busoga; they went to the sugar plantation in Kakuuto but failed to cope with the workload. What am I trying to emphasise? The productivity of Ugandans in low-income jobs is very low and that is why most investors are turning to foreign countries for cheap labour. So, as we talk of aliens who are coming in to offer labour for the low paying jobs especially those, which are manual, most Ugandans are not ready to go in for them. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have to draw from our history. For instance, sugarcane growing is not new in this country but you can state what the problem was when this plantation started. There was a problem of labour because there were people who did not want to work in sugarcane plantations and there were those who were willing. So, whether it has changed or not, this is a matter, which you have to address instead of saying so and so have come when actually the local people were not willing to work. That is the fact. If you do not take it into account your contributions may be actually misleading.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Again, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues in this House, when an honourable member was opening his speech he talked about a community. We are moving towards a political union of East Africa. I overheard hon. Pajobo talking about Kenyans taking over jobs in this country; another one is talking about Tanzanians taking over jobs in this country. What message are you sending to your neighbours with whom you are forming a political union? Therefore, I would like us to be strategic in what we are doing. We should not be sending wrong signals to our neighbours with whom in a very short time we are going to have just one country. I thank you Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, can’t we leave that issue?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, can I get clarification? The honourable minister has made a very important statement but I also recall that not in the very far way past Ugandans who lived in Tanzania, in the Kagera area for a long time, were sent away by Tanzania. Can the minister, therefore, tell us what message the Tanzanians were sending?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I want to tell the House that those people who sent away Ugandans sent a wrong message and we in the Government condemned it and we made presentations to their government. Therefore, a wrong does not undo a wrong. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, I do not want to divulge my contribution. What I was trying to make is that, yes, entering the East African Community is viable for us as Ugandans but we have actually stated that there are so many Kenyans and Tanzanians who are fishing in Lake Victoria.  

I want to inform the minister that if Ugandans cross the border and enter the waters of Kenya, they will be arrested. They arrest them immediately. So, actually what I am trying to say is that as a country, as the Department of Immigration we need to harmonise with our neighbours, otherwise if for us we treat them lightly and they mistreat us, it is not the best way forward.

THE SPEAKER: But for practical purposes, how do you determine the border on Lake Victoria between Uganda’s waters and those of Kenya and Tanzania? How?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, maybe I cannot at the moment describe it but when you are on the waters, there are islands. You can actually know that from island A to island B, those ones belong to Kenya. So when you cross the middle point, you are in Kenya. There is no problem; we know the borders. When you are on the water you can actually tell the borders.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the islands are the mpangis, the boundary marks?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, what I wanted to urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs about is that according to the report the committee has made it very clear that the whole department lacks data. So, if the department does not have the data of aliens working in Uganda, what are they talking about? They cannot tell us how many foreigners are in mining, in petty trade and in boda boda trade! We even have dealers in motor vehicles that are Indians. 

We need to urge government to do something. I am actually not surprised with the report because if the whole board of 15 members fails to have a quorum and yet they have been working for 15 years, what is this in such a vibrant state? So really the minister responsible should do something, otherwise the trend is not the best. I thank you.

5.05
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work and also commend the Department of Immigration for the achievements listed on page 9. We have really concentrated on the weaknesses and failed to acknowledge the good work despite the limited facilitation.

I will concentrate on the issuing of passports, which is an achievement on their part. I remember sometime back it would take ages to get a passport issued, or you had to know somebody in the department to get it for you fast. But by and by, even ordinary people can now acquire passports within a day or two. 

I have examples, Mr Speaker, where people have acquired passports without my intervention because people would say that they are from Bujenje or they are from Masindi. I do get for some but there are some who have confided in me that they have been issued with passports within a day or two. So, I would like to thank the department for this. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, about facilitation of this department, I do not know what to say because when my great, great grandfather, Kabalega was struggling, he would walk miles or send messengers with a letter, which would take years to move to and fro, then when somewhere in between, bicycles came by and then vehicles. Now we have fax and Internet services that weren’t there then but I am surprised that the whole Government of Uganda cannot avail this department with these facilities and I believe that we are not very poor.  

This department, which is supposed to co-ordinate the entry and exist of Ugandans and foreigners to our country at different points, has only two vehicles! What is the difference between the ancient and modern Uganda?  When you come to the current IT, it is almost non-existent. How are we going to demand positive results from this department? 

I would like the minister - the person representing the Leader of Government Business - to really inform me because even the statement by the minister was so disheartening. The problem in this department, the problems in immigration are in a way self created by the procedures in government. Is government aware of these problems and therefore, has resigned that it cannot act on these problems?  

At one time they said the board wasn’t supposed to be made up of more than six people - about seven, at another point they were 11 and now they are three. The excuse - yes, three people! The excuse is that there was a ban. I do not know whether this one is also a board since there was a ban on recruitment or appointment of the board? It expired long ago, fine. 

The committee is telling us that this board cannot leave before handing over. Hand over to whom? So, is that the excuse that they are waiting for, until when? You know, these are simple things, which I think my government, which I cherish so much, should be looking into and regularise.

Mr Speaker, there was some kind of hot debate. People do not want us to mention Kenyans and Tanzanians vis-à-vis Ugandans, but I think facts are facts. Those ones qualified to be part of the East African Community, I would now like to ask, how about the Congolese, should we talk about them or keep quiet about them? Because you know I come from Bunyoro and the bigger part of Bunyoro, borders with Congo along Lake Albert, which is in Masindi District. In 1996 there was a semblance of an immigration post at Butyaba but along the way it collapsed. I complained to hon. Kategaya then, he was like all of them are Africans - yes, he did tell me: “Why are you bothered, have they caused any problems?”  At that time -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think in all countries you take Australia or the United States, they favour the immigration into those countries of White people, therefore, we as Africans have also to take into account the race of those who are immigrating into our country. We have to favour Congolese because they are Africans, we have also to favour any other people who are Africans and we have to look out for the real foreigners. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable members you are talking about illegal immigrants. Does being a Black stop you if you are not a citizen here from being an illegal immigrant? So, as I said, please be sophisticated in dealing with this issue.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for strengthening my point. That is exactly what I was talking about and I would tell you if there is no control of the movements across borders then that is why we have problems in Masindi. Our fellow Ugandans being mistaken to be Alurs from Congo. So if the post was working there we would not be having these problems in Masindi and in Bunyoro. 

The Banyoro are chasing, we are not the ones chasing, and it is government’s failure to differentiate for us between the foreigners, the Alurus from Congo vis-à-vis the Alurus from Uganda. So, I am calling upon government to consider opening up border posts at Butyaba and also Wanseko so that we can know. You know for us Banyoro we are very good and we welcome everybody so long as they come here regularly and legally.

Mr Speaker, as I wind up –(Interruption)

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that while we blame government for not playing its role well and maybe for causing all these problems, the problem is not government. The problem is with the people because when a person comes and settles in my village, it is my responsibility as a citizen of this country to report to government that, “There is a person who has illegally entered here”, but if we say it is government I do not think we shall be able to solve the problem.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to impute that citizens should go and create entry points and man migration posts or it should be government to organise it? Is he in order to allude that the citizens in Western Uganda should go and open border posts and man immigration posts?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think my understanding of the honourable member’s information or clarification was to talk about the civic duty of a citizen. The civic duty of a citizen is to assist government organs and, therefore, he was saying if you detect this, as a responsible citizen you report it. It might have passed undetected, once you detect it, you report. I think that is what he was saying.  

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much for your guidance. Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up but before I do –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt but the issue, which he is articulating, is very important. The factors, which are causing anxiety to the Members of Parliament, must be understood clearly. We must know that mainly Asians today dominate the planet in terms of population. The number of Chinese is over one billion, Indians are over one billion; now Africa is suffering so many shortfalls. If you look at the plight of wars on this continent and factor in ignorance, AIDS and famine, Africans are not favoured to compete even in defence of their continent. In fact everybody is worried that the Asians tigers can overrun this continent at this moment.

The way forward is not to condemn them but to register all our citizens even before they are born. The technology around is enough for us to register our people and then you can start saying, “Look, you are not ours, you are just a foreigner, we can give you this job.” Right now we are in a situation, we may not be able to defend ourselves, we do not know who foreigners are. I have known foreigners who have taken over names of “Rwamirama” because they stole the passport of Rwamirama and they are in the world moving as if they are Ugandans yet they are not.  

If we had our records right and you had equipment as the honourable member is saying, correct equipment at the borders and even at various entry points would make it possible for us to know who a foreigner is and what their rights are because we cannot say that we do not want people to come here. You are unfortunate in that you inherited a very rich area in terms of climate, soil fertility, fresh water; everything is so good that want it or not people will have to gravitate here. 

The Kenyans are desperate, they have a very high population, they simply have to gravitate here by nature because this is where it is free, where things are easy, and people must come here. What we should be doing is to organise ourselves so that we know what is ours and allow visitors to come in on our set terms

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members I think when this committee was set up, it was set up because apparently people were concerned about illegal immigrants. That was the issue and the report has given yields that this and that is the problem. But the most important thing in this report as I see, why has that problem arisen? It has arisen because the department, which is charged with that responsibility has no equipment, no funds, it is not mobile and has no sophisticated equipments at entry points. That is why, because maybe we are not saying people should not come in but we are saying people are coming in uncontrolled, people are using forged documents and there are no ways of detecting them.  

I think the emphasis would be, how do we assist the department to carry out its work, is it recruitment of more staff, is it giving them funds to move, is it giving them equipment; I think that is the central issue. The issue of immigrants being here is not an issue. It is a fact but how do we stop it from today; what is the way forward.

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that issues of people’s movements in and outside Uganda are a responsibility of the Immigration Department whether report or not, where are we going to report to? I am raising a point that in Masindi, in Butyaba and Wasenko, there are no immigration points so even if people knew who is coming in and who is going they do not have anywhere to report such characters. We were told in a meeting that the issues of immigration are for government and the Immigration Department. So, please, government help us and streamline this department –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But nobody denies that fact that it is the Immigration Department, which is charged with this responsibility. The issue is why has it failed? I think this is what you have to look into and provide a remedy.  

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much. My colleague did not seem to understand that point but since the concerned people understand it I hope it will be addressed. I did say that the Immigration Department should be strengthened and facilitated to carry out its mandate.  

My last point, Mr Speaker, I am shocked and surprised, on page 36, the very last sentence - now I do not know what solution you are going to give - the sentence reads, “From our recorded testimonies the committee was informed that the working relationship between the commissioner and some senior staff members was very poor resulting into outright hatred, witchcraft and other inhuman acts.”   

Witchcraft, hatred and other inhuman acts, I think this is a very strong statement and the Government must look into this urgently because we do not want to go back to the ancient times –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you think this could be petty? This is a petty thing; do you think the whole Parliament should be concerned with witchcraft and personal relations of two individuals? Why don’t you really leave it to the personnel people to deal with it; shall we really take our time to discuss this issue?

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, this is a report of Parliament and maybe by the time they came to quote some of these cases there could be something, which is hampering the operations of this department. It is not only one person, it is the commissioner against several senior staff members. So as we look into the facilitation in terms of transport allowances et cetera, we should also look at the human side of motivation and interaction.  

In modern management we have to move or work as a team. If one person becomes problematic then the whole team may fail to perform and we may be even putting the blame somewhere else when actually the shortcoming is with the individuals within the departments. Thank you, Sir.

5.25
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I can really only sympathise with the Immigration Department because before I came to Parliament I was a consultant for government and my work required me to visit all the border posts in Uganda. Part of what I read in this report is what I saw five years ago, and it just means that since then nothing has been done. I then begin to wonder whether government considers the Immigration Department as a significant component of its national institution.  

It is unfortunate that in this report we have not been given – I agree with my colleagues about data – but in particular we have not been given the budget of the Immigration Department with a breakdown maybe of over the last four or five years so that we know whether the budget is adequate, whether government has been providing increments to sustain their activities; and the areas that we think we can specifically recommend government to strengthen in terms of financing. But of course across the board the facilities are not there, the personnel are neglected and yet these things are very important. 

I would want to know from the minister, we have been undertaking reform in many places, Revenue Authority, have we ever contemplated undertaking a reform of the Immigration Department that would include the kind of targets that their activities should focus on? I do not think it is there and it is not in this report.

The other matter, which I thought was important and really as I heard members debate were these persistent concerns about Asians, Kenyans and Tanzanians. Yes, people may be concerned but I think we are missing the point if we focus on them because, first of all, if you travelled to countries like Canada, United States, or you are in London - and that reflects the way the world is moving - you would be amazed. Everybody is there and we are going towards that world.  

The only concern that we should have is, are we prepared to be participants in that new world because there is no immigration laws, no border restrictions that will stop us and isolate us from the rest of the world. We just must prepare ourselves to be part of that bigger world where everybody belongs –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the concern of the House and the public is alien immigrants and the member is talking about Canada. May I know from the member whether he travels to Canada or to Britain without a visa, you just move anyhow and board a plane?

PROF. LATIGO: I think the minister while responding he said there is no point debating on speculation. You were the first person to complain that there is no data and, therefore, when you say these are illegal immigrants and you do not have the data, it is not fair. So, it is your complaint that I am reflecting on. 

Therefore, if some Asian is doing business in Kitgum and the Immigration Department has not deported him and you have not checked his documents to find whether he is settled in Uganda legally there is no point bringing the matter here. But if your concern, which is apparently the case, is that Kenyans are taking over our jobs then do not blame the Immigration Department. 

If you went to flower sector all the middle management are Kenyans simply because over the years we never trained to manage floriculture units; and if you want the business here you must bring in the labour otherwise it will not work. There is no way our economy is going to progress by the backward protection that I hear some of our colleagues advocate for –(Interruption)

MR SABITI: I think the complaint, which this report tries to portray is that we have laws in this country and if you are to come in this country you must follow the right procedure; and if you look at page 40 the committee has identified certain section of Ugandans stopping the Immigration Department from doing its job, so, really we cannot just dismiss it. 

Yes, I have been to Canada, I have been to Europe, you cannot enter Netherlands, you cannot enter Canada, you cannot enter America unless you go through their laws; you will be deported. So what we are saying is that let this department be fully equipped and this department should not be interrupted; it should do its work so that whoever comes in comes in legally.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Sabiiti, I am not talking about you as hon. Sabiiti, but I am talking about Sabiiti from Uganda, he has no passport; he has no national identity card and there is another Jack Sabiiti from Atlanta, he is not White, you walk together, how will the person know that there is Jack Sabiiti from Rukiga and the other Sabiiti who is dressed like you is a person from Atlanta when you cannot tell this is Jack Sabiiti from Rukiga unless you have seen his documents? 

These are the problems we have and they are real because when you go to Britain they will of course expect you to have a passport, be you White or Black. We have to work on the system of identifying our people here maybe by saying every person in Uganda should have a national identity card so then you can say, “Where is your identity card?” I think that is the beginning rather than complaining that this is happening because we do not have structures and mechanism of identifying our people.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my brother Sabiiti that people have got two months’ visa to Britain and disappeared in Britain. You go to America, they are everyday fighting with Mexicans and illegal immigrants. Only the other day they were deporting illegal immigrants from Morocco. This is happening; the only difference between theirs and ours is that there are facilities to move these things.  

Secondly, even where they are illegal immigrants in those countries, people have defended them. In some cases they have gone to court and defended them because they have a reason. But I would not want to pick on what was stated in this report because it is speculation. If I had a specific case, if you just say ministers did this, it does not help me, what do I see in it? Nothing! It is just the same speculation, like the speculation that led us to put this committee. We should have been specific and said that, “On the case of this and this he was found to be an illegal immigrant and his deportation was stopped”, then I would know that there is a case, which is objective.

All I am just saying is that something is very wrong but the wrong thing is not the immigrants, it is the Immigration Department and I beg government to take that department seriously. Thank you very much.

5.32
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County Rakai):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, it is a pity that we are debating this report at a time when we are through with the budget because you see a lot of issues really linger around funds. I think in the circumstance we have little we can do except maybe to give them prayers until the next financial year because when you look at infrastructure - was it page 7 or 8 -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable members that on matters of security you do not only rely on prayers, you must also act. Unmanned borders are a serious problem. If it takes us to give supplementary let us do it. I thank you.

CAPT. MATOVU: Yes, we are in agreement and since you have volunteered to come up to push for supplementary I will be the one to second you because really it is so disturbing that out of the 27 exit points only six are housed in permanent houses. They told us about lack of fax machines, the Internet and scanners; this is terrible, I am worried and I think maybe this is why we have a lot of problems related to security.

The other one is on page 36 of the report. This specifically talks about the Commissioner, Mrs Pearl Mutiibwa, I do not know this lady incidentally but it appears we need to be careful - (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: But do you need to debate an individual, it is true she was mentioned in the report but do we have to - proceed.

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, the report also really went personal because as you see throughout our interaction I do not know whether this was for a day or for a week, but they were able to say that whereas she possesses a very long experience as a senior civil servant she lacks self-drive and confidence to take decisions. But this is a lady facing eight Members of Parliament under a probe committee; a lady who is in charge of an institution, which has no staff, not funded, no infrastructure, you can imagine the level of discrepancy this lady has and yet she is now facing a committee of eight Members of Parliament! 

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you think this was a management assessment? Do you think really the committee, which went for this thing marshaled up all this? Why don’t we really leave it to those concerned since it has been raised?

CAPT. MATOVU: Yes, Mr Speaker, since you are on my side I think - otherwise –(Interruption) 

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, the situation really – the report itself was sort of callous. It went on to say that the permanent secretary was disorganizing immigration. I think this type of analysis is not good at all.

THE SPEAKER: And they came to the conclusion that it was not the case. Why do you really – you have to look at the report. When you talk about assessing a person it must be done differently. This was not a commission set up to deal with that particular person, but you leave it to those concerned to further investigate the matter.

CAPT. MATOVU: My last one is about political interference. I think we could look at it from two sides. Political interference at what stage; at what level? Is it this politician, Capt. Matovu trying to flout the procedures, or captain has an investor in Rakai but this man has been moving up and down to follow up maybe his work permit then this man comes and says, “You people, I am flying out. I cannot continue when I am not secure.” Then Rakai Parliamentary Group calls this man to the Immigration Department. Is that really bad? Are we trying to fraud anything? We are even asking, what is the problem? 

So according to me, maybe to have a solution for this we could say let immigration put their work method very clear. They say to process documents like they showed us somewhere, from filling the form up to getting the permit, it is one month. I will go home and sit and wait for one month but when people are being told, “Come tomorrow”, and the days are expiring, the man is about to be rounded up by either the Police and somehow a politician is a principled politician, I think we must come in here. 

Unless it is a negative interference, we are trying to fraud the law, the man is not even appearing; he is in some home. But I am with this man, we are following up a project in my area, Capt. Matovu, I will not sit, I will follow up and go for this man. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have come to the end of this debate –(Interruptions)

5.38
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. On behalf of the Government I would like to thank the committee for this report and I want to thank the House for making very interesting, relevant and appropriate remarks on this report.  

The terms of reference of the report are stated very clearly and it was provoked by important situations in this country. So let me make very brief remarks on some of the issues that have been raised both in the report and by contributors to the debate.

The first remark I will make is in regard to the competence of the Immigration Department to do their work. We have noted that definitely there is need to restructure the department, to strengthen and facilitate it through a number of interventions like education and budgetary provision. We totally agree with the concern of the House because when immigration into the country is not properly handled it can also negatively impact on the country with regard to security and how the economy of the country is run. When you have aliens, not only do they take jobs of Ugandans, they will even externalise very important resources that ought to stay here so members are appropriately concerned. 

You will recognize that security of the world like terrorism has become so important that even within countries, say if you are travelling in the United States and you want to move from one state to another through an airport, they can even make you remove your shoes and clothes to check you to make sure that you are legally travelling and you are the person that is travelling. So, I think we have to beaver away.

Regarding the immigration board, Mr Speaker, the situation I must admit is not easily defendable. So, obviously government will move very fast and I think we are already moving to reconstitute the board. As honourable members know the board has even been provided for under our Constitution. So, it will have to be reconstituted because it is a constitutional requirement.

Mr Speaker, as far as labour laws are concerned we are aware that many of the laws in our statute books even those in the revised laws of this country are outdated and Cabinet has already approved four Bills related to labour and as soon as they are printed these Bills will be forwarded to Parliament for debate. They are being printed. What I am not sure about is whether this Seventh Parliament will find the time to debate and pass these Bills so that they are enacted into law.  

As you know, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, we have a very tight programme, very busy. Particularly we would like to appeal to members to help Parliament do business on a daily basis. Because the Speaker has on many times had to adjourn the House because of not only lack of quorum but even lack of business especially when we have reports that are not coming –(Interruptions)

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the minister who is on the Floor to first of all give a request to Cabinet to come and attend Parliament because Members of Parliament actually are here but Cabinet is not here. In fact I am sure that none of the responsible ministers as far as the Department of Immigration is concerned is around. So, I would like to give information to the minister to invite the Cabinet to attend regularly. Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The honourable member should know that ministers are competent members of this House; some of us are even duly elected so when I say Members of Parliament should attend Parliament obviously I am including ministers as well. They are not aliens to this House. I am including them and really I totally agree with you that ministers are Members of this House and, therefore, when we say Members of this House should attend, we include ministers as well.  

I was talking about the labour laws that they are being printed and they will soon come to the House.

Obviously I am glad that members have recognized that in spite of the inadequacies some achievements have been registered and, therefore, we will build on those. For example, the report notes that in spite of the problems we have, 417 aliens have been deported from this country. So we need to build on that and strengthen the performance of the department.

Hon. Kabakumba talked about the issue of Congolese in Western Uganda. Mr Speaker and honorable members, not only are we concerned about this but we also had a ministerial team going to that area to establish what was going on and we noted that there was quite a lot of passion. But you know, when you are neighbors with a country that is a little bit less endowed with resources than you are, and one with worse political situations, you are bound to have a gradient and there will be flow along that gradient. 

That is why between the United States and Mexico there is even an electrified fence with marksmen along the fence, but you do not stop Mexicans entering the United States on a daily basis. They are there and there are people, particularly conservatives, who shout publicly against them but privately want them because they want cheap labor. So no matter what we do in Uganda and East Africa generally, you will have that problem. 

In fact that is why I think as a region we should be interested in the development of Congo; we must be interested in the political stabilization of Congo not by interfering but certainly making it known to the rest of the world that it is necessary. For as long as we have problems there –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you, Mr Minister. You are saying we should be kind to our neighbors, now here is a situation at the border of Congo and Koboko where the Congolese children come to study in Uganda in primary, then gradually they pass first grade and they are taken to our schools up to university for free. Should we continue to give them that hospitality? Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, you know there is very little you can – first of all, the honorable member knows that these children may be Congolese but they have immediate relatives in Uganda. We are the same people; they even have parents in Uganda. And by the way, there is no way we can succeed in the region in isolation of the rest of Africa when we are looking up to the union of Africa, which will probably come. What are you going to do about it? In fact time will come when some of us who have very little land will be happy for that union so that we can go where there is plenty of land.  

You know, honourable members, we must appreciate that it can be mutually beneficial to do trade with Congo. I know Europeans make a lot of noise about it, which I think is terribly wrong. They should encourage regular and legal trade between Uganda and Congo and even cultural and educational exchanges. For example, the people in the southwest are establishing universities like Kabale University. 

I would be happy to see half of the students in that university as Congolese. They will go back and civilize their place; they can stabilize it so that we can have peace in the region. So, you should encourage these children. Let them come and study with us so that when they go back they will say, “This is how things get done over the border”.

Finally, let me say something about political interference. I was consulting with the presenter of the report about this because this is very serious. I know hon. Capt. Matovu was talking about positive interference, that is perfectly okay; it is our job as political leaders to facilitate anybody who wants to do business in this country. However, when we are doing it for less than positive reasons then it is a matter of concern. Therefore, we will need your wise counsel as to how to approach this subject so that we can reach the root of the matter where there are any political culprits, they be dealt with.  

I do not think it is right for us as political leaders to engage in irregular activities. If a person has rights to be protected you have a right to participate in protecting the regular rights of that person. But to promote irregular rights is something that government would not support. Therefore, we really look at this with a lot of concern and I will report it to the Government. And perhaps as you said after this report has been approved we shall go beyond the contents of this report and maybe look at those issues that have not been adequately addressed.  

I think we must also agree that any public report has some confidentialities that it cannot include, but must be dealt with beyond the Floor of this House. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the debate –(Interruption)

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have waited for this opportunity to register my presence and not just now. I have been here since except that I have had no opportunity to intervene but I would like to ascertain my presence throughout this day as established. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Your presence is captured on record. Honourable members, a report was presented on immigration and you have debated it. Therefore, you have somehow made a contribution to the report. The motion is that we adopt the report for further action by whoever is concerned.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. As I said after the roll call that I was somehow impressed by the increased attendance of members, next time I think you will attend more and please carry our message to those who have not been here so that next time we – some may not be able to sit here but may be standing in the lobby. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday, 17 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m. when we shall continue with business. Thank you very much. Have a happy weekend.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 17 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)



